bs L eae
r-, =


my


THE


BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR


BY
JOSEPH S. EXELL


ST. JOHN


VOL. I


BAKER BOOK HOUSE
GRAND RAPIDS 6, MICHIGAN
1963


‘ " + }


PHOTOLITHOPRINTED BY CUSHING - MALLOY, INC, aber
ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN, UNIZED STATES OF AMERICA ie ne
1963 — j Re |
we
Ny


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.


I. Sr, Joun tae Apostie.—l. His PERSONALITY AS APPREHENDED BY MODERN
STUDENTS. To most of us the Apostle dwells apart, in a dim, solemn region of
mystery. He seems to look out upon us with gentle, dreamy eyes—a man of
meditative calmness and repose, intensely intuitional, speaking in words of child-
like, mystic simpleness, whose drift and scope baffle our logical methods to appre-
hend, With a kind of vague intention we are content to call him “the Apostle of
Love”’ while his meaning floats before us in twilight and distance, As our life in
God deepens we begin to perceive that, while the image of the Lord mirrors itself
in him, as the sky mirrors itself in the depths of the Galilean seas, he is no mere
passive and idle recipient of light, no mere reflecting surface, but a great, loving,
deeply spiritual soul, all aglow with adoration, and enthusiasm, and delight, and
ever-living wonder, absorbed with the Lord, and resting in the calm assurance of
His favour. As when one gazes with speculative eye into the star-lit azure, piercing
far into its deep immensity, so (spiritually) does this man gaze into the depths of
Christ with the gaze of love. (J. Culross, D.D.) 2. THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF HIS
EARLY Lire. His birthplace was probably Bethsaida, a fishing village on the Sea of
Galilee, the native place also of Peter, Andrew, and Philip, This seems to be
a natural inference from his intimate acquaintance with them, and from his
being with them (Matt. iv. 18-21; John i. 40). His parents could not have
been altogether poor: Zebedee had “hired servants” (Mark i. 20); Salome was one
of the women who provided for the Saviour’s wants (Matt. xxvii. 56), and who pur-
chased spices to embalm him (Luke xxiii. 55); and our Saviour, when He was
dying, commended Mary to the care of John, and requested him to take her to his
own house. That Zebedee was in good circumstances, and in a respectable social
position, may perhaps also be inferred from the fact that John was known by the
high priest (chap. xviii. 15). Under these circumstances, the supposition is natural
that the Evangelist had received some education. He is, indeed, enumerated (Acts
iv. 13), among the “ignorant,” but the Pharisees regarded all persons as such who
had not pursued the Rabbinic study of the law, all who were not pupils of the
Rabbins. It is probable that from his earliest years he had a religious bent. His
mother Salome appears to have been a woman of piety, such was the devotion with
which she attached herself to Jesus ; her mind, too, was probably occupied with.the
Messianic hopes, as we infer from the narrative in Matt. xx. 20, from which we
gather also her devoted love to her children. Such a mother would be likely to
exercise at an early period a hallowed influence on her children, and this would be
fostered in John by his mode of life as a fisherman, which often led him to pass the
quiet watches of the night on the waters, amid the enchantments of a region
resembling that which encircles the Lake of Lucerne. (Tholuck.) John inherited,
no doubt, a good bodily organization. His parents were not doomed to breathe the
impure air of a pent-up city. Their home was out in open nature, amidst the fresh
breezes of the hills and of the sea. Their habits were not those of self-indulgence
and indolence which generate disease, nor of hard brain work which tends to ener-


vi INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.

Se
vate the system. The work of the muscles and the limbs was their invigorating
occupation. The child, thus inheriting a healthful frame, grew up amidst the same
invigorating conditions. His early impressions from nature would be large and deep.
Our greatness is determined by our ideas and our ideas by our impressions. — Small
ideas can never make a great man, nor can great ideas grow out of superficial im-
pressions. Large plants must have a deep soil. Hence as a rule a man must be
brought up amidst grand scenery to have a grand soul. To John’s young eye nature
towered in some of her loveliest and most majestic aspects, and spoke, in the rustle
of trees, the howl of winds, and the roar of billows, strange and stirring poetry to
his soul. (D. Thomas, D.D.) 3. His HISTORY AS A FOLLOWER OF Curist. John
first appears as a disciple of the Baptist. As such the visions which may have been
awakened in his youthful fancy through the suggestions of ancient prophecy must
have become more fixed by the rigid tones of the great teacher. In such a state of
mind, waiting for the hope of Israel, how welcome must have been the sight of the
dove alighting on Christ’s head and the voice which proclaimed Him the well-
beloved Son of God. But Jesus did not then begin His public ministry ; He retired
from the gaze of an expecting people to meet and subdue the chief adversary of His
mission. To all who recognized Him as their long-looked-for Anointed, this must
have been an interval of painful suspense. At length, however, as the Baptist and
two of his disciples were standing together, Jesus drew near. A mere hint is suf-
ficient to recall Him to their remembrance. The disciples overhear their master’s
exclamation: ‘Lo, the Lamb of God! ”—and immediately leaving him they
follow Jesus. Nor are they willing to be separated from Him, till they have found
out His abode and lived with Him. In this incident is contained the germ of that
attachment between Christ and John which expanded with ever-increasing vigour and
beauty on earth and is now perfected by the purity and ennobied by the higher
association of heaven. In the next scene Jesus meets him on the shores of Tiberias,
and calls him to be His constant follower. From this period to the end of the
Saviour’s ministry all that is known of him is embraced in a few scattered incidents.
With Peter and James he was present at the restoration of Jairus’s daughter. In the
same company he was a witness of the transfiguration. At the last supper John
reclined next to Christ, and was looked upon as His bosom friend. It was John’s
sad privilege to behold the agony of Gethsemane. He fearlessly entered the hall of
Pilate, and led in Peter who had been timidly loitering at the door. And how
soothing, in the last dark hour of the crucifixion—like the mild beaming of the
evening star on the edge of a retiring thundercloud—is that parting interchange of
affection as the weeping eye of the beloved disciple meets the agonized yet tender
look of the dying Saviour, and that simple charge is given, ‘‘ Behold thy mother!”
When the women reported, that the stone had been rolled away from the sepulchre,
Peter and John ran thither in company. After the resurrection John went into
Galilee, and there meeting Jesus, according to appointment, he followed Him to
receive his final instructions and promises. But soon the day of separation came,
and Jesus ascended, leaving John and the other disciples to tarry at Jerusalem.
(E. HE. Salisbury.) 4. His LIFE SUBSEQUENT TO THE ASCENSION. After the ascension
he continued in Jerusalem, at least for a time. Among the brethren at the election
of Matthias, and on the Day of Pentecost, he accompanied Peter to the Temple,
when the lame man was healed at the Gate Beautiful. Later in the day he was
apprehended along with Peter and sent to prison; and on the morrow the two were
cited before the Sanhedrim, With Peter he was afterwards despatched to Samaria
(Acts viii. 14), It is probable that soon after he withdrew from the metropolis to
Galilee with the Virgin, induced to do so, it may be supposed, by the dislike of the
latter to remain where her Lord (as well as her son) had been crucified, and by the
increasing hostility of the Jews (Acts viii. 1). If this were so, it will explain how,
three years after, on the occasion of Paul’s first visit, he did not meet with John
(Gal, i. 18), whom he first saw fourteen years after (Gal. ii.9). John, it is believed,
had by this time returned to the head-quarters of the Church in Jerusalem, in con-
sequence of the Virgin’s death in 48 a.p. Then, having resumed his natural position,
he was recognized by St. Paul as one of the “pillars” of the Church. How long
he abode here is uncertain. Perhaps he accompanied the Church when it migrated
to Pella, before the Roman war, about 67 a.p. In later years, though not till Paul’s
death, possibly not till the deaths of Timothy and Titus had deprived the churches
in Asia Minor of apostolic guidance, he settled at Ephesus, (7. Whitelaw, D.D.)
5. Cuosina vzars, During the period of the labours of the Evancelist in these
portions of Asia Minor, he was banished by one of the emperors to Patmos, where,


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. vii


according to Rev. i. 9, he wrote the Apocalypse. If Irensus and Eusebius are to
be credited, the banishment must have occurred under Domitian (died 96 a.p.).
We find in addition in Tertullian, in Jerome, and other writers, an account
of John’s being taken to Rome under Domitian, of his being cast into a
vessel of boiling oil, of his miraculous deliverance from it, and of his being
subsequently removed to Patmos. There is an independent testimony that John
suffered for the faith, in the fact that Polycrates, bishop of Ephesus (about 200a.p.),
calls him paprve, “ a martyr.” The return from exile is to be dated under Nerva.
In the ecclesiastical tradition he appears as the centre of the Church-life in Asia
Minor, insomuch, that in the controversies, as for example the one about Easter,
and in the struggle with the Gnostics, he is referred to, and frequent mention is
made of his disciples and hearers. When he had reached, as Jerome tells us, his
extremest old age, he became too feeble to walk to the meetings, and was carried to
them by young men. He could no longer say much, but he constantly repeated the
words: ‘ Little children, love one another!” When he was asked why he con-
stantly repeated this expression, his answer was: ‘“‘ Because this is the command
of the Lord, and because enough is done if but this one thing be done.” (Tholuck.)
6. Dzatn. We are ignorant of the time and circumstances of his death. Conjec-
ture ranges from 89 a.p. to 120 a.v. Chrysostom affirms that he was a hundred
years old when he wrote his Gospel, and that he lived full twenty years after. It
does not appear that he died by violence, but peacefully upon his bed, most probably
in Ephesus, amidst his “little children.” One likes to imagine the tranquility of
the last scenes, in keeping with the tenor of his life. In all likelihood, his dust lies
somewhere amidst the wild jungle that has overspread the neighbourhood. With
the setting of ‘‘ that last Resplendence” the age of common history begins. The
churches found it difficult to believe that he had really passed away; the saying
had gone abroad among them that he should not die, but should continue until the
appearing of the Lord; and so in course of time the legend was framed—that he
was not really dead, but only sleeping in his grave. It was not wholly an error; for
‘*he lives and will ever live by his writings, and the future belongs to him even
more than the past.” (J. Culross, D.D.) 7. Trapvitions, John and Cerinthus :—
One day as the Apostle was entering the public bath at Ephesus, the Apostle
learned that the heretic was within. Immediately he sprang from the place,
exclaiming, “‘ Let us flee, lest the house fall upon us, since Cerinthus, the enemy
of truth, is within.’”? Jeremy Taylor pronounces this a good precedent for us, when
the case is equal. St. John could discern the spirit of Cerinthus, whose heresy was
fundamental, and the Apostle was a person assisted up to infallibility, ‘And
possibly,” he adds, “it was done by the whisper of a prophetic spirit and upon a
miraculous design ; for immediately upon his retreat the bath fell down, and
crushed Cerinthus in the ruins.” More to the point is the bishop’s counsel, that
we should not quickly, nor upon slight grounds, nor unworthy instances, call heretic.
(Ibid.) The partridge and the hunter :—In his old age the Apostle used to find
pleasure in the attachment of a tamed partridge. One day, as he held it in his
bosom and was gently stroking it, a huntsman suddenly approached, and wondering
that one so illustrious should take to such a trivial amusement, he asked, ‘‘ Art thou
that John whose singular renown had inspired even me with a great desire to know
thee? How then canst thou occupy thyself with an employment sohumble?” The
Apostle replied, “‘ What is that in thy hand?” He answered, “A bow.” ‘‘ And why
dost thou not always carry it bent?” ‘‘ Because,” he answered, “it would in that
case lose its strength ; and when it was necessary to shoot, it would fail from the too
continuous strain.” ‘Then let not this slight and brief relaxation of mine perplex
thee,” answered the Apostle; ‘‘ since without it the spirit would flag from the un-
remitted strain, and fail when the call of duty came.” (John Cassian.) St. John
and the bandit :—Visiting a town not far from Ephesus, and assembling with the
brethren, he saw in the audience a young man, tall of stature and of noble counte-
nance and ardent spirit. Addressing the pastor of the church, he said: ‘* I commit
that young man to thy charge, and call Christ and the Church to witness that I do
so.” ‘The pastor of the church undertook, and for a time faithfully fulfilled, the
charge. He instructed the young man in the faith, and by and by had the joy of
receiving him into the church. Subsequently, however, he relaxed his watchfulness,
and was led by idle and worthless acquaintances into temptation, and at length,
believing salvation hopeless, he fully surrendered himself to evil, and became one
of a company of brigands, of whom he was made the chief. Some time after this,
John revisited the city, and addressing the pastor of the church, said, ‘‘ Restore me


Vili INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.

PNET ee ee ee
now the pledge which I, with the Saviour, entrusted to your charge in the presence
of the church.” And when he saw that his words were not understood, he added,
“T reclaim the young man whose soul I entrusted to thee.” The pastor said, with
tears, “He is dead.” ‘“ How?” asked the Apostle: “what death did he die?”
“ He is dead to God,” was the answer; ‘for he has become evil and reprobate; he
was forced to flee for his crimes, and he is now a brigand among our mountains.”
Immediately the Apostle, obtaining a horse and guide, rode off even as he was
to the robber hold, and falling into the hands of the sentinels, required to be
led at once to their chief. But when John was led into his presence, he at
once fied, overwhelmed with shame. John, forgetting his years, ran after him,
crying, “‘ Why, my child, do you flee from me—from me, your father, an unarmed
old man? Have compassion on me, my child; do not be afraid. You yet
have a hope of life. I will yet give account to Christ for you. If needs be,
I will gladly die for you, as Christ died for us. I will lay down my life for
you. Stop! Believe, Christ hath sent me.” Hearing these words, he first stands
still and casts his eyes upon the ground, He next throws away his arms, and com-
mences trembling and weeping bitterly. When the old man approaches he clasps
his knees, and with the most vehement agony pleads for forgiveness, baptizing him-
self anew as it were with his own tears: all this time, however, he conceals his right
hand. But the Apostle, pledging himself, with an appeal to God for His truth,
that he had obtained forgiveness from the Saviour for him, implores him even
on his knees, and the hand he had held back he kisses as if it were cleansed
again by his penitence. He finally led him back to the church. Here
he pleaded with him earnestly, strove with him in fasting, urged him with
monitions, until he was able to restore him to the church—an example of
sincere repentance and genuine regeneration. (From Clement of Alexandria.)
The pupils of St. John :—Three names are traditionally linked to John’s as those
of pupils. The first is that of Ignatius—‘‘the disciple of John the Apostle,” he
is called in the ‘‘ Martyrdom of Ignatius,” ‘‘ and a man in all respects of apostolic
character.” Tradition makes him out to have been the little child whom Jesus
set as an example of humility amidst the twelve apostles, Hence he was supposed
to derive his name of Theophorus—the ‘‘ God-carried;” though he himself in-
terprets it to mean one who carries God in his heart. He was overseer of the
Church of Syrian Antioch, and is said to have suffered martyrdom under Trajan,
at Rome, by being thrown to the lions. A large number of writings have been
attributed to him, respecting which there has been more controversy than about
any ancient Christian writings, if we except the New Testament itself. The second
name is Polycarp. Irenzus, who sat at his feet, informs us that he “‘ was instructed
by the apostles, and was brought into contact with many who had seen Christ.”
We learn from Irensus further that Polycarp was an overseer in the Church at
Smyrna by apostolic appointment. When called to swear by the fortune of Cesar
and reproach Christ, that he might save his life, he replied, ‘‘ Eighty and six years
have I served Him, and He never did me an injury: how can I blaspheme Him,
my King and my Saviour?” From amidst the flames that consumed him he gave
thanks, ‘ because Thou hast counted me worthy to have a part in the number of
Thy martyrs, in the cup of Thy Christ, to the resurrection of eternal life, both of
soul and body, through the incorruption (imparted) by the Holy Ghost.” The
third name is that of Papias, an overseer in the Church at Hierapolis, a city of
Phrygia, the birthplace of Epictetus. Ireneus speaks gf him as an “ ancient
man,” “a hearer of John,” and “a companion of Polycarp.” He was on terms
of intercourse with many who had known the Lord and His apostles. From them
he gathered information which he wove into five books, entitled an “‘ Exposition of
the Lord’s Sayings ””—a work which has not come down to us, except some frag-
ments. He seems to have been a man of small mind, a great reader, but a poor
thinker. It is to him that the report is traced back that Matthew wrote in Hebrew
and that Mark, in his Gospel, was the mouthpiece of Peter. He too is said to have
suffered martyrdom about the same time with Polycarp. (J. Culross, D.D.) The
“* Account of the Decease of St. John, Apostle and Evangelist” (from the apocryphal
Acts) tells us that on a Sunday after prayer and the Eucharist he said to Byrrhus
‘*Take with thee two brethren with baskets and spades and come after me %
John walked forth and came to the grave of a Christian brother, and said to the
youths, ‘‘ Dig, my sons, and let the trench be deep.” Then he went on conversing
and edifying those present, speaking of the majesty of the Messiah, and praying
over each of them. When the trench was finished, he suddenly disrobed and cast


Lo


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. ix
EB el ee een ee ee re
his garments like bedelothes in the trench; and, standing in his mantle only, he
lifted up his hands and prayed to God, ‘ Receive the soul of Thy John.” Then he
turned to the East and glorified God, standing full in the light; and said, “ Be

Thou with me, Jesus tHe Messiah our Lord.” Then he went down into the trench,
and saying, ‘‘Concord and peace be with you my brethren,” he rendered up his
spirit rejoicing. Posthumous legends :—During his lifetime the saying went
abroad that he was not to die, but to form one of the company who “ are alive and
remain unto the coming of the Lord.” Even his actual passing away did not
eradicate this belief. Wild assertions in the course of time were hazarded; such
as, that his remains, though sought for, could not be found. Augustine tells of
persons in his day who professed to have witnessed the gentle heaving of the turf
where he lay, asleep, but not dead, at Ephesus. The notion that he was still alive
became almost an article of popular faith in the Middle Ages (not unlike the legend
of the Wandering Jew), and in some quarters lingered even later. The English
sect of “Seekers,” under Cromwell, expected his reappearance as the forerunner of
Christ’s glorious return, A trace of the notion is still partially visible in the Feast
of the Translation of the Body of St. John, observed in the Greek Church. Beza
tells of an impostor of his times, burned at Toulouse, who gave himself out to be
the Apostle. A specimen of a different class of legends is found in the “ Chronicle
of John of Brompton.” King Edward the Confessor had, after Christ and the
Virgin Mary, a special veneration for St. John. One day, returning from his church
at Westminster, he was accosted by a pilgrim, who asked of him an alms for the
love of God and St. John. The king, who was ever merciful to the poor, immedi-
ately drew from his finger a ring, and, unknown to any one, gave it to the beggar.
When the king had reigned twenty-four years, it came to pass that two Englishmen,
pilgrims, returning to their own country from the Holy Land, were met by one in
the habit of a pilgrim, who asked of them concerning their country: and being told
they were of England, he said unto them, ‘‘ When ye shall have arrived in your
own country, go to King Edward, and salute him in my name: say to him that I
thank him for the alms which he bestowed on me in a certain street in Westminster ;
for there, on a certain day, as I begged of him an alms, he bestowed on me this
ring, which till now I have preserved, and ye shall carry it back to him, saying
that in six months from this time he shall quit the world and come and remain
with me for ever.” The pilgrims, being astounded, said, ‘*‘ Who art thou? and
where is thy dwelling?” And he answered, saying, “I am John the Evangelist.
Edward your king is my friend, and for the sanctity of his life I hold him dear.
Go now therefore, deliver to him this message and this ring, and I will pray to God
for him. The king received the tidings joyfully and feasted the messengers royally.
Then he set himself to prepare for his departure out of this world. On the eve
of the Nativity 1066, he fell sick, and on the eve of the Epiphany following he
died. The ring he gave to the Abbot of Westminster to be for ever preserved
among the relics there. (J. Culross, D.D.) 8. His cHARACTER. As the disciple
whom Jesus loved :—The whole sum of his character is contained in the single fact
that he was ‘ the disciple whom Jesus loved.” Once understand that, from what-
ever causes, no obstacle intervened between him and that one Divine object, which
from the earliest dawn of youth to the last years of extreme old age was ever
impressing itself deeper and deeper into his inmost soul, and his whole work on
earth is at once accounted for. Whatever we can conceive of devoted tenderness,
deep affection, intense admiration for goodness, we must conceive of him who,
even in the palace of the high priest, and at the foot of the Cross, was the inseparable
companion of his Lord; whatever we can conceive of a gentleness and holiness
ever increasing in depth and purity, that we must conceive of the heart and mind
which produced the Gospel and Epistle of St. John. (Dean Stanley.) As the Son
of Thunder :—It was not as the Beloved Disciple, but as the Son of Thunder—not
as the apostle who leaned upon his Master’s breast at supper, but as the apostle
who called down fire from heaven, who forbade the man to cast out devils, who
claimed with his brother the highest places in the kingdom of heaven—that he
was known to the readers of the three Gospels. But it is natural that in such a
character the more outward and superficial traits should have attracted attention
before the complete perfection of that more inward and silent growth which was
alone essential to it; and alien in some respects as the bursts of fiery passion may
be from the usual terror of St, John’s later character, they fully agree with the
anathema of the tenth verse of his Second Epistle and with the story of Cerinthus
and the bath. It is not surprising that the deep stillness of such a charactcr as


x INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.


this should, like the Oriental sky, break out from time to time into tempests of
impassioned vehemence: still less that the character which was to excel all others
in its devoted love of good should give indications—in its earlier stages even in
excess—of that intense hatred of evil, without which love’ of good can hardly be
said to exist. (Zbid.) The character of John the Apostle was that of John the
man sanctified :—In calling him to be a follower, the Lord did not suppress his
individuality, but used it; as, if one should send a message by a lisping child, the
lisp will be heard in the delivery of the message; or as, when Moses’ face shone,
or Stephen wore as it had been the face of an angel, the men were still themselves.
This is the Lord’s way with His own throughout. While they are all taken up
with Him into heavenly places, there is no dead monotony -of character produced ;
each wears a grace peculiar to himself; each is Christ-like after his own order.
So with this man. The original texture of his nature abides. He has lost nothing;
rather he is become more simply, truly, characteristically, profoundly, essentially
himself—himself, purified and exalted. A traveller, giving an account of an ancient
volcano which he visited, tells of a verdurous cup-like hollow on the mountain
summit, and that, where the fierce heat had once burned, lay a still, clear pool of
water, looking up like an eye to the beautiful heavens above. It is an apt parable
of this man. Naturally and originally volcanic, capable of profoundest passion
and daring, he is new-made by grace, till in his old age he stands out in calm
grandeur of character, and depth, and largeness of soul, with all the gentlenesses
and graces of Christ adorning him—a man, as I imagine him to myself, with a face
so noble that kings might do him homage, and so sweet that children would 1un to
him for his blessing. (J. Culross,D.D.) He is not in the least sentimental :-—
Nowhere does he exhibit trace or taint of that false ‘liberality’ which bids truth
and lie shake hands and be friends, or judicially binds them over to keep the
peace ; far less of that ‘‘ philosophic breadth’? which places Jesus Christ, Zoroaster,
Sakya-Mouni, Mahomet (and why not, by and by, Joseph Smith?), in the same
Pantheon. He is full of the grand intolerance of love; incapable of compromise
or truce with falsehood, however mighty or loftily throned. * If a man come and
bring not the doctrine of Christ, whosoever biddeth him God-speed is partaker of
his evil deeds (2 John x. 11). (Ibid.) His unobtrusive courage :—He never puts
himself forward in the sight of others, challenging observation, but yet is ever
found by his Master’s side in the hour of danger, quietly, and as of course. Thus,
on the night of betrayal, after the first alarm and forsaking, he closely follows
Jesus from the garden, goes in along with Him to the place of trial and judgment,
and never for a moment falls away from Him or flinches. Peter too follows, but
afar off, and takes his place with the officers and servants, as if he belonged to
their company; and in that “ afar off” lay his weakness and danger. John goes
in “ with ” Jesus, and in this lay his safety. Again, at the crucifixion, he held his
station near the cross of his Master all day, a witness of His dreadful sufferings;
exhibiting that rarest form of courage, which so few even of strong men are capable
of—the courage to stand still and look upon the sufferings of a beloved friend,
protracted and intensifying from hour to hour, which we can do nothing whatever
to relieve. Ah, it takes courage of the loftiest order for that! (Ibid.) His
healthiness :—Here is no invalid or valetudinarian, but a man of heathful, robust
physique, capable of sustained energy and patience. There is the same healthful-
ness mentally: in his writings, with all their depth, we detect nothing hazy,
vague, blurred; every chapter is like an engraving in which the nicest lines are
distinctly seen. If Paul was characterized by a profound sense of “ righteousness,”
John is as notably characterized (if such an expression may be allowed) by a pro-
found and vehement sense of ‘“ truth”—a man to whom “a lie” is intolerable.
Naturally and originally bold, intense, capable of the most ardent passion and
enthusiasm, with an all-daring imagination, with a capacious understanding, and
wonderful receptivity both of brain and heart, he is one of the grandest captives
that ever surrendered to Jesus Christ, and he becomes one of the noblest examples
of his new-fashioning power, so as to alternately exhibit, beyond the rest, the
perfect likeness of the Lamb, (IZbid.) | 9. His wrirmnes AND CHARACTER AS AN
auTHoR :—John stands entirely alone, without any of his fellow-witnesses having
exerted on him any appreciable influence, such as, e.g., Paul did on Luke, or Peter
on Mark, His theology bears the character less of a doctrinal development than
of an animated witness. Not dialectics, but intuition; not the intellect, but the
feelings ; not the future with its lofty expectations, but the present with its priceless
blessings, enters in the didactic writings of St. John ever anew into the foreground.


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. xi
ce ae rer ah eos i ne Ke
Only on a single occasion (chap i. 17) is indicated the opposition between Law and
Gospel which occupies so important a place in Paul; with John the Gospel stands
not only in diametrical opposition to the law, but also immeasurably above it. The
cause of this phenomenon is not difficult to discover. John probably never occupied
so strictly legal a standpoint as, e.g., James, much less experienced such a sudden
transition from darkness to light as Paul. As the sun causes the blossom to unfold,
so had the interview with Christ and the continued contemplation of Him (chap. i. 40)
awakened his spiritual life with silent but mighty power; and of this inner life
his doctrine is at once the expression and the deciphering. (J. J. Van Oosterzee, D.D.)
The Johannine writings form a triology: the Gospel basis, the organic conformation,
the final and eternal future of the Church. Christ who was, who is, and who is to
come. (J. P. Lange, D.D.) There are three books which we attribute to St.
John, besides the two short letters to Gaius and the Elect Lady. Of these, his
Gospel is a perfect summary of Christian Theology, his First Epistle of Christian
Ethics, his Apocalypse of Christian Politics. (F. D. Maurice, M.A.) 10. His
UNIQUE INFLUENCE. It is certainly a unique fact that a fisherman, simply relating
what he saw and heard, in terms that a child may understand, should have brought
the supremest claims of Jesus of Nazareth into view—beyond what even the
imperial Paul has done—so as to compel the most profound and philosophic
thinkers of every age to meet the problem, and so as to induce men, to whom sin
and helplessness are realities and not names, to commit themselves into His hands
for both worlds, believing them to be the hands of grace and almightiness. (J.
Culross, D.D.) ;


II, St. Joun’s RELATIONS WITH HIS CONTEMPORARIES AS APOSTLE AND AUTHOR.
—l. As APosTLE WITH THE OTHER aposTLES. (1) With St. Peter and St, Paul:—
(a) Each has a distinct place in the first formation of the Church, Peter is the
founder, Paul the propagator, John the finisher. Peter the apostle of the rising
dawn; Paul of the noon in its heat and clearness; John the sunset—first in the
stormy sunset of the Apocalypse, then in the calm brightness of the Gospel and
Epistles of his old age. (b) Each is the centre round which the floating elements
of thought and action clustered and crystallized. The whole body of Jewish
Christians leaned upon St. Peter, of Gentiles upon St. Paul, of mixed believers
upon St. John, (c) Each was connected with the sole authentic records of the
life of Christ. There can be little doubt that it was St. Peter’s disciples who first
received the representation which is preserved to us in the Prophet and Lawgiver
according to St. Matthew, the human Friend according to St. Mark. We need not
hesitate to recognize in the Gospel and Acts of St. Luke St. Paul’s view, first of the
suffering victim, then of the invisible Guide of the universal Church. We
at once acknowledge that we have in the Gospel of St. John the complete image
of the Word made flesh, (d) Each has borne his part in the unfolding of the
Divine economy. Peter the apostle of courageous and confident hope; Paul of
faith; John of love. Peter of power and action; Paul of thought and wisdom;
John of feeling and of goodness. Peter clings to the recollection of the older world ;
Paul plunges into the conflict of the present ; John, whether as prophet, evangelist,
or teacher, fixes his gaze on the invisible and the future. Peter gave to Christianity
its first outward historical form ; Paul its inward and spiritual freedom; John that
Divine end and object in which form and spirit harmonize. (Dean Stanley.)
(2) With St. Paul :—Between St. Paul and St. John how great is the contrast! In
St. Paul we are struck mainly by the wealth of sacred thought; in St. John by its
simplicity. St. Paul is versatile and discursive ; St. John seems to be fixed in the
entranced bliss of a perpetual intuition. St. Paul isa dialectician, who teaches as
by reasoning; St. John speaks as if the highest life of his soul was the wondering
study of one vast Apocalypse. St. Paul begins with anthropology; St. John with
theology. St.Paul often appeals to theology that he may enforce truths of morals;
St. John finds the highest moral truth in his most abstract theological contempla-
tions. St. Paul usually describes the redemption gift of Christ as Righteousness ;
St. John more naturally contemplates it as Life. In St. Paul the ethical element
predominates; in St. John the mystical. St. John is more especially the spiritual
ancestor of such fathers as Gregory Nazianzen; St. Paul of such as Augustine.
St. Paul is the typical apostle of Western, as St. John is of Eastern, Christendom ;
the contemplative side of the Christian life finds its pattern in St. John, the active
in St. Paul. Yet, striking as are such differences of spiritual methed and temper,
they are found in these great apostles side by side with an entire unity of teaching


xii INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.

NN ———$—$—$—————
as to the Person of our Lord. (Canon Liddon.) As soon as we pass from the
writings of Paul to those of John the difference shows itself in the great words that
are used. Paul’s words are—sin, grace, righteousness, election, redemption, faith,
reconciliation, salvation, the day of Christ; John’s words are such as these—life
and death, light and darkness, love and hatred, truth and a lie, the Son of God and
the Wicked One. Were I to select characteristic and corresponding utterances they
would be these from Paul—* Just and the Justifier of him who believeth in Jesus ”’ ;
from John—‘ This is the true God and eternal life.” The lines of thought pursued
by the two apostles are parallel and harmonious, while yet they lie on different
planes. (J. Culross, D.D.) St. John and St. Peter :—As Peter was the first of
the apostles in their relation to the world, John was the first in their relation to
Christ. The talent of Peter was ideally practical; that of John practically ideal.
Peter is the chief of the working, upbuilding spirits of the Church; John the chief
of the contemplative. In John, the basis of enthusiasm or devotion to Christ was
not an inexhaustible impulse to do, but a deep wondering celebration of the per-
fection of Christ. The fundamental characteristic of Peter was energetic heart ;
that of John reposing heartiness. Peter sees the glory of Christ chiefly in the
mighty unfolding of the glory of His kingdom ; John sees all the glory of the king-
dom of Christ comprised in the single glory of His personal exaltation and future
appearing. (P. Schaff, D.D.) 2. As AN EVANGELIST WITH THE SYNOPTISTS. The
fathers of the Christian Church saw in the vision described in Revelation iv. 7, a
faithful representation of the four Evangelists. They differ somewhat in their
application of the figures; but the majority take the “lion” to represent Matthew,
the “calf” or ox to represent Mark, the ‘“‘ man” to represent Luke, and the “‘ eagle”
to represent John. But whatever differences prevail in respect of the first three
fibures, all are agreed that the eagle is a symbol of the fousth Evangelist. ‘ There
be a thing too wonderful for me, the way of an eagle in the air.” (J. C. Jones,
D.D.) (1) St. John was acquainted with the Synoptists, and assumes that his readers
were :—(a) Many of the things which he supposes to be already known, and which,
therefore, he does not repeat, are precisely such as are contained in the other
gospels: e.g., the imprisonment of the Baptist (chap. iii. 24), the manner in which
Jesus procured a young ass (xii. 14-16), and the stone before the sepulchre, and the
presence of other women (xx. 1-2). (b) He omits some narratives which are con-
tained in the other gospels, which would have been serviceable to his object: e.g.,
the explanation of Jesus to the disciples of John (Matt. xi. 28), the miracles at the
death of Jesus (Matt. xxvii. 45-51), the supernatural conception, and the ascension,
which, however, is alluded to in vi. 62, xx. 17. Amongst other omissions are the
death of the Baptist, the election of the apostles, the transfiguration, and the
institution of the last supper, the miraculous cure of the ear of Malchus (Luke xxii,
51, cf. John xviii. 10), the last exclamation of Jesus (Luke xxiii. 16) and the loud
voice in which it was uttered (Mark xv. 37). In cases where the connection would
not permit of an entire omission the narrative is briefly sketched (ef. chap. xviii.
39-40 and Luke xxiii. 17-23; Mark v. 6-14). (c) He contributes materials which
complete the others: e.g., the name Malchus (xviii. 10). (Storr and Flatt.) (2)
His representation of Christ and His work differs from theirs :—In one gospel Christ
is the fulfiller of the Law, and withal, by a touching contrast, the Man of Sorrows.
In another He is the Lord of Nature and the Leader of men. In a third He is
active and all-embracing Compassion. Thus the obedience, the force, and the
tenderness of His humanity are successively depicted; but room is left for another
aspect of His life, differing from these and yet in harmony with them, If we may
dare so to speak, the Synoptists approach their great subject from without, St,
John unfolds it from within. He sets forth the life of our Lord not in any one of
the aspects which belong to it as human, but as being the consistent and adequate
expression of the glory of a Divine Person, manifested to men under a visible
form. (Canon Liddon.) Not only is the theatre upon which we here meet Christ
the form of His discourses, and the impression which is thereby made, different,
but even the substance, compared with that of the Synoptists, offers important
points of distinction, There the kingdom of heaven is presented, here it is the
King Himself; there the human, here the Divine side of the Redeemer; there the
blessedness of salvation on the other side the grave is brought into the foreground
here the blessedness on this side. Here the Evangelist begins with the Divine
origin of our Lord, there the Synoptists begin with His human birth; there the
words and discourses rise to the unveiling of His Divine dignity ; in John they pro-
ceed from the assumption of this truth as a starting-point. (J. J. Van Oostcrzee,


ee en


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. xiii


D.D.) The Synoptists pourtray Christ in His three several offices—St. Matthew
especially in that of king; St. Mark, of God as man; St. Luke, of priest and
victim; St. John speaks more particularly of His Divine and heavenly nature, of
spiritual things, and of the higher mysteries of Christian rule and doctrine; in
which he especially unfolds some of the chief types and ceremonies, which through-
out the Old Testament prepare us for the highest and most sacred and mysterious
truths, as by parables. (S. R. Bosanquet.) The Synoptic narratives are implicit
dogmas, St. John’s dogmas are concrete facts. (Canon Westcott.) (3) This differ-
ence does not affect the perfect harmony of the four :—-For—(a) The Johannine Christ
ts as truly human as is that of the Synoptists. The fourth gospel introduces Christ
as claiming to have been born (xviii. 37), which the Synoptists never do; it repre-
sents Him as having a body that could walk (x. 22), ride io 15), that could be
wearied (iv. 6), that could eat and drink (iv. 10, 31), that could be bound (xviii. 12),
scourged (xix. 1), that could weep (xi. 35), thirst (xix. 28), be crucified (xix. 18), die
(xix. 20), and be buried (&ix. 42); of a mind that could know (ii. 24), learn by ask-
ing (xi. 34), and express its thoughts (iii. 3); of a soul that could be troubled
(xii. 27), and a spirit that could be moved with indignation (xi. 33). It depicts
Him as undergoing experiences and performing actions of which only a real man
is capable, as, e.g., sitting at a marriage feast (ii. 1-10), shedding tears at a friend’s
grave (xi. 35), accepting hospitality (xii. 2), and doing the office of a menial (xiii.
5); conversing with a rabbi (iii. 3), with a woman (iv. 7), with the people (vii. 28),
with His disciples (xiv. 1), with His captors (xviii. 4), &c.; preaching (vil. 14, vi.
59, ix. 2-6); exposing Himself to the close and constant scrutiny of friends (xi.
1-5) and of enemies (viii. 48-59). In short, if John’s Christ was not a verus homo,
it would be difficult to find one such on earth. Then—(b) The Synoptic Christ is
as perfect as is that of John. . f the latter came forth from a pre-existent state so
did the former (Matt. i. 18-25; Mark i 11; Luke i. 32-36). If the latter was
‘‘ perfectly developed’ when He entered upon His public ministry so was the former,
as His baptism secured (Matt. iii. 16-17) and the temptation attested (Matt. iv. 11).
Was John’s Christ saluted by Nathanael as Divine? So was Luke’s (v. 8, iv. 34).
Had John’s Christ the faculty of omniscience? So had the Christ of the Synoptists
(Matt. ix. 15, xii. 15-25; Mark ii. 20, xii. 15; Luke v. 35, vi. 3). Neither failed in
any miracle He attempted, although in the absence of necessary moral conditions
there were instances in which He did not attempt; nor even the miracles of the
one greater than those of the other. In Matthew, Mark, and Luke He is under the
constraint of the same Divine imperative (Matt. xxvi. 54; Mark viii. 31; Luke ii.
49, iv. 43, xix. 5) as in John (iii. 14, iv. 4, ix. 4, x. 16). That the Synoptic Christ
did not know Himself to be the Messiah or the Divine Son until towards the end is
absurd ; for it was authoritatively proclaimed to Him at the baptism (Matt. iii. 17),
and the devils knew it (Matt. iv. 3-6, viii. 29). (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) (4) This
difference is perfectly reasonable and intelligible :—One of Goethe’s biographers
says of him that there were hidden in him ten different persons; we discover in
Luther, Augustine, and Paul such a multiplicity and fulness of intellectual and
spiritual life that it sometimes costs us an effort to discover in the very divergent
exhibition of this life the same fundamental eharacteristics in the same person. In
the polished and thousand-faced diamond there shines one and the same light in a
multiform blending of colours; and should we expect the case to be different in an
infinitely higher sphere—-the spiritual and the Divine? (J. J. Van Oosterzee, D.D.)
If a wise man who was merely human like Socrates, could present such a manifold-
ness in unity that two of his pupils could give such contrasted yet true pictures of
his teaching, surely the same is possible in the case of Christ—in the case of Him
whose office and work was to be the Redeemer of men of all shades of character
and life. (Bleek.) The same person may narrate the same thing on different
occasions in a different way, and yet-in each case with the fundamentals of truth.
Compare Acts ix. and xxvi. with each other, and of the same kind chap. x. and xi,
where the conversion of Paul and Cornelius is told twice. Ifa drawing is made of
a city first from the east side, then from the west, though in both cases the tallest
and most striking towers and edifices are presented, yet in all other respects the
two sketches not only can, but must differ widely. And yet both are faithful copies
of the original. (Bengel.) Each of yourselves may be studied at the same time
by the anatomist and by the psychologist. Certainly the aspect of your complex
nature which the one study insists upon, is sufficiently remote from the aspect
which presents itself to the other. In the eyes of one observer you are purely spirit;
you are thought, affection, memory, will, imagination. But to the other observer


xiv INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.


your material body is everything. Its veins and muscles, its pores and nerves, its
colour, proportions, functions, absorb his whole attention. Yet is there any ground
for a petty jealousy between the one study of your nature and the other? May not
each illustrate, supplement, and balance the other? These questions admit of an
easy reply; each half of the truth is practically no less than speculatively necessary
to the other. Nor is it otherwise with the general relation of the first three gospels
to the fourth. (Canon Liddon.) (5) This difference has been no difficulty to the
Church :—As far as the religious side of the contrast is concerned, it is remarkable
that the conscience of the Church has never been perplexed by it, and that it is
exclusively the learned who pronounce it insoluble. This fact proves, in any case,
that for the pious and believing heart the Jesus of the Synoptics has never been,
and will never be, anything else but that of John. The difference, therefore, does
not reach the depths of the religious and moral life. (F. Godet, D.D.) Christian
piety is fed by our four canonical Gospels, and yet it knows but one Christ, In the
people, as well as in a child, there is an instinct which surpasses any acuteness of
the best criticism. We can say of the people what Jesus said of the sheep, ‘‘a
stranger will they not follow.” If now the Jesus of John is totally different from
that of the three, we must confess that Christendom has saluted a stranger by the
name of Master for more than fifteen centuries without the slightest doubt; and
has regarded both the stranger and the Master worthy of the same adoration.
Such a misconception would not only be without parallel in history, but would even
have history against itself. (Revue Chrétienne.) (6) This difference is an argu-
ment in favour of the authenticity of both representations :—Any one who in writing
would smuggle in his own wares under the Johannean flag, would certainly have to
be very careful never to come into even apparent contradiction to the first three
Gospels. He who by crafty pre-meditation would invest himself with the appear-
ance and manner of an apostle, must take the greatest pains to utter an echo of the
apostolic witnesses, but never a note that is not in perfect harmony with them. If,
therefore, the diversity of doctrinal idea and historical representation between the
first three Gospels and the fourth still seems strange, then I may say that it is per-
fectly inexplicable if we are here dealing with an anonymous author. But all the
difficulty will disappear if we accept the fact that this is the work of an apostle who
occupies a perfectly independent position beside the other three Evangelists, yet
whose testimony he continues, enlarges, and completes. (J. J. Van Oosterzee, D.D.)
(7) John’s style differs from that of the Synoptists :—We find in St. John’s Gospel
something more than the artless and childish simplicity of St. Matthew’s narrative ;
more than the rapidity and terseness of St. Mark’s narrative; more than the calm
and flowing history of St. Luke, With that artlessness, that terseness, and that
calmness, there is mingled a higher and more elevated tone—a tone derived from
the monuments of the remotest sacred antiquity, as well as from the hidden depths
of the most profound theology; a tone reminding us sometimes of the Mosaic
account of creation, sometimes of the wise sayings of Solomor, sometimes akin
even to the theology of the later Jewish-Alexandrine philosophers. (Isaac da Costa.)


III. Tae GosPen accorpine To St. Jonn.—l. History or THE CONTROVERSY.
From the disappearance of the Alogi in the later sub-Apostolic age until the end of
the seventeenth century, the authenticity of St. John’s Gospel was not questioned.
The earliest modern objections to it were raised in this country on the assumption
of a discrepancy between St. John and the Synoptists. These were combatted by
Le Clerc, and for well nigh a century the point was thought to have been decided
when in 1792 Evanson revived it, and was answered by Priestley. The brilliant
reputation of Herder next secured attention for his theory that St. John describes
not the historical but the ideal Christ, in which several German writers followed
him. But these negative criticisms were met in turn by Roman Catholic divines
like Hug, and liberal Lutherans such as Hichhorn and Koinel. By their labours
the question was again held to have been set at rest. This second settlement was
rudely disturbed by the famous ‘‘ Probabilia” of Bretschneider in 1820. He
exaggerated the contrast between the Christ of St. John and of the Synoptists into
a positive contradiction. Protestant Germany was then fascinated by Schleier-
macher, who not only accepted the fourth Gospel, but found in that Gospel the
reason for his somewhat reckless estimate of the other three. The sharp con-
troversy which followed resulted in Bretschneider’s retractation, which produced an
impression which was not violently interfered with until 1835, when Strauss, in hig
first life of Jesus, denied that the Gospel was the work of the son of Zebedee,


ea we ee
\ “1
‘ ‘


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. xv


This was withdrawn in the third edition of 1838, but reaffirmed in the fourth of
1840 ; and in the popular edition of 1864 he extended a friendly hand to the Tubin-
gen School, which had arisen in the meantime, and which aspired to supplement
the negative criticism of Strauss by a positive hypothesis. St. John’s Gospel was
held to represent a highly developed state of an orthodox gnosis, the growth of
which presupposed the lapse of at least a century, and Baur, Schwegler, and Zeller
decided that it was not composed till after a.p. 160, which general position is held
by the disciples of that school as one of its very fundamental tenets. (Canon Lid-
don.) 2, THE REAL GROUND OF oOpposITION. The question of the Johannine
writing is determined by another graver still: that of the Johannine Christ; and
most frequently it is the latter which sways the solution of the former. Nothing
can prevent the critic, whose inward feeling, for one reason or another, is repugnant
to the Christ of John, from resolving the question of the fourth Gospel in a way
conformed to the secret wish of his antipathy; as, on the other hand, the author,
whose deepest and holiest aspirations are awakened on meeting with the figure of
that same Christ, ‘‘ full of grace and truth,” will soon find in the lights proceeding
from such profound sympathy the solution of critical difficulties which have been
declared insurmountable. (F. Godet, D.D. 3. THE VAST IMPORTANCE OF THE
question. If St. John’s Gospel is not the historical account of an eyewitness, but
only a myth, then there is no historical Christ; and without an historical Christ
all the faith of the Christian Church is a delusion; all Christian confession,
hypocrisy or deception; the Christian reverence for God an imposition; and the
Reformation, finally, a crime or a madness. (Baron Bunsen.) The writer of the
Gospel certainly professes to have been an eye-witness of the things which he
records, and as good as calls himself John. In addition, the same hand that wrote
the Gospel unquestionably wrote also the First Epistle (as both external and in-
ternal evidence show), in which the distinctest possible assertion.is made of the
writer’s having been a personal witness of the manifestation. If then he was nota
witness, I cannot acquit him of the worst kind of “lie,” all the more abominable
that it is a lie against God, the effect of which is to represent a creature as His
equal ; and I cannot help quoting against him—shuddering as I do it—the words
of that John whom he simulates, ‘ All liars shall have their part in the lake which
burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. (J. Culross, D.D.)
4. WHo WAS THE AUTHOR IF Nor St. JoHn? The “‘ great unknown” who has been
suggested would have been too great to have been concealed. He would have
stood out a head taller than all the great men of the second century. There is no
room in the second century for such a mind. Its literature has an utterly different
stamp from the fourth Gospel. The writings of the apostolic fathers stand in
dependence upon the apostolic literature. Simply read the letter of Polycarp, who
was such an honoured chief in the Church of Asia Minor, and see what a great
falling off there is, And the following literature begins, with Justin, the age of
theological reflection and of scientific digestion, which presupposes an age of the
original production of Christian thoughts, and therefore a book like John’s Gospel.
Both the Gnosticism of the second century and the contest against it offer us an
entirely different picture from the one the fourth Gospel presents. The Gospel
points to an earlier stage, a stage of first productivity and of original grandeur.
(C. EZ. Luthardt, D.D.) That any writer of the second century should be able to
give with perfect accuracy a large number of particulars respecting a former age
and a different people is one improbability. Then that he should avoid all indica-
tions of his own age is another. The second century was distinguished from the
first by metaphysical discussions respecting the nature of Christ, by the unsettled
claims of Church officers, and by the peculiar efficacy attributed to the sacraments.
Of these controversies there is in this Gospel no sign. Then again, that being a
truthful Christian, the author should wish to conceal his distance from the events
related, snd to represent himself as an eye-witness, even the Apostle John, is
another separate improbability. That he should give a view of the person of Christ,
surpassing iv human tenderness and Divine dignity that of the other Evangelists,
and more conducive to Christian comfort and improvement than any other book,
this is anotherimprobability. That it should differ from the other Gospels and agree
so wellis another. But all these combined improbabilities must be accepted, if we
take this Gospel to be the composition, honest or dishonest, of any one but the
apostle. To all this must be added that the writer of such a work should be always
in what is called miraculous concealment; and that within thirty or. forty years of
its composition it should be received by Christians of distant countries and conflict-


xvi INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.

nr ee eS ae Ee
ing parties as of apostolical authority, a work the genuineness of which was above
controversy. (Prof. J. H. Godwin.) 5. Sr. Joun pip waite ir. (1) Internal
evidence. (a) The author was a Jew :—We find ourselves so completely transported
to the Jewish circle of ideas, and to Jewish life, thst we must recognize not only the
design of portraying these matters thoroughly, but aiso the peculiar memory which
furnishes the material for such portrayal. (Weizsdcker.) Although he nowhere
indicates his purpose to write for Jews, he, not less than Matthew, continually cites
the Old Testament, and shows that he was acquainted with the Hebrew text, and
on the smallest points shows an extensive knowledge of Jewish manners and cus-
toms. (J. J. Van Oosterzee, D.D.) The vocabulary, the structure of the sentences,
the symmetry and numerical symbolism of the composition, the expression and the
arrangement of the thoughts, are essentially Hebrew. (b) The author was a Jew of
Palestine in the time of our Lord :—He knew the minutest details of the different
localities of the Holy land, e.g., the size of the Lake of Tiberias, and the distance
of Betliany from Jerusalem. He described the country about Jacob’s Well as,
according to Renan, only a man could do who had frequently passed it. He is aw
fait as to the relationship between Annas and Caiaphas. He knows exactly how
many years they have been rebuilding the temple, and that the Romans had taken
away from the Jews the right of capital punishment. (F. Godet, D.D.) Writing
after the destruction of Jerusalem, he paints the Holy City with its inhabitants
and localities in such living colours, that it appears to us sometimes as if the city
and temple stood before us. (J.J. Van Oosterzee,D.D.) It is inconceivable that a
Gentile living at a distance from the scene of religious and political controversy
which he paints could have realized, as the Evangelist has done, with vivid and un-
erring accuracy the relations of parties and interests which ceased to exist after the
fall of Jerusalem, that he could have marked distinctly the part which the hier-
archical class—the unnamed Sadducees—took in the crisis of the Passion; that he
could have caught the real points at issue between true and false Judaism, which
in their first form had passed away when the Christian Society was firmly
established: that he could have portrayed the growth and conflict of opinion as to
the national hopes of the Messiah side by side with the progress of the Lord’s
ministry. All this was foreign to the experience of an Alexandrine or an Asiatic of
the second century. (Bp. Westcott.) (c) The author was an eye-witness :—
Such he claimed to be, and the frequent and graphic mention of incidents likely to
be retained in the memory, but improbable as the result of any other cause, fully
confirm the claim. He is more explicit in his chronology than the others. It is
through him that we learn of Christ’s four visits to Jerusalem, He fixes the day of
Christ’s baptism, and hour of His calling the two disciples; mentions the grass on
which the multitudes sat down; describes the position and gestures of the disciples
at the Last Supper; recalls the darkness into which Judas went out; and the
lanterns and torches carried by those who arrested Jesus; and relates the
changing positions of Peter at the time of his denial, and the means by
which he obtained access to the hall. (@. F. Wright.) St. John’s ac-
count may be likened to a freshly plucked cluster of grapes, on which the
morning dew still glistens; and I deeply pity him who does not receive this
impression, but can think only of the artistic creation of an anonymous compositor
who (unheard-of connection !) combines such incomparable talents with such un-
skilful simplicity. (J.J. Van Oosterzee,D.D.) (a) This Palestinian contemporary of
Jesus was a member of the intimate circle of friends, formed arownd the person of
our Lord. He knew personally Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Peter, &c., and the kind
of relation that Jesus had to each. The naive replied to Philip, the spiteful remarks
of Judas, the cry of devotion mingled with the unbelief of Thomas, are all known
to Him. He knew who were the four disciples who by their questions drew forth
the instructions of Jesus at that intimate conversation they had with Him on the
eve of His death. He recalls the smallest details of the course of the two disciples
at the grave of Jesus. All that would have been disgusting charlatanism on the
part of a man who had not lived in close intimacy with the apostles, and would
consequently only treat the disciples as characters in a romance. This companion
of Jesus could only have been an apostle. He completes and presents in quite a
new light the tradition received in the Church, as we find it recorded in the
Synoptics. The narrative is equivalent to a complete renovation of the history of
Jesus transmitted, the Synoptics by harmonizing very well with them, but remain-
ing absolutely independent, Only an apostle, who felt perfectly sure of his authority,
could stand face to face with the most ancient Gospels already received in the


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. xvii
inne erate ee tr a ws opreny riser en = 8 Pe ee er
Churches, and maintain such a position. (F. Godet, D.D.) (e) This apostle was
John. His language betrayshim. While other Evangelists speak of the precursor as
John the Baptist, and very naturally to distinguish him from the apostle, the writer
nowhere thinks it necessary to add this surname, although he speaks of Thomas
called Didymus, of Judas not Iscariot, and Simon Peter. The only conceivable
reason for this is that he himself was John and was known as such, there being no
other but the Baptist. (J.J. Van Oosterzee,D.D.) (f) This John was the disciple
whom Jesus loved. The other disciples are mentioned by their names, Peter,
Andrew, Thomas, Nathaniel, &c., while the names of John and his brother James
nowhere appear. In chap. xxi. 2, the two sons of Zebedee, who in all the lists of the
apostles are at the head, are placed the last. Now the disciple whom Jesus loved,
who takes part in this scene (vers. 20, 21) cannot have been James, for he was
dead at an early date (Acts xii. 2). It can only have been John, his brother. Lastly,
this disciple must have been among the favoured three. But he could not have
been Peter, who is distinguished from him, nor James who died first, while he (chap.
xxi. 23) survived all the others. Could there be no other than John. (F. Godet,
D.D.) Why, then, does he not mention his ownname? Because his readers were
acquainted with it. He certainly never reckoned on severe critics without special
gifts for their occupation. The honourable epithet was dearer to his heart than any
other; he therefore made use of it with special pleasure when it was necessary to
speak of himself; and that man cannot be a very acute psychologist if he regards
as immodest boasting the choice of a term that expresses the deepest sense of grati-
tude for the highest manifestation of favour. (J. J. Van Oosterzee, D.D.) (2)
The testimony of the author himself :—In chap. i. 14 he speaks of himself as an
ocular witness, not as every Christian is, for the purely moral sense is impossible
here. The Evangelist speaks of the Incarnation and earthly life of Jesus, whose
history he is about to relate. In such a context it is impossible to use the term
“beheld ’in a purely spiritual sense. In chap. xix. 35 the Evangelist says, ‘‘ And he
that saw it bare record, and his record is true, and he knoweth that he saith true,
that ye might believe.” Writers have abused the term ‘he that ” to maintain that
the author was here distinguishing himself from the witness. But how could he
say of any other than himself ‘‘ he knows that he saith true”? One man does not
answer for another’s conscience; in the nature of things a man can only answer for
himself. The pronoun translated ‘‘ he that” is frequently employed in an exclusive
sense ‘‘he and he alone ”’ (comp. chap. i. 18, v. 39, ix. 37); and in no case to point
out a different person. It is the witness of the fact who narrates it, it is he alone
who has seen it, and all others who know the fact only know it by faith in his testi-
mony. He who hath seen has borne witness of it, that ye may believe. The
testimony of the author himself in the capacity of eye-witness is unanswerably
confirmed by the first four verses of his first Epistle. Itis not possible to express
in more forcible terms the fact of personal perception than by means of the
different bodily senses—sight, hearing, touch, and he who has seen, heard, touched,
bears witness in order that those who have not seen, heard, touched, may believe,
and thus possess and rejoice with Him (vers. 3,4). Thereis too much holy majesty
and tender love in these words to suppose that they were those of an impostor;
and if he who wrote them was what he pretended to be, the witness of the life and
death of Jesus, it must be admitted tbat this witness was an apostle, and that this
apostle was the disciple whom Jesus loved, as has been attested in chap. xxi. For
he alone was at the foot of the cross (chap. xix. 26), and was able to see with his eye
the blood and water from the side of Jesus. (F. Godet, D.D.) (3) External
testimony. Up toa certain point we have the same evidence for all the Gospels
equally. In the days of the Diocletian persecution (a.D, 303) the Gospel by John was
as well known and as universally recognized as those by Matthew, Mark, and
Luke. In earlier days it was the same. Origen (a.p. 184-253) speaks of ‘the
Four Gospels,” which were the only undisputed ones in the whole Church of God
throughout the world, and the fourth, which he describes as that which was
written by “ the disciple whom Jesus loved,” was his special delight. In the still
earlier days of Irengzus (a.p. 126-190), we find the same universal acceptance of the
fourth with the other Gospels. His testimony has special force in support of the
Gospel by John. As the disciple of Polycarp, the disciple of John, he must have
known whether the so-called Gospel by John was known to and acknowledged by
John’s disciple ; and it is not conceivable that he could have accepted as the work of
John, # book of which Polycarp knew nothing. Moreover the reason he assigns for the
existence of only four Gospels, and the explanations he gives of the circumstances 10


H ; ah ae
Ree by


xviii INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.

a
which John wrote all, imply that the book was not a recent discovery. To the age
immediately preceding that in which the good Bishop of Lyons wrote his ‘ Adversus
Hereses ” belong the two translations, the Syriac and theold Latin. And the fourth
Gospel has its place in them side by side with the otherthree. The Syriac dates from
before the middle of the second century, and the old Latin not muchlater. Andas
these translations were made from different MSS. and in parts of the world distant
from each other, their original forms must be sought at a distance of time which
cannot be reckoned at less than half a century. Justin Martyr belongs to the first
half of the second century, having suffered in a.p. 166 or 167. He quotes from
certain “‘ Memoirs ” as having been written by “‘ apostles and their followers,” and
s0 indubitable is the correspondence between Justin’s doctrine of the Logos and
that of the “ Word” in the fourth Gospel, that some critics have resorted to the
desperate hypothesis that the former derived it from the latter !—forgetting that
Justin appeals to the ‘‘ Memoirs” as containing the history of the faith which he
professed. To the age of Justin and Ireneus belongs a fragment which bears the
name of its discoverer, Muratori, a Latin translation from the Greek, which cannot
have been written later than a.p.170. In this work the fourth place is given to
the Gospel of St. John, and the author, after giving an account of its composition,
proceeds to say, ‘‘ What wonder is it then that John brings forward every detail
with so much emphasis, even in his Epistles saying of himself, ‘What we have
seen with our eyes and heard with our ears and our hands have handled, these
things have we written unto you?’” Fer so he professes that he was not only an
eye-witness, but also a hearer, and, moreover, a historian of all the wonderful works
in order. Almost as imporiant as the testimony of the Fathers is the testimony of
unbelievers. Theoldest polemic against the faith was written by Celsus ep 161-180).
Inthisthe wholechristological standpoint of the Church is John’s,and while Celsus re-
fersmost frequently to Matthew, he usesJohn more than Mark or Luke. John’s Gospel
then was known at this period by friend and foe, and it will not do therefore to talk
of it as originating in that or the immediately preceding time. The testimony of
the Gnostic heretics is equally conclusive. The earliest of them is provably
Marcion, who came to Rome about 4.p. 140. He knew the fourth Gospel as John’s,
and rejected it on that account. But if it was recognized as such in Gnostic
circles, it must have been recognized much earlier in Church circles, which compels
us to go back to the times of the freshest recollection of John. But at that date
they would not have accepted a book as John’s if it had not come from the apostle,
and much less if it had been foreign to his way of thinking. (John Kennedy, D.D.)
The force of this external testimony :—The value of this accumulated evidence is not
the mere sum of individual testimonies (weighty though that is); but lies in the
demonstration thus furnished that in the third quarter of the second century this
Gospel was received without question or suspicion together with the three others
(and more) by the Churches of Asia, Europe, and Africa. This wide dissemination
implies a considerable lapse of years since its publication ; so that the combined
light of these testimonies shines far back through the first half of the century—that
is, within the lifetime of hundreds, if not thousands, who had seen and heard the
apostle himself. That within that half-century the Gospel and the Epistle should
have been forged, and obtained this worldwide reception as genuine, is a monstrously
incredible supposition. (H. R. Conder, D.D.) Conclusion :—Those who since
the first discussion of this question have been really conversant with it, never could
have had a moment’s doubt. As the attack on St. John has become fiercer and
fiercer, the truth has been more and more solidly established, error has been pur-
sued into its last hiding-places, and at this moment the facts before us are such
that no man who does not will knowingly to choose error and reject truth can dare
to say that the fourth Gospel is not the work of the Apostle John. (H. Ewald.)
6. WHEN AND WHERE WAS IT WRITTEN? (1) Its date and place. The unanimous
testimony of antiquity is, that the apostle wrote his Gospel in Ephesus, We are
led to the same conclusion by internal marks, as for example, that the author has
regard to the Hellenistic Jewish theosophy, and for the most part to readers out of
Palestine (John ii. 6, 13, iv. 9, v. 1, 2). Another mark of the same kind, is his skill
in the use of the Hellenistic Greek. This is so great, when we compare it with the
style of the Apocalypse, that if the Evangelist John be the author of the latter, the
Gospel, to all appearance, must have been written ata considerably later period.
According to Irenzus, the Apocalypse was seen (éwpd9n) by John toward the end of
the reign of Domitian (who died 96). If we suppose that the vision was committed
to writing about the time of its appearance, it would fix the date of the Apocalypse


oe
. a


ar


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. xix


at about a.p. 95; if we now place the composition of the Gospel at about a.p. 100,
(and we can hardly put it later), we shall only have an interval of five years between
the writings, a space of time which seems too brief to account for the great diversity in
their language. If we might, in accordance with the highly plausible internal marks,
fix the time of writing the Revelation under Galba (A.D. 68 or 69), the time thus ob-
tained would be all-sufficient. (A. Tholuck, D.D.) (2) The characteristics of the age
in which it was written :—Of the apostles, John alone survived. Nero and the tyrants
who succeeded him had been swept away; and no Peter was needed to revive the hope
of an infant and persecuted Church. Jerusalem had perished, and in its ruin was
broken that Judaic spirit which had struggled against St. Paul. There was nothing
within and without the Church to break the profound peace which inaugurated the
reign of Trajan. A new generation of Christians had arisen to which the thoughts
and feelings of the first were unknown ; between the earlier and present state of the
Christian society there seemed to be fixed a chasm as of many centuries; what
wonder then if in the place of that Divine history now growing dim in the distance,
there should have arisen those portentous shadows of Oriental speculation which
afterwards deepened into the Gnostic heresy, and what wonder if in the place of
that fervent zeal which marked the conduct of the earliest Christians, we find
iniquity abounding and the love of many waxing cold, and faith and holiness falling
asunder in fatal disunion? (Dean Stanley.) (8) The Gospel in and jor its own
age :—The age of St. John, so far from being one of fierce controversy, seems much
rather, in the evils attacked and the mode of attacking them, to partake of the
general tranquillity of the whole period unbroken till the fierce controversies of the
middle of the nextcentury. The chief form, therefore, in which the beloved disciple
inculcated Christian truth, was not that of a polemical epistle, but of an historical
gospel ; was not the assertion of any principle however deep, of any morality how-
ever exalted, but the description in all its fulness of the person of Jesus Christ.
Previous Evangelists had given to the Church that which the Church had then
most needed; the cycle of the warnings, precepts, miracles,.external ministrations
of the Lord had been preserved in what we now know as the teaching of the first
three Gospels. But the life as a whole—the outer life, with the distinct stages of
progressive interest—the inner life, with the discourses which represented the-glory
which He had before the world was—the life as intended to be the source of life for
the whole world—this was precisely what we might expect from St. John. It was
as though the recollection of his youth, which to the minds of all else were waxing
faint, came back on him with all their original vividness; no greater treasure could
he bequeath to the world, which seemed as it were to have had a new term added
to its existence, than a faithful historical record of those scenes that would else
have perished with him; no better antidote could he furnish, alike for the intellec-
tual and moral perversions of his age, than the complete representation of the Word
made flesh. But to meet the tendencies of his age no belief in mere facts was suffi-
cient. The prevalent errors had arisen from speculating not on the facts, but on the
ideas which the facts represented. The sins of the day had arisen not merely from
outward forgetfulness, but from an inward unbelief of the great end for which the
facts took place. Still, therefore, keeping his stand on the immovable historical
ground of Jesus Christ come in the flesh, he passes over everything merely outward
or local; institutions, miracles, actions, are only mentioned in the higher truths
which they represent, or else introduced only for the sake of those truths; the
earthly things of the previous Gospels are transfigured in the fourth; they are of
the body, this of the spirit. The flood of Oriental speculation John met not merely
by opposing them, but by acknowledging and reproducing in the light of Christian
faith whatever there was of truth in them. (Jbid.) 7. Irs veracity. The
internal difficulties may be summarized as follows : (1) As to time :—(a) The fourth
Gospel implies a long ministry, with festivals, as its landmarks. But the three, at
least, allow of a ministry as long as the fourth can require; while reference to the
festivals was natural in a narrative, the main scene of which is laid at Jerusalem.
(b) The fourth Gospel appears to place the Crucifixion on Nisan 14, the three on
Nisan 15. This real difficulty has been explained by hypotheses (i) of a passover
anticipated by our Lord. This is perhaps most satisfactory. (ii) Of a passover
postponed by the chief priests. (iii) Of a difference of computation as to the true day
of the Passover, owing to the variation between the solar and lunar reckonings,
(iv) Of a possible explanation of St. John’s language (chap. xviii. 28, é&c.), which
would make it consistent with the date of Nisan 15, as that of the Crucifixion. The
objection, drawn from the observance of Nisan 14 by those Churches in the second


xx INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.

a a
century which inherited St. John’s traditions, assumes that such observance was
commemorative of the Last Supper, and not, as is probable, of our Lord’s death.
(2) As to the scene of our Lord’s teaching :—* St. John places it in Judea; the three
in Galilee.” But no gospel professes to be a complete history, and records of a
Galilean and of a Judean ministry, respectively, leave room for each other. (3) As
to the style of Christ’s teaching :—‘‘1t Jesus spoke as reported by Matthew, He
could not have spcken as reported by John.”? But the difference of subject, hearers,
“nd circumstances in the two cases, taken in conjunction with the differing mental
peculiarities of the reporters, will account for the difference of style. The phrases
assumed to be peculiar to St. John are by no means unknown to the synoptists—
e.g., the antithesis between Light and Darkness. (4) As to the matter of Christ’s
teaching :—‘ The discourses in St. John cannot be historical, since they are nothing
more than an explanation of the Logos idea put forth by the writer.” But this
begs the whole question. It might be true if the doctrine of the Logos had been the
product of Gnostic speculations. But if Jesus was really the Divine Son, mani-
testing Himself as such to men, such language as that reported by St. John
is no more than we should expect. St. John never represents our Lord as
announcing His Divinity in the terms of the Prologue; he would have done
so had he really been creating a fictitious Jesus designed to illustrate a
particular theosophic speculation. (Canon Liddon.) (5) As to the
length of the discourses :—‘ John could not possibly have retained these discourses
in his memory, in suc! minuteness and fulness, for so many years.” ‘The true
answer to this objection is the Lord’s promise of the Spirit, to bring all things to
remembrance, Subsidiary to this, however, there are various considerations that
deserve to be weighed, as, e.g.—(a) Where writing is little used, the wonderful
strength that memory attains. (b) There is nothing incredible, or even unlikely,
in the supposition of John’s having used memoranda; or that the book took its
final form only by a very slow process—indeed, by a process of growth. (c) John
did not, any more than the other evangelists, act as a mere verbal reporter, but
reproduced the sense livingly. (d) The very length of time that elapsed, filled up
as it was in telling of Jesus again and again, in thought and contemplation, and in
deepening experience, would render it not more difticult, but more easy, to his full
and final testimony. Any one may find analogies within his own knowledge.
(J. Culross, D.D.) 8. Irs prsten. (1) The polemical theory :—The idea of a
polemical dogmatic design, besides the general one, is held by Irenzus, who says it
was John’s purpose to confute the errors of the Gnostic Cerinthus. Many of the
ancient and modern theologians concur in the view of this ancient father; some
of them, however, suppose a more general polemical aim against Gnostic and
Docetic errors at large, whilst many think that they discover in the Gospel, besides
this, a polemical aspect toward the sect of disciples of John or Zabians (Baptizers) ;
while others think they can detect a polemical purpose against carnal Judaizers;
and that the Gospel contains expressions which can be employed in confuting cer-
tain heresies no one will deny, But this is insufficient to establish a distinctively
vontroversial aim ; fora pure Christianity, constantly and in its own nature, isin
conflict with those errors. The characteristics of the Gospel can force us to the
idea of a definitely polemic aim only in case the didatic character peculiar to it can
be accounted for in no other way. It is, nevertheless, probable that cursorily here
and there (chap. xix. 34, 35), especially in the Introduction, he has-an eye to
erroneous opinions and doubts, which just at that time were current. It is natural
to all authors to have an occasional regard of this sort to their relations to their
own times. (Tholuck.) (2) The spiritual and supplementary theories :—He might
have intended to present a more spiritual delineation of the doctrine and life of
the Saviour. This thought readily occurs to him who has been attracted by the
wonderfully sublime simplicity, and the heavenly gentleness, which pervade this
whole work, as well as by the many expressions in regard to the higher nature of
Christ. The Alexandrine writers, who generally embrace the idea that there is a
twofold spiritual point of view existing among Christians, express this thought;
and since, in addition, John generally reports thase discourses and miracles of
Christ which are not mentioned by the other evangelists, many writers, both ancient
and modern, have supposed that John had a general purpose of completing the
earlier Gospels, especially of supplying what was wanting in their delineation of
the Divine in Christ. But the conjecture that the fourth Gospel is more pneumatic
than the others certainly belongs to a later period, which reflected from its own
point of view on the tio classes of records. The Apostle himself would in all pre.


ewe We ees


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. xxi
et ee i a I ee eee re eer =
bability have judged in the matter as Herder does: “ If you insist on calling this a
Gospel of the Spirit, be it so; but the other gospels are not therefore fieshly.
They also contain living words of Christ, and build on the same foundation of
faith.” The object of completing the three synoptical gospels which we have,
cannot, then, in this specific sense be admitted. That this cannot have been the
grand design, is shown by the unity of form in the Gospel. ‘This Gospel,” says
Hase, ‘‘is no mere patchwork to fill up vacant spaces;” and not even as a distinct
subordinate purpose, kept in view by the Evangelist throughout, can we perceive &
design of filling out what had been omitted by the others. It is in conflict with
such a view, in fact, that so much has been embraced in the fourth Gospel which is
also found in the first three ; that not a few of at least apparent contradictions to
them occur which might have been harmonized; that, on the other hand, the
apparent contradictions between the synoptical gospels themselves are not cleared
up; that at chap. xx. 30, some statement of this aim might justly be looked for;
and, finally, that to embrace this view strictly would force us to think of a literary
assiduity of a comparatively modern stamp. Nevertheless, there is some truth
lying at the bottom of this theory. If John in his instructions imparted much
which passed beyond the circle of the ordinary oral tradition, and consequently
beyond the synoptical gospels which flowed from it, we can hardly think otherwise
than that among his friends a longing would be excited to possess a history of the
Lord in accordance with his delineation. (Ibid.) (3) The specific practical
purpose:—This was fourfold. (a) To show how the pre-existent Word of God
‘came to His own” (the Jews), unfolding before them His glory as ‘the only-
begotten Son of the Father.” (b) How that glory was either not discerned by His
own, through inward moral and spiritual blindness; or, if perceived (as one can
hardly help thinking it was by the ecclesiastical leaders), was deliberately rejected,
because ‘“‘they loved the darkness rather than the light.” (c) How, notwithstanding,
this glory was recognized and received by another ‘‘own,” the spiritually born, who
were inwardly drawn of God to believe on His Name. (d) How, by further revela-
tions of His glory in dying for them on the cross and rising again, He gave to these
latter the right and power to become the sons of God. (T.Whitelaw,D.D.) The
unity of the fourth Gospel is a theological unity; the whole narrative is threaded
together by the single intention to unfold the relation of the Father to the Son, or
Divine Word, as the Divine relation, through a living participation in which all
men may be transfigured and set free. (Rk. H. Hutton, M.A.) The design of
St. John was to convey just and adequate notions of the real nature, character, and
office of that great Teacher who came to instruct and redeem mankind, For this
purpose he studiously selected for his narrative those passages of our Saviour’s
life which most clearly displayed His Divine power and authority, and those of His
discourses in which He spoke most plainly of His own nature, and of the efficacy
of His death as an atonement for the sins of the world. The object which this
evangelist had in view is very clearly stated in chap. xx. 31. It was not to accumu-
late as many instances as possible of the miraculous power exerted by Jesus, but
only those which most distinctly illustrated His peculiar office and nature, (Bishop
Blomfield.) But assuredly one object the Hvangelist had in view was to trace out
the progress of belief and unbelief. And in the fifth and sixth chapters we have
two forms of unbelief contrasted. The unbelief of Jerusalem—*t The Jews sought
to kill Him.’”? The unbelief of Galilee—** This is a hard saying, who can hear it?”
‘‘ Many of His disciples went back, and walked no more with Him.” Types of two
forms of unbelief in all ages! One is sad or contemptuous, another fanatical ;
one sneers, another strikes; one sighs, another grinds its teeth; one would kill
Him if it could, another turns upon its heel; one curses Him and loathes the sacred
wounds, another would only pierce His loving heart by leaving Him alone. (Bishop
Alexander.) From its very commencement the Gospel pursues this theme: The
eternal conflict between the Divine light and the corruption of men, exhibited in
the opposition between the inimical Jewish party and the appearing of the Son of
God, and protracted until the light is victorious. As the overture expresses the
idea of a musical composition, so the very Prologue embodies this theme, for u
speaks of the contest of the world with the Logos before He became flesh; and as
the theme of the epistle to the Romans lies in chap. i. 17, so the idea whick
animates the Gospel of John is expressed in chap. i. 11-13. Tivo main divisions
even of an outward character undoubtedly present themselves. The first, to chap
xii., embraces the public work of Jesus, and closes with a resumé of it (chap. v.
44-50). For the second division, the history of the Passion and Resurrection, we ar


xxii INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.


EEE eeTETETEFEeEeeeeFee


prepared by the discourse (chap. xii. 23-32), in which the leading thought is: the
setting of the sun is necessary, for without it there can be no rising. Chap. xiil
begins the history of the Passion, and at the outstart (chap. v. 3) the disciple points to
the final glory. The exclamation of Thomas—the sublimest acknowledgment of
the risen Saviour—closes the second part, and by the words to which it leads—
“Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed ”—forms the transition
to the closing expression: “ These are written that ye might believe that Jesus is
the Son of God.” (A. Tholuck,D.D.) 9. ANALYSIS oF THE GosPEL. I. Jesus is the Son
of God (chaps. i—iv.):—1. The Christ (chap. i.1-18), 2. The introduction of Jesus
into the world (chap. i. 19; ii. 11) by the testimony of the Baptist (chap. i. 19-40);
of Himself (chap. i. 41; ii. 11). 3. First revelation of Himself as the Son of God
(chap. ii. 12; iv. 54). (a) In Jerusalem and Judwa (chap. ii. 12; iii. 36). (6) In
Samaria and Galilee (chap. iv. 1-54). II. Jesus and the Jews (chap. v. 12):—1, Jesus
the Life. Opening of the conflict (chaps. v., vi.). (a) His Divine working as Son
of God. Beginning of opposition (chap. v. 1-47). (b) Jesus the Life in the flesh.
Progress of belief and unbelief (chap. vi. 1-71). 2. Jesus the Light. Height of
the conflict (chaps. vii.-x.). (a) He meets the unbelief of the Jews at Jerusalem
(chap. vii. 1-52), (b) Opposition between the Jews and Jesus at its height (chap.
viii. 12-59). (c) Jesus the Light of the World for salvation and for judgment (chaps.
ix.,x.) 8. The delivery of Jesus to death is the Life and Judgment of the World
(chaps. xi. xii.) (a) The raising from the dead (chap. xi. 1-57). (b) Prophetic
announcement of the future (chap. xii. 1-36). (c) Final judgment on Israel (ibid.
87-50). III. Jesus and His own (chaps. xiii.-xx.):—1. Jesus’ love and the belief
of His disciples. (a) His love in condescension (chap. xiii. 1-30). (6) His love in
keeping and completing the disciples in the faith (chap. xiii. 31; xvi. 33). His
love in the exaltation of the Son of God (chap. xvii.). 2. Jesus the Lord. The
unbelief of Israel now in its completion. The belief of His own (chaps. xvili.-xx.).
(a) His free surrender to His enemies and to the unbelief of Israel (chap. xviii. 1;
xix. 16). (b) His self-surrender to death, and Divine testimony in death (chap. xix.
16-42). (c) His manifestation of Himself as passed from death into liberty and
life, and the completion of the disciples’ faith worked thereby (chap. xx. 1-29).
The Appendix (chap. xxi.):—The glimpse into the future. (a) The symbolic
draught of fishes (vers. 1-8). (b) The symbolic meal (vers. 9-14). (c) The calling
and its prospect (vers. 15-23). (d) Conclusion. (C. E. Luthardt, D.D.) 10. Irs
CHARACTERISTICS. (1) In general :—I love best of all to readin St. John. There is
in him something so perfectly wonderful—dusk and night, and the quick lightning
throbbing through them! The soft clouds of evening, and behind the mass the big
full moon bodily !—something so sad, so high, so full of presage, that one can
never weary of it. When I read John, it always seems to me that I see him before
me, reclining at the Last Supper on the bosom of his Lord, as if his angel held the
light for me, and at certain parts would place hisarm around me, and whisper some-
thing in my ear. I am far from understanding all I read, yet often John’s idea
seems to hover before me in the distance; and even when I look into a place
that is entirely dark, I have a presension of a great, glorious sense, which
I shall some day understand, and hence I catch so eagerly at every new ex-
position of the Gospel of John, It is true, most of them only ruffle the even-
ing clouds, and never trouble the moon behind them. (Claudius of Wansbeck.)
2) Simplicity and profundity:—This Gospel speaks a guage, to which no
parallel whatever is to be found in the whole compass of literature; such childlike
simplicity, with such contemplative profundity; such life and such deep rest; such
sadness and such serenity ; and, above all, such a breath of love—“ an eternal life
which has already dawned, a life which rests in God, which has overcome the dis-
union between the world that is and the world to come, the human and the Divine.”
(Hase). If we cast our eyes over the whole body of religious literature, there is
certainly none whom we would feel tempted to place by John’s side, unless,
perhaps, it were Thomas 4-Kempis; yet such a comparison would involve as
complete a mistake, as to place in parallel the simplicity of Xenophon with that of
Plato. In the Apostolic men, cited as scholars of John, in Polycarp, Ignatius,
the author of the Epistle to Diognetus, there are, indeed, here and there, tones of
assonance with John, but not the touch of John’s pencil, while to Paul so many
parallels, even besides Luther, present themselves. (Z'holuck.) (3) Clearness
and depth :—This little work has been the subject of critical study and exegetical
commentaries so numerous that they would form a library. Nevertheless, it does
not present any particular obscurities. It is a simple recital, written in a clear


I at


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. xxiii


- flowing style, its simplicity sometimes borders on naiveté, and if its contents are


deep, they resemble the ocean in this respect, which is transparent even to the
bottom in fine weather. This book has been rightly compared to the light of the
moon, whose brilliant splendour meets our gaze through the mysterious calm of
the night. (F. Godet, D.D.) (4) Brevity and suggestiveness :—The vocabulary
of St. John is comparatively poor, but the value of his experiences far surpasses
that of their verbal exponent. The inscription on Herder’s monument at Weimar,
‘* Light, life, love,” embodies the fundamental idea of St. John’s theology; but
who has ever yet perfectly fathomed this in the spirit of the Apostle! (J. J. Van


‘ Oosterzee, D.D.). (5) Spirituality :—It depends on one’s nature more than on his


logical powers what he shall find in this Gospel. Very remarkable is it how little
children and ripe Christians, the simplest minded and the deepest minded, all like
it with so profound a liking. To the mere logician it is one of the most obscure
and perplexing writings that can be taken up; to the little child and the child-
hearted saint, it is one of the easiest and most delightful. As, in the twilight of a
day in September, one may cast a hasty, careless glance across the sky and see only
a bright star shining here and there, while if he gazes steadfastly in some one
direction for a little time, world after world, at first invisible, will shine forth to
him from the blue depths ; so, to him who looks long and earnestly into this book,
glory after glory will disclose itself, till his whole spiritual sky is one wide field of
light, while at the same time a sense of infinite mystery steals over him, and a
strangely mingled longing and awe. (J. Culross, D.D.) 11. Irs EFFECTS ON THE
LIFE OF THE CuuRcH. I believe the writings of this Apostle have been blotted by
more penitents’ tears, and have won more hearts for the Redeemer, than all the rest
put together. Among the ‘‘ gracious words” that are set as thick as stars in the
firmament of Scripture, there are none that shine with a clearer lustre than those
which we findin John. Take the following by way of example: ‘‘ Behold the Lamb
of God!” *“* Him that cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast out’’; ‘“‘He that
believeth on Me hath everlasting life’®; ‘*‘The blood of Jesus Christ His Son
cleanseth us from all sin”; ‘‘ The Spirit and the bride say, Come; and let him
that heareth say, Come; and let him that is athirst come: and whosoever will, let
him take the water of life freely.” These texts are all the more wonderful when
viewed in their connection. If we were asked to name a verse that might be called
the very pole-star of faith, what would it be but this? ‘‘God so loved the world
that He gave His Only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not
perish, but have everlasting life.” How many souls have entered into the peace of
believing through means of this one verse God only knows; and again, how often
dying lips have whispered it and fading eyes have brightened to hear it spoken.
One example may represent a thousand. Jonas Justus, wiping the cold sweat from
the forehead of the dying Luther, heard him praying and committing his soul with
great confidence into the hands of the Heavenly Father ; and then, as if he were
grasping hard after the ground of such certain hope, he repeated aloud this passage
(in Latin, as he had learned it when a child). (Ibid.) 12. Ivs vatuz. (1) Asa
testimony to the Divinity of Christ :—There is a proverb that no man’s life should
be written by his private servant. That proverb expresses the general conviction
that as a rule, like some mountain scenery or ruined castle, moral greatness in man
is more picturesque when viewed at a distance. The proverb bids you not to
scrutinize even a good man too narrowly, lest perchance you should discover flaws
in his character which will shake your conviction of his goodness. It is hinted that
some obtrusive weakness which escape public observation will be obvious to a man’s
every day companion, and will be fatal to the higher estimate which, but for such
scrutiny, might have been formed respecting him. But in the case of Jesus Christ
the moral of this cynical proverb is altogether at fault. Jesus chooses one disciple
to be the privileged sharer of a nearer intimacy than any other. John sees more
of the Master than any other, more of His glory, more too of His humiliation, and
yet John beyond any other of the sacred writers is the persistent herald and teacher
of our Lord’s Divinity. (Canon Liddon.) The fourth Gospel is throughout per-
vaded by the idea of human testimony to Christ: from the Baptist, from the
disciples, from the Jews at Jerusalem, from the witnesses of the raising of Lazarus,
from the Pharisees who believed, from the author, and from Pilate. St. Jolin


xxiv INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.


a eee


delights to assist and make permanent the burning cries of confession wrung from
the hearts of men. From the Baptist, ‘‘Behold the Lamb of God!” from
Nathanael, “ Thou art the Son of God”; from the Samaritan woman, “ Is not this
the Christ?’ from Peter, “ Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God” ; from
the people, “‘ When Christ cometh will He do more miracles than those which this
man hath done?” from the officers, ‘‘ Never man spake like this man”; from
Martha, ‘Thou art the Christ, the Son of God’; from Pilate, “I find no fault in
Him”; from Thomas, ‘My Lord and my God.” Wonderful music! drawn from
the heart of man by the hand of faith, running up the scales from its faintest and
lowest note—“ Thou art the King of Israel,” to its grandest and richest harmony,
“My Lord and my God.” But the witness of God is greater, of which this Gospel
is full. Hence the mention of the attesting voice from heaven, “I have both
glorified it and will glorify it again.” Hence the intense conviction that the
Scriptures are “‘ they which testify of Him,” that “had they believed Moses they
would have believed Him.” Hence the accumulated reference to type and prophecy
in the narrative of the atoning death. In a mere historian there might have
seemed to be no more of deep purpose in the particular cruelties inflicted by the
soldiers or the mob, than in the shape of the tangled knots of seaweed flung by the
spring tide upon the beach. But every incident is to John’s eye arranged by ‘‘ the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God.” The lots upon the vestment were
cast by a Divine hand. The vessel with vinegar, the sponge and hyssop were not
there by chance. The perfection and dignity of that Body, which seemed so help-
less, were guaranteed by the rubric of the Divine ritual in regard to the Paschal
Lamb—‘‘ Not a bone of Him shall be broken.” The thrust of the soldier’s lance is
in the dark background of Zechariah’s prophecy, and written upon the very Body
that shall come in the clouds of heaven. ‘ They shall look on Him whom they
pierced.”” The Evangelist’s spirit sails over the deep of Scripture as over an
equatorial ocean, but on the far horizon of prophecy he sees its southern Cross.
(Bp. Alexander.) (2) As a portrait of Christ:—The fourth Gospel is a really
historical source for a representation of the character of Christ, but in a higher,
spiritualized sense of the word. Without this Gospel the unfathomable depth, the
inaccessible height, of the character of the Saviour of the world would be wanting to
us, and His boundless’ influence, renewing all humanity, would for ever remain a
mystery. (Schenkel.) (3) As a message to modern men :—When we look around
on our own times, full indeed of moral and intellectual interest, but outwardly un-
ruffled—without persecution and without enthusiasm—martyrdom seeming to be
almost an impossibility ; human and natural agencies alive at work everywhere—
this Gospel is not without its use to check desponding thoughts, if we remember that
such an age, uncongenial as it might seem to the growth of religious excellence,
was the age which witnessed the full development of the character of the holiest of
the sons of men. Or again, when we look at the intellectual temptations by which
our times are especially assailed, the tendency to lose sight of fact and reality in
shadowy systems of philosophy which we have not strength to grasp, the confusion
and dissolution of barriers which once fenced round our opinions and our duties
may we not fairly be reminded of some of the speculations of the close of the first
century? May we not be allowed to trust that as then, in the first publication, so
now, in the revived study of St. John’s writings, we may find our best refuge ee
the distractions of the time, that as of old he was the “true Gnostic,” so now he
may be to us the true Idealist of the age? (Dean Stanley.) (4) As a gospel for
common life :—If theology is a collection of dry husks, the granaries which contain
those husks will be set on fire, and nothing will quench the fire till they be
consumed. It is just because I find in St. John the grain which those husks some-
times conceal, for which they are sometimes a substitute; because theology in his


INTRODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. XIV


Gospel offers itself to us as a living root, out of which all living powers, thoughts,
acts, may develop; because there is nothing in him that is abstract, because that
which is deep and eternal proves itself to be deep and eternal by entering into all
the relations of time, and manifesting itself in all the common doings of men; it is
therefore, I believe, that he makes his appeal, not to the man of technicalities, not
to the school doctor, but to the simple wayfarer, and at the same time to the man
of science who does not forget that he is a man, and who expects to ascertain
principles only by the honest method of experiment. (F. D. Maurice, M.A.)
13. Testimonies of enemies and friends:—It has been stigmatized as a myth
(Strauss), a theological romance (Baur), a misty picture without reality
(Weitzsicker), a product of dotage and fancy (Gfrérer), poor stuff (J. 8. Mill); it
has been eulogized as the main gospel only to be comprehended by those who lean
on Jesus’ bosom (Origen), as more love bewitching and elevating than all the
harmonies of music (Chrysostom), as the water of life (Augustine), as the chief
gospel, unique, tender and true (Luther), as the boundless flight of the bird of God
(Adam of St. Victor), as the key to the right understanding of the rest (Calvin), as
the most important portion of the New Testament (Lessing), as the heart of Christ
(Ernesti), as written by an angel’s hand (Herder), as pervaded with eternal, child-
like, Christmas joys (Schliermacher), as the diamond among the gospels (Lange),
as wonderful with its fulness of grace, truth, peace, light and life (Meyer), as the
good wine kept till the last. (Bp. Wordsworth.)


4 sdaaal spore wks


THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR.


ST. JOHN.


CHAPTER I.


Vers. 1-5. In the beginning was the Word.—I. Tar ApostLE ASSERTS THE
Divinity or Curist. 1. His name: the Word. (1) He is the chief subject of
Revelation—the Word of promise—the substance of all shadows, types, and pro-
phecies. (2) The medium of God’s communications with the world. To Him the
Father communicates Himself in counsel; He, as the Wisdom of God, communicates
the Father’s counsels to men. 2. His eternity. Not ‘from,” but “in,” the
beginning. 3. His distinct personality and co-existence with the Father. II. Tur
APOSTLE CONFIRMS HIS STATEMENT BY REFERRING TO CHRIST’S PRE-INCARNATE MANI-
FESTATION TO THE WORLD. 1. The worlds and the things in them are not eternal.
Reason teaches us that there must have been a first cause. 2. All things were
made by the Word (Col. i. 16; Heb.i. 2). 3. He Himself was not made; therefore
cannot be a creature, however exalted, such as Socinians, Mohammedans, and
Arians represent Him. 4. Every form of life is in Him, of whatever rank, from
inanimate matter up to rational and spiritual man. 5. All light proceeds from
Him. 6. The restoration of the ruined is by Him. Souls in the darkness of death
are illumined and revived by Him. (A. Beith, D.D.) I. THE RELATION OF THE
Worp to Gop, as possessing the Divine nature and existing with God before
creation. II. THe RELATION oF THE WORD TO THE UNIVERSE, as its Creator. III.
THE RELATION OF THE WoRD TO MEN, as being the source of life and light to
them. IV. THE RELATION oF THE WORD TO FALLEN HUMANITY, as shining in the
darkness, though the darkness comprehended it not. (W. Perkins.) Practical
reflections :—I. WouLD WE KNOW THE EXCEEDING SINFULNESS OF SIN? Let us read
these verses. If no one less than the Eternal God, the Creator and Preserver of all
things, could take away the sin of the world, sin must be a far more abominable
thing in the sight of God than most men suppose. If Christ is so great, then sin
must indeed be sinful! II. Wovunp wE KNOW THE STRENGTH OF A TRUE CHRISTIAN’S
FOUNDATION FOR HOPE? Let us often read these verses. Let us mark that the
Saviour in whom the believer is bid to trust is nothing less than the Eternal God,
One able to save to the uttermost all that come to the Father by Him. He that was
“with God,” and ‘was God,” is also ‘‘ Emmanuel, God with us.” (Bp. Ryle.)
Christ and God :—‘‘ In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God” (John i. 1), As the translation of this passage cannot be
improved, and the words are plain, no verbal exegesis is required. The subject is
Christ and God, and we are here taught—I. Taat Curistis THE ETERNAL REvEALER
or Gov. ‘In the beginning was the Word ”’—the Logos. He is not a word but
the word. As the Revealer, this Word is distinguished—l. By its faithfulness,
Christ is the exact exponent of the Divine intellect and heart. 2. By its fulness.
Other words only speak part of God. 3. By its forcefulness. Human words are
sometimes powerful, they are not always air; they are sometimes a force. God’s
words in nature are mighty. II. Tuar Curist 1s THE ETERNAL SELF OF Gop.
«‘ And the Word was with God.’”? The expression implies that He had a conscious
existence distinct from the Absolute One. He was with Him. He that is with me
is not me. 1. Christ was with Him in the sense of agreement. There was a
perfect concurrence. 2, Christ was with him in the sense of contact. Never out


™~


2 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, {oaP. I.
Oa
of His presence, living in His light, breathing His inspirations. Ill. THat Curist
18 THE ETERNAL SELF or Gop, ‘And the Word was God.” 1. “He was
God” in form. Deep, it would seem, in the constitution of moral soul, is the
craving for some form of God. As He appears in the universe, He transcends the
limits of human vision. Christ is the form He has assumed; the form in whict,
in all probability, He appears to His intelligent universe as well as to man. 2. ** He
was God” in action. Through Him the eternal volitions are carried out and
realized. He isthe Actualizer of God’s eternalideas. (D. Thomas, D.D.) The
Word made flesh:—A fourfold contrast. I. In respect of essence. Word and
flesh. The first suggests pure spirituality, power, eternity ; the second materiality, —
weakness, mortality. II. In respect of existence. In the beginning the Word
was. In time the Word was made flesh. The eternal becomes an infant of days.
He who was in the beginning, and had.no beginning, has also an existence num-
bered by every year that passes away. III. In respect of assocration. ‘‘ With
God”; “among us.” In perfect holiness and blessedness; acquainted with grief
and beset by sin. In the bosom of the Eternal Father, receiving and returning
infinite love; and in the arms of a human mother, soon to taste the hatred and
cruelty of man. IV. In respect of narurE. The supreme contrast. He who was
God became man. In man are united spirit and matter, angel and brute,
seraph and clay. But what extremes meet in Christ! Creator and creature,
eternity and time; and these in unbroken union. (W. Perkins.) The Word :—
I. The rnrernity of the Word. 1. By the phrase “in the beginning” is to be
understood eternity. Had St. John said ‘‘before” the beginning, he would have
presented eternity under the laws of time, a mistake as grave as to describe the
Infinite under the conditions of the finite. But mounting up higher than time and
space, he leads us to the calm where God dwelleth. 2, Four times he repeats the
word ‘ was”; which—(1) Joined with ‘‘ beginning,” makes the idea of eternity
dawn upon the mind in all its awful grandeur. (2) Joined to “ with God,” involves
a contrast with verse 3. The sun, moon, and stars in the beginning ‘“‘ were made”’;
the Word in the beginning ‘‘was.” His existence and theirs consequently differ
radically. (3) Joined to ‘‘ God” contrasts with verse 14. ‘In the beginning was
the Word”; in the fulness of time ‘‘the Word was made flesh.” 3. Christ
always existed as the Word. It was not in the course of history that He became
the Word. In His pre-existence Jesus Christ is God speaking to Himself; in His
post-existence God speaking to us. The same word He speaks to Himself and to
us; therefore it has the same meaning on the Divine as on the human side. II.
The pErrsonaLity of the Word. 1. The Word was “with God” in respect of
personality. Omnipotence is eternally in God; Jesus Christ is eternally with God
—a mode of speech signifying distinct, but not separate, personal subsistence.
God spent eternity in self-communion; but He so far transcends us in the power
of thinking that His ideas become realities. His one thought becomes a Word
consubstantial with Himself. 2. He was with God in respect of complacency.
God took unspeakable delight in His Word, for in Him He beheld His own por-
traiture, without defect, fault, or flaw. God, as Father, infinitely, eternally, loves
the Son. This intense love the Son cherishes towards the Father. He was not
siiaply with, but ‘‘ towards,” God. He had His face, so to speak, turned fully towards
Him, returning all the wealth of thought and affection poured upon Him. With
the perfect thinker-the perfect Word reflects back the perfect thought. A further
idea still lurks here. The Word was “at home” with God. Christ in His pre-
existent state never felt restrained or ill at ease as an inferior with a superior, but
as a loving child with an indulgent father (Prov. viii. 22-31); not as a subject in
the presence of his monarch, or a creature in the presence of his Creator, but as
an equal in the society of his friend. 3. He was with God in respect of counsel
or purpose. (1) In respect of creative counsel. All things were gathered together
in the pre-existent Christ (Rev. iii. 4; Col. i. 15, 16). (2) In respect of redemptive
purpose. In the centre of the earth all the mountains meet. In the centre all
terrestrial objects stand together. Similarly Christ is the centre of the plan of
our salvation (Eph. i. 3, 4). III. The proper Divmiry of the Word. 1. “Was
God” implies co-equality. Two persons may be in amicable fellowship, whilst in
nature and standing the one may berinferior to the other. (1) As Mediator indeed
in His state of humiliation, Christ was the Father’s subordinate and servant;
wherefore He says, ‘‘ My Father is greater than I.” (2) But as He is the Second
Person in the Trinity, St. John teaches His equality with the Father. The idea of
perfect sonship excludes that of subordination. The man of forty is as much a


poy a Cee eee


CHAP. I.] ST. JOHN, 3
er eee i A aS
son as a child of four; the fact of sonship is undiminished, but subordination is
gone. But Jesus Christ is from the first a perfect Son, and therefore on a footing
of equality with the perfect Father. (3) The Son being thus equal with the TPather,
God will have no occasion to repeat His Word. The perfect revelation is summed
up in one word—Jesus Christ. 2. ‘‘Was God” teaches consubstantiality. ‘The
Word was with God”; there it is God with the article denoting the Father's
person ; here without the article indicating substance, being. The Son can never
be the Father ; but is of the same essence as the Father—of the same, not of like;
homo-ousia, not homoiousia. 38. Let us therefore hold fast the doctrine once
delivered to the saints. Beware of running away with the notion that all the
intellects are opposed to orthodoxy. The acute intellects may be, but the profound
intellects, which see far and deep, are not. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D,D.) The
Word :—1, As the mental work in man is the thought of the mind by which the
mind holds converse with itself insensibly—that is, without effort and without
passion or emotion—and is the perfect image and similitude of the mind from
which it proceeds, so does the Son derive a free and unseen origin from the Father,
being His express image and similitude. 2. As the mind holds converse with
itself by its own thought and cogitation, and sees and knows itself and all things
by means of this thought, so does the Father see Himself as in a mirror in the
person of His Son. 3. As the intellectual, immaterial word abides in man’s mind,
so does the Divine Word abide and remain in the bosom of the Father. (II.
Denton, M.A.) 1. When the Word was—in the beginning. 2. Where the Word
was—with God. 3. What the Word was—God. (Beaux Amis.) Lhe resemblance
between the Written and the Personal Word:—I. Curist 1s Divryn-ttuman. 1. He
assumed into union with His Godhead a human soul, a human body, and an animal
nature. He hungered, thirsted, was fatigued, and had as real a need of meat,
drink, and sleep as other men. 2. He grew, not only in stature, but in wisdom.
3. As regarded His human mind, He knew not the time of the consummation of
all things. 4. He was as much mixed up with the manifold, humbling, petty
details of daily life as any of us. 5. But every now and then there flashed rays of
that glory which He had with the Father before the world was. II. fue Wrirrren
Worp 18 Divine-Human. 1. Its Divine element is twofold. (1) Inspiration, which
pervades the whole of it. (2) Revelation, which characterizes the most important
parts of it—the creation, the whole range of prophecy, the law, the gospel. 2. It
is perfectly human—a fact attested by the variety of its style. It is coloured with
the human mind, affections, experiences, reasonings. 3. This human element gives
the Scriptures that geniality which wakens so many chords in our hearts, and
which makes us find them such a sympathetic book. If they spoke only the
tongues of angels they might reveal to us mysteries, impress and even scare us,
but where would their comfort be? 4. Like the Personal Word, the Written
Word, though both human and Divine, is but one book; inasmuch as all its treatises
were given by inspiration of one Spirit, who did for them what the living soul does
for the animal frame—gave them a regular organization and development which
makes the Bible truly and really one body. ILI. THe Prrrecr HUMANITY OF THE
Written WoRD INVOLVES ITS BEING COMPASSED WITH INFIRMITY, AS THE Wnhirren
Worp was. Hence the weaknesses of its human language and thought. 1. In
censuring sin it speaks with a fidelity which our false delicacy does not relish, and
which no uninspired preacher would dare to imitate. 2. Frequently the writers
descend to matters of comparatively local, temporal, and mundane interest. 3.
They were unacquainted with scientific truth. 4. In many points they give a
handle to the misconstructions of enemies. IV. Tuer is 4 crowra or Horny
ScRIPTURE EXACTLY CORRESPONDING TO THE GROWTH oF THE Persona Worp. 1.
Prophecy is built up stone upon stone on the foundation of the original promise (Gen.
iii. 15). This promise is handed over to Abraham in an enlarged and expanded
form (Gen. xii.3). When Abraham’s family branches out into twelve tribes, Judah
is selected as the tribe in which the promise should run (Gen. xlix. 8,10). As
soon as an earthly kingdom is established, David is indicated as the kmg on whose
throne Messiah should sit (2 Sam. vii. 12-16). 2. The Written Word is ever
developing itself from Genesis to Revelation. In Genesis you have the dawn of
Divine knowledge and thought ; in the New Testament you have its noontide blaze.
God, Christ, morality, the Fall, justification, sanctification are not seen as clearly
in the Old Testament as in the New, nor in the earlier books of the Old as in the
later. Yet from first to last it is the very Word of God, as Jesus is; as much
exalted above other books as He is by His Divinity above other men. VY. It


4 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHae. 1.
EXHIBITS ALL THE SYMPTOMS OF ITS EXALTED CHARACTER AND ORIGIN. It abounds
in passages of supernatural sublimity, foresights, revelations of heaven, oracles
which seem to vibrate with the voice of the archangel and the trump of God. Like
the Personal Word, the Written Word rises up in meek majesty to make those who
approach it with hostile intent go backward and fall to the ground ; upon it
descends the holy dove; over it hangs the bright cloud ; it quickens human souls ;
it says to the stormy sea of the human heart, ‘‘ Peace, be still’’; before it the
demons of lust, pride, covetousness, worldliness, quake and flee. As both in His
veneration and resurrection and ascension Jesus was declared to be Divine, so both
at its commencement, when it stoops down to inaugurate the narrative of earth,
and at its close ascends to heaven again and exhibits man purged from all stain,
so the Written Word is declared to be the Word of God with power. VI. Ir Curist
WERE NOT HUMAN, WE SHOULD NOT HAVE THE CONSOLATION OF His SYMPATHY; IF THE :
ScRIPTURES WERE NOT HUMAN, THEY COULD NOT COME HOME AS THEY DO TO HUMAN '
HEARTS AND conscrENcES. [et us therefore regard them with but one whit the less
affectionate veneration. There could be no trial of faith if they presented no :
difficulties. 'To what shall we go if we give them up? (Dean Goulburn.) The
heavenly analogy of the connection of speech with reason :—Man’s reason was formed
in the image of God, and our Lord is called the Word ; these are the two Scriptural
intimations which guide us into part of the truth respecting the Divine nature.
1. Reason involves a thing distinct from itself, namely, speech, or the power of
communicating the processes of reason, so that whosoever has the faculty of reason
has in that faculty the faculty of speech or the Word. 2. Though reason wraps
up speech in itself, yet we can conceive of reason as energizing latently, and of the
faculty of speech as having no exercise. 3. Neither reason nor speech can make
any claim to priority of existence; they are twin faculties, born at the same
instant. Now listen to what the Catholic Church has gathered from the Scripture
respecting the nature of God. I. There is a Truyrry in Untry, that is, more than
one Person in the Divine nature. Man’s spirit, the Bible says, was made in the
image of that nature. In man’s spirit there are two faculties, reason and speech,
The second Person in the Divine nature goes by the name of the Word, that is, He
stands to the first in the same relation as that in which utterance stands to under-
standing. II. St. John intimates that THERE WAS A PERIOD WHEN, although both
blessed Persons existed, yet raz Son was IN THE BOSOM OF THE FATHER; when,
though the Word was, yet the Word came not forth. That is like reason, with the
faculty of speech latent in it, not put forth, III. Tae masesty or tHEsE PERsons
IS CO-ETERNAL. The administration of this in the human spirit is the twin birth
of reason and speech. Speech, then, in the nature of man, represents Christ in
the nature of God. What a value and a dignity does this impress on human
speech! When you reason and communicate to others the result you adumbrate
in the limits of a finite nature, the nature of the Infinite One. Shall any child of
man, then, degrade this faculty of speech to vain and profane and unclean com-
munications? (Ibid.) The relation of this revelation with that of Genesis i.
which is an introduction to the story of the first man, as this is an introduction to
the story of the second Man, the Lord from heaven. The great words are the
same in both cases, though they have evidently deepened in their later use—the
beginning, God, the Word (‘‘God said”), all things, light, darkness, life, to be, to
become. While the evangelist begins with creation, he goes very far beyond, and
consequently uses many words that were not needed in Genesis, but are indispens-
able to his purpose, such as law, grace, truth, faith, sons of God and sin. As in
Genesis, God is taken for granted. There is no attempt to prove that He is, and
there is no notice taken of any denial that He is. With a grand daring of disregard,
as if there could be no controversy on such a subject, the paragraph proceeds on
the assumption that He is, as beyond question, like a postulate or axiom. (J.
Culross, D.D.) Controversy about Christ :—This verse is an unanswerable argu-
ment against three classes of heretics, It confutes—1. The Arians, who regard
Christ as a Being inferior to God. 2. The Sabellians, who deny any distinction of
Persons in the Trinity, and say that God sometimes manifested Himself as Father,
sometimes as Son, and sometimes as the Spirit, and that the Father and the Spirit
suffered on the cross. 3. The Socinians and Unitarians, who say that Jesus Christ
was not God, but man, a most holy and perfect man, but only a man. (Bp.
Ryle.) A notable conversion :—A memorable hour arrived in the history of a
youth belonging to an honourable French family in the second half of the sixteenth
century, Though scarcely fifteen years of age, he had been led by blind guides to


oe ee


CHAP, I.] ST. JOHN, 5


unbelief, and the dragon’s teeth, sown on an unguarded field, had already begun to
produce their destructive harvest. His godly father, deeply concerned for his
salvation, placed a New Testament in his room, and offered the silent prayer
that he might take it and read it. The son did so. His eye rested accidentally
upon a passage which, according to his own words, so affected him that he
‘suddenly felt the Divinity of the subject, and, together with the majesty, also
the power of the words that so infinitely surpassed the flow of all human eloquence.
My whole body was convulsed,” he continues, “my soul was confounded, and I
have been so affected this whole day that I have scarcely been conscious of my own
identity.” It was not quite twenty-five years after this remarkable event that he
was preaching the Gospel of the Reformation at Antwerp, while the light from the
blaze of the funeral pile which was consuming his companions in faith shone
against the windows of the hall where he preached. And when the pestilence that
raged in Leyden in 1602 numbered him among its victims, it was universally
acknowledged and lamented that a shining light had set. This young man was the
celebrated Professor Francis Junius, and the passage which was the power of God
to his salvation was Johni.1. (J.J. Van Oosterzee, D.D.) The nature of Christ
perfectly similar and equal to that of the Eternal Father :—1. This subject yields
in importance to none. The views we take of it will influence those we take of all
other doctrines, and must terminate in results which affect God’s glory. 2. Our
state of mind should be one of perfect neutrality. The slightest prepossession is
incompatible with the love of truth. 3. The language of the Scriptures must be
taken in its obvious signification, just as the Jews took John x. 30, xv.13. 4.
Should this doctrine be clearly taught, no difficulty can affect its certainty or ought
to affect our faith. 5. The lines of proof are five. (1) Divine names are given to
Christ. (2) Divine attributes are ascribed to Him. (3) Divine works are wrought
by Him. (4) Divine relations are sustained by Him. (5) Divine worship is
demanded by and paid to Him. The line suggested by our text is the first. I.
Christ is called Jenova (John xii. 37; cf. Isa. vi. 1-10).. II. Gop (Rom. ix. 5;
Heb. i. 8). III. Grear Gop (Titus ii. 3). IV. Truz Gop (1 John v. 20). V.
Mieury Gop (Isa. ix. 6). VI. Gop or Israrn (Exod. xxiv. 9,10; Psa. xviii. 17, 18;
Eph. iv. 8). Im reference to these instances: 1. Has any other received such
appellations. 2. Compare these appellations with the religious state of the Jews at
the time of Christ. They were strict monotheists, as were Christ and the apostles.
If, therefore, it was intended to convey the idea of Christ’s Divinity, no better
terms could have been used; but if to convey the idea that He was a mere man,
they are totally misleading. 3. Compare these appellations with the state of the
Pagan world. They were idolaters, and Christ’s design and that of His apostles
was to deliver them from idolatry. A strange method was employed if Christ were
amere creature, 4. Examine whether events have justified the notion which the
prophets gave if Christ benot God. It was predicted that He should utterly abolish
idols, and has He not done so? 65. The supposition that the Deity of Christ was
taught by the Saviour and His apostles will alone enable us to account for His
rejection. Conclusion: 1. Is the Deity of Christ a doctrine of Scripture? Then
how is the accuracy of His precepts ratified? How entire the proof of their con-
formity to the will of God! 2. Is the Saviour possessed of a Divine nature? How
absolutely, therefore, is He ableto scrutinize our professions of His gospel! 3.
The same truth also invites the utmost confidence in His declarations of mercy and
offers of pardon. (J. F, Denham.) On books :—1. What is it which makes men
different from all other living beings we know of? Is it not speech—the power of
words? The beasts may make one another understand many things, but they
have no speech. 2. But where did this power of uttering thoughts come from?
The beasts have been on the earth as long as man, and yet they can no more speak
than they could when they were created. But Adam could speak at once, and
could understand what God said to him. Who gave him that power but Jesus,
the Word who was in the beginning with God, and lighteth every man that cometh
into the world? 3. By Christ the Word God has spoken to man in all ages. It
was He whom Moses and the seventy elders saw, for ‘‘no man hath seen God at
any time; the only-begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father He hath
leclared Him.” He put into David’s mouth those glorious Psalms. ‘The Lord
. . . hath put a new song into my mouth.” He, as the Word of God, came unto
the prophets. When He became incarnate, He spake as never man spake, And
since then He has given to all wise and holy poets, philosophers, and preachers the
power to speak and write the wonderful truths they have thought out. 4. Ought


™,


6 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [owar. 1.
Eine IST Ce Se
not the knowledge of all this (1) make us better and wiser; (2) make us reverence
the Bible ; (3) reverence all good books? Except a living man, there is nothing
more wonderful than a book, a message from a human soul thousands of miles
away which can amuse, terrify, comfort, teach us. Why is it that neither angels,
nor saints, nor evil spirits appear now to speak to men as they once did? Because
we have books by which Christ’s messengers and the devil’s can communicate with
us. If they are good and true, they are the message of Christ, the Teacher of all
truth. If they are false and wicked, we ought to fear them as evil spirits loosed
among us. ‘his is an age of books. A flood of writings of all sorts is spreading
over the world. We ought not to stop that. It is God’s ordinance. It is of His
grace and mercy that we have a free press. It was dearly bought. The men who
died to buy us this liberty knew that it was better to let in a thousand bad books
than to shut out one good one, for a grain of God’s truth will outweigh a ton of
the devil’s lies. Wecannot silence evil books, but we can take care what we read, and
that what we let others read shall be good and wholesome. (Charles Kingsley, M.A.)
The Word of Scripture concerning the beginning :—I. Tue Orp Testament WorD IN
vHe New Testament ticut. II. Tae New Testament WorD ON THE OLD TESTAMENT
BASIS. (Lange.) I. AS THE GREAT DISTINCTION BETWEEN ETERNITY AND TIME. 1
As TUE GREAT UNION BETWEEN ETERNITY AND TIME. (Ibid.) What is gained by
defending the eternal pre-existence of Jesus Christ:—Much every way. The
lievealer of God being eternal, He is competent to give the world an eternal revela-
tion—a revelation of eternal truth, a revelation of the eternal God. Moses and
others might serve as organs of the Old Testament revelation, for the religion they
established was temporal, designed to last only ‘till the time of reformation.” In
the nature of things a temporal revealer can only found a temporal religion; you
must have an everlasting Revealer to make known the everlasting gospel. (J.
Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) The origin of the term ‘‘ Logos,” or Word :—The claims
of Philo to be regarded as the source of St. John’s doctrine have been largely advo-
cated. But—I. Ir 1s NoT CERTAIN THAT JOHN WAS ACQUAINTED WITH PHILO OR THE
ALEXANDRINE Gnosis. 1. The relations which existed between Ephesus and
Alexandria. 2. The assumption that Apollos carried over the Philonian doctrines.
3. The statement that Cerinthus drew the germs of his doctrine from an Alexandrian
source, And 4. The circumstance that Neoplatonism had spread widely amongst
the Hellenistic Jews only make it probable that John was acquainted with Philo,
but cannot be regarded as establishing it. II. With THE EXCEPTION OF THE
TERM LoGos, THE GOSPEL CONTAINS NOT A TRACE OF PuimonismM, which is remark-
able if John began its composition under the influence of that celebrated master.
The number of parallels between the philosopher and the evangelist are at the
most four, and these are confined exclusively to the prologue. III. Tus Locos or
PHILO IS ESSENTIALLY DIFFERENT FROM THAT OF JOHN. 1. It is impossible to deter-
mine whether the former is a person or an attribute, or a personification, whereas
the latter is distinctly personal. 2. The former is not Divine in the sense that the
latter is. Philo gives the name of deirepoc Oed¢ to the Logos only metaphorically,
whereas John calls Him @ed¢ in the strictest didactic sense. 3. The former is a
metaphysical conception ; the latter an object of religious contemplation. 4. The
former has no real connection with human history and salvation such as the latter
has. IV. Ir was UNNECESSARY FOR JOHN TO HAVE RECOURSE TO PHILO FOR THIS
PECULIAR EXPRESSION. 1. In the Hebrew Scriptures we have the germs of the
doctrine. (1) In Gen. i. creation is attributed to so many separate voices or spoken
words of Elohim. What if John purposed to represent the uncreated Logos as the
personal Being by whom these creative words were altered ? (2) The Maleach
Jehovah who appeared as God’s messenger, who announced His will (Gen. xv. 1),
and who, if distinguished from Him (Gen. xvi. 11), was identified with Him (Gen.
xvi. 13, xix. 16, xxxii. 30), would unquestionably prepare the way for such a con-
ception as John’s. (3) The creative activity assigned to the Word of Jehovah
(Psa. xxxiii. 6-9) would tend to foster the notion. (4) The personification of
wisdem (Prov. viii. 22-31) would further serve to develop the idea. 2. In the
Chochmah writings of the Post-Exilian Period, which carried on and perfected the
tendency already begun, John would find another contributory source to the doctrine.
In these the transition from an impersonal to a personal Sophia is an accomplished
fact (Wisdom of Sirach, i. 1, 4, xxiv. 3,9; Wisdom of Solomon, vii. 25, 26, 22) ;
and the Chaldee Targumists substitute for Elohim and Jehovah Memra da Yeya, a
personal being who served as the permanent agent or representative of God, and
who was identified with the Shekinah and the Messiah. 3. While Christ never


a ges


CHAP. I.] ST. JOHN. q
employed the term, an examination of His utterances concerning His person might
easily suggest the propriety of using it. Without alluding to John v. 38, xiv. 24,
xvii. 14, the aspect in which Christ’s person, character, and work are here contem.
plated is that of one who has come with the Divine words of truth and life, and the
transition must have seemed natural and easy from Christ as the speaker of God’s
words to Him as God’s spoken Word Himself. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) Christ
the Word of God :—What is a word? It is a thought in the depths of the heart
made audible to a second person. If Christ be the Word of God, He is God’s love
sounding in the language of mankind, God’s truth reverberating among the
centuries as amid the corridors of a grand temple, God’s justice revealed to our
comprehension. Once this orb was a bright mirror which reflected God’s image,
but sin darkened it, and it isdim. Once the rolling of its waves, the murmurings
of its streams, the noise of its winds, was the word of God; but sin has laid its
hand upon all its heart-strings and deadened and disordered its vibrations. Christ
is now what the world once was, and more than the world was—God’s love, God’s
truth, audible to men. So that in hearing Christ speak I hear God; in seeing
Christ’s portrait I see God’s; in seeing the picture of Christ delivered in the gospel
I see all that is comprehensible of the High and Holy One that inhabiteth eternity
and the praises thereof. (J. Cumming, D.D.) The Word was with God.—The
Divine Father and Son :—Ask the sun if ever it were without its beams. Ask the
fountain if ever it were without its streams. So God was never without His Son.
(Arrowsmith.) God not solitary:—God did not spend the everlasting ages in
sublime, solitary, masterly inactivity. He had a Word with Him, equal to Himself,
the reflex image of His own person. That God from everlasting loved is an idea
with which we are all familiar enough; it is the prominent idea in the correlates
Father and Son. But in the text Jesus Christ is presented, not as the Son, but as
the Word ; accordingly the main idea is not God as love, but God as mind. Not
only God loved from eternity, but He thought from eternity; He thought as
intensely as He loved, (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) The Word was God.—The
Deity of Christ an impossible invention :—Imagine yourselves in the position of St.
John: Think of any one whom you have loved and revered in past years. He has
gone; but you cling to him more earnestly in thought and affection than while he
was here. His words, haunts, phrases, handwriting, likeness, are for you precious
and sacred. Others may be forgotten, but one such memory cannot fade. But
can we conceive it possible that after any lapse of time we should express our
reverence and love by saying that our friend was superhuman? Can we imagine
ourselves incorporating our recollection with some current theosophic doctrine
elevating him to the rank of a Divine hypostasis? And if Jesus was merely human,
St. John’s statements about Him are among the most preposterous fictions which
have imposed on the world. They were advanced with a full knowledge of what
they involved. St, John was convinced as profoundly as we are of the truth of the
unity of God, and of the interval which separates the highest of creatures from the
Creator. And if we are not naturally lured to deify our friends, neither was St.
John. If Jesus had been merely human, He would have felt as we feel about a
beloved lost friend. In proportion to our belief in our friend’s goodness, and to our.
reverence for his character, is the strength of our conviction that we could not do
him a more cruel injury by entwining a blasphemous fable around the simple story
of his life. This deification of Jesus by St. John would have. been consistent
neither with his reverence for God nor his loyalty to his merely human teacher.
St. John worshipped the jealous God of Israel; and he has recorded the warning
he received against worshipping the angel of the Apocalypse. If Christ had not really
been Divine, the real beauty of His human character would have been disfigured by
any such exaggeration, and Christianity would assuredly have perished within the
limits of the first century. (Canon Liddon.) The Divinity of Christ revealed in the
Gospel of John :—I remember once talking with a lady who said she did not believe
Jesus was the Son of God, although she believed He was a good man, and admired
very much the teaching He had left. Strangely enough, I found her (with all the
beautiful inconsistency of a woman’s mind, and that inconsistency is frequently
very beautiful and much better than the logical consistency of man’s mind) particu-
larly fond of the sayings of Jesus as recorded in the Gospel of St. John; such, for
instance, as ‘“‘In My Father’s house are many mansions; I go to prepare a place
for you.” ‘‘ Now,” I said, “will you go home and read again the Gospel of St.
John, and cross out every word that intimates He is Divine, and say you don’t
believe that and that?’? She thought it would be a good idea, and I gave her a


. a eS
8 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omr.
ee — ¥y ?


little Testament and told her to mark and cut it as much as she liked. She came
back in a week, as she had promised. ‘ Well, how did you getalong?” “I didn’t
get along at all. The truth is, I found I had to cross out the whole of the first
chapter, and I began to think, ‘If it’s like this, what’ll become of the beautiful
promises and sayings?’ so I stopped and cried, ‘ Lord, I see itis so. I accept Thee
as Son of God, my Lord and my God.’” (Dr. Pentecost.) The term Word
applicable to Christ :—A person officiating as a medium of correspondence between
the throne and its functionaries or subjects might be styled the word ; or the person
who should carry the command of a general to those who should see them executed.
Such an one might also be styled the word, as standing in a mid-position between
the person holding supreme command and those set under authority. No trans-
ference of words from a general to a special signification could be more easy and
even, striking than this. If, then, we assume that the person invested with
mediatorial attributes and relations is called in several passages of Scripture “ the
Word,” or “the Word of the Lord,” because His official position is analogous to
the examples just given or to others which human experience suggests, is there not
a manifest propriety in its being used in this instance? and could the whole com-
pass of language supply us with a second term in all respects so suitable as this—
the Word? (G. Steward.) Christ the true God:—Two gentlemen were once
disputing on the Divinity of Christ. One of them, who argued against it, said, ‘‘ If
it were true, it certainly would have been expressed in more clear, unequivocal
terms.” ‘ Well,” said the other, “admitting that you believe it, were authorized to
teach it, and allowed to use your own language, how would you express the doctrine
to make it clear and indubitable?” ‘I would say,” replied the first, ‘that Jesus
Christ is the true God.’ “‘ You are happy,” rejoined the other, “in the choice of
your words, for you have happened to hit upon the very words of inspiration.
John, speaking of Jesus, says, ‘ This is the true God and eternal life.’” Christ is
God :—The commencement of Christian work in Japan happened thus : An American
lady, of the name of Prince, interested herself in the country, and four or five
missionaries were sent out, but only occupied themselves in the translation of the
Scriptures. After sometime this lady offered to teach English toa young Japanese,
and gave him the Gospel of St. John to translate. Shortly after, it was observed
that he became very agitated and restless, walking up and down the room con-
stantly. At last he could contain himself no longer, and burst out with the question,
“ Who is this Man about whom I am reading—this Jesus? You call Him a Man,
but He must be a God.” Thus the simple word itself had forced on him the con-
viction that Jesus Christ was indeed God.


Ver. 2. The same was in the beginning with God.—This repetition teaches—
I. How LIrrLE ABLE WE ARE TO COMPREHEND THIS GREAT MYSTERY, which we can
but take in by little and little, and must put that together, as children do letters,
syllables, and words, till we attain a more full understanding thereof, for our com-
fort and salvation. II. How muck AND OFTEN IT IS TO BE INCULCATED UPON BELIEVERS
to study again and again, as having more in it than will be seen at first view ; and
when they have found most in it, yet there is infinitely more to be found in that
inexhaustible fountain, III. That believers may read ALL THAT TENDER-HEARTED-
NESS, compassion, mercifulness, and sympathy which is in Him, ro BE NOT A MAN’S
ONLY, and in our kinsman, but in Him who is also the eternal God, whose thoughts
and purposes are eternal and immutable, like Himself. IV. That believers may see
THE WISDOM AND LOVE oF Gop, who has found a way of reconciliation of lost man By
THE SAME IN NATURE AND ESSENCE, WHO IS THE PARTY OFFENDED. (G. Hutcheson.)
The Word which was in the beginning a testimony :—I. To the ErmRNaL PERSONALITY,
as the ground of all things, II. To the Ermrnan Srrrrr—Light—as the law of all
things. III. To the Hrmernan Love, as the kernel of all things. IV. To the
Erernat Lire, as the life of all things. (Lange.) The Word in His exaltation
over time :—He—I. In rue Brcinnine founded all things, II. IN THE mmDpLE
executed all things; that He may, III, In rum xnp, judge all things. (Lange.)
The eternity of Christ an argument for His oneness with the Father :—Does the
radiance of the sun proceed from the substance itself of the sun or from some other
source? Any one not deprived of his senses must needs confess that it proceeds
from the substance itself. Yet, although the radiance proceeds from the sun itself,
we cannot say that it is later in point of time than the subsistence of that body,
since the sun has never appeared without its rays. It is for this reason that
St. Paul calls Him “ Brightness” (Heb. i. 3), setting forth thereby His being from


cmap. 1] ST. JOHN. ag


God and His eternity. (Chrysostom.) The value of Scripture repetitions :—
Repetitions have divers uses in Scripture. In prayer they argue affection. In
prophecy they note celerity and certainty. In threatenings they note unavoidable-
ness and suddenness. In precepts they note a necessity of performing them. In
truths, like that before us, they serve to show the necessity of believing and know-
ing them. (Arrowsmith.) ‘‘ With God’’ :—These words express the co-existence,
but at the same time the distinction of person. They imply relation with, inter-
course with. (Comp. the ‘“‘in the bosom of the Father” of ver. 18, and ‘‘ Let us
make man” of Gen. i. 26.) ‘* Throned face to face with God,’’ ‘‘the gaze ever
directed towards God,” have been given as paraphrases, and the full sense cannot
be expressed in fewer words. The “with” represents “motion towards.” The
Being whose existence is asserted in the “was” is regarded as distinct, but
not alone, as ever going forth in communion with God. (Comp. the use of the
same word “with” in Matt. xiii. 56; xxvi. 15; Mark vi. 3; ix. 19; 1 Cor. xvi.
6,7; Gal. i.18; iv.18.) (H.W. Watkins, D.D.) Christ and the Creation :—
The old Gnostic Christians held that the world was not created by the Great
God, ‘‘but by Demiurgus, a spirit descending from the Mons, which were
themselves derived from the Deity.” John’s statement stands in direct anta-
gonism to this. From this we infer—I. Tuar CHRIsT IS OLDER THAN THE
UNIVERSE. ‘The worker must be older than his productions. II. THar Curist 1s
GREATER THAN THE UNIVERSE. As the architect is greater than his building, the
author than his work, the artist than his productions, Christ is greater than the
universe. 1. Greater in extent. But Christ’s being extends beyond the limits of
the universe. 2. Greater in force. 3. Greater in beauty. III. Txar Curisr 1s
OWNER OF THE UNIVERSE. Production gives the highest right to possession. (D.
Thomas, D.D.)


Ver. 3. All things were made by Him.—The Christian doctrine of creation :—
I. THE PURIFICATION OF THE HEATHEN DOCTRINE: obviating the eternity of matter.
Il. THE DEEPENING OF THE JEWISH DOCTRINE of the Shekinah: clearly pronouncing
the personal life of love in God as it enters into the world. III. Tae GLortrication
OF THE SOUND DOCTRINE of scientific investigation: man the final cause of things ;
the God Man the final cause of man. IV. THE verpicr or THE Spirit respecting
the derivation of the world from a non-spiritual source: materialism. (Lange.)
The Christian features in all things :—I. The creaturezy instinct of dependence,
as an impulse towards the upholding Word. II. The NaTuRan, sELF-UNFOLDING
instinct, as the impulse towards freedom (Rom. viii.). IIT. The cosMIcAL, WORLD-
FORMING instinct, as an impulse towards unity. IV. The sprrrrvau instinct, as the
impulse to rise in the service of the Spirit. (Zbid.) Christ the Creator :—I. As
He is the efficient cause of all. II. As Heis the pattern by which all were made.
III. As all things are created by the Godhead, and the Word was God. (Cornelius
a Lapide.) The universal creatorship of Christ:—I. AssocrarEs His NAME WITH
ALL EXISTENCE, PAST AND PRESENT. 1. It furnishes the key to the dark problems
of nature and providence. 2. It gives to science and Christianity a common
foundation. (1) Science reveals the eternal power and Godhead of the Word.
(2) Christianity the means of mercy to fallen man through the Word. (3) Each a
compartment of one great fabric reared to the glory of God. Science the outer
court: admire and adore. Christianity the holy place: kneel, pray, praise (Heb.
iv. 16), II. ArrorDs TO FAITH THE GREATEST ASSURANCE AND ENCOURAGEMENT.
“ His every word of grace is strong,” &c. III. InsprREs THE HUMBLEST WITH CON-
FIDENCE. Christ cares for the humblest of His creatures (Psa. civ. 27; Matt. vii. 11).
IV. IRRADIATES THE FUTURE WITH A GLORIOUS HOPE (Rev. xxi. 1, 5). (Van Doren.)
The relation of Christ to the created universe :—All things are—I. In Him. All
archetypal forms and sources of creative life eternally reside in Him. II. By Him.
He is the one Producer and Sustainer of all created existence. III. For Him.
He is the end of created things. Living for Him the explanation and law of every
(Lbid.) The creative power of the Word :—See 1 Cor. viii. 6; Col. i.


eature. }
16; Heb. i. 2. Observe—1. God revealed Himself through His Son before the
Incarnation. 2. To be a Creator the Word had to be God. 3. Matter is not


eternal: the universe has an intelligent personality back of it, as architect, builder,
and sustainer. 4. The stars are a manifestation of Christ, as well as the Bible:
we see Him in natural as in revealed religion. 5. The Being who made all things
is worthy of being trusted with the absolute work of making and sustaining our
characters. (A. H. Moment.) The universe a revelation of Christ :—The creation


oo


10 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. 1


a ae EE


of a single atom would have been a revelation of Him: how much more is this
great universe! A man is always greater than his work; no architect, for example,
ever put his whole self into the noblest building he designed ; even so the Word is
greater than the universe which He has called into being. k Still, 80 far as it goes,
it reveals Him to us. To the eye of childhood this world into which we are born
is beautiful and strange, and marvellous past expression. Not less so to the intel-
ligent and thoughtful manhood. If the romance is gone, as the summer dew from
the grass at noon, the real wonder only becomes more overwhelming. (J. Culross,
D.D.) God in nature :—To the infidel, Nature’s voices are but a Babel din.
Trees rustle, and brooks babble, and winds blow; but there is no meaning in their
sound. To the Christian, all speak of God; and if it were not for the dimness of
the natural eye, he might see His host of angels at their ministry. The tree
stretches out its arm, laden with fruit, like the arm of God. The morning sprinkles
him with dew, as with holy water; and he is sung to sleep at evening with songs
like the lullaby of earthly parents to their children. (H.W. Beecher.) Divine
designs open to us in creation :—When I was in the galleries of Oxford, I saw many
of the designs of Raphael and Michael Angelo. I looked upon them with reverence,
and took up such of them as I was permitted to touch as one would take up a love
token, It seemed to me these sketches brought me nearer the great masters than
their finished pictures could have done, because therein I saw the minds’ processes
as they were first born. They were the first salient pointc of the inspiration. Could
I have brought them home with me, how rich I should have been! how envied for
their possession! Now, there are open and free to us, every day of our lives, the
designs of a greater than Raphael or Michael Angelo. God, of whom the noblest
master is but a feeble imitator, is sketching and painting every hour the most
wondrous pictures—not hoarded in any gallery, but spread in light and shadow
round the whole earth, and glowing for us in the overhanging skies. (H. W.
Beecher.) The Creator must be Divine :—To create, to call something out of
nothing—be it a dying spark or a blazing sun, a dewdrop cradled in a lily’s bosom,
or the vast ocean in the hollow of God’s hand, mole-hill or mountain, the dancing
motes of a sunbeam or the rolling planets of a system, a burning seraph or a feeble
glow-worm, one of the ephemera that takes wing in the morning and is dead at
night, or one of the angels that sang when our Lord was born; whatever be the
thing created, the power to create is God’s, the act of creation His; and therefore,
since Paul says that Jesus Christ created all things, he cannot mean to depose our
Lord from the throne of Divinity, and lower God’s only begotten Son to the level
of a created being. (Z. Guthrie, D.D.) Creation the work of God :—Creation is
the work of God: ‘without Him was not anything made that was made.’ He
only can create. The architect can rear a cathedral, the sculptor can cut forms of
symmetry and grace from marble, the painter can depict life on his canvas, the
machinist can construct engines that shall serve the nations; but not one of them
can create. They work with materials already in existence. They bring existing
things into new combinations; this is all. God alone can create. (D. Thomas,
D.D.) The greatness of the universe a testimony to the greatness of Christ:—1.. We
look around us upon the infinite variety of productions which the earth brings
forth—their use, their goodness, their beauty ; we sweep the eye of imagination
over ocean and continent, hill and plain, lake and stream, corn-land and forest,
sahara and paradise; we mark the changes produced by day and night, and the
succession of the seasons ; we listen to the music of nature—the boom of ocean
dashing on the shore, the wind in the forest, the tinkling of the hidden moorland
rill; we think of the countless tribes of living and sentient beings that inhabit
earth along with us; we think of man with his marvellous endowments; we think
of the treasures of darkness and hidden riches of secret places; we listen to all
that science can tell us of the subtle agencies that pervade creation and the laws
which bind all beings together. 2. Then, standing on earth as on a promontory,
we look upwards and outwards. Beneath the nether sky, with its cloud and scenery,
and its sunrise and sunset hues of beauty, there are illimitable realms of space, studded
with worlds moving harmoniously in close ravelled maze. These heavens were vast
and glorious to the eye of the Chaldean gazer thousands of years ago; how have their
vastness and glory grown to us since then! The globe which is our dwelling-place
is one of the smallest planets wheeling round one of the lesser suns, It is con-
ceivable that only our own little world might have hung solitary in immensity ;
but the space swept by the telescope teems with solar systems compared with which
ours is Insignificant. In the Milky Way alone are millions of suns, the nearest of


Ctat


Se ee ee


ay


CHAP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 11


which requires years to dart its light to us, though light travels two hundred thou-
sand miles during the single vibration of a pendulum. In the presence of that
immensity, our globe is but as a grain of sand on the sea-shore. 3. Leaving the
realms of space, with the help of geology, let us look back on the realms of time.
Since our world became the theatre of life, ages on ages have run their course, for
the duration of which we have absolutely no measure. The universe in its vast-
ness, wonder, and divine beauty, and in all the evolutions through which it has
passed during countless ages, lay first of all in His mind—if one may say so—as
the grand cathedral was in the brain of the architect ere its foundation-stone was
laid; it took all that we see, and all that science discloses, and all that mystery
still hides, to express His creative idea. How great, then, must the Maker be!
How wise, good, glorious! (J. Culross, D.D.) Christ’s creative knowledge :—A
quaint countryman, telling of his thorough knowledge of the people of his vicinity,
said boastfully, ‘‘I know all these people as well as if ’d made ’em.” That state-
ment of his covered a great deal of ground, whether it were true or were only a
suggestion ofatruth. No man can understand a complicated piece of mechanism like
the man who madeit. And there was never so complicated a piece of mechanism on
earth as the average man or woman. At the best, every man or woman is a bundle
of contradictions; and the closest human friend is puzzled at times over some new
phase of those contradictions in his friend. Only He who made that puzzle can
know its parts in all their relations and in all their workings. What a comfort in
the thought that our Friend of friends knows us as well as if He made us; knows
us because He did make us—for “all things were made by Him.” (H. C. Trum-
bull, D.D.) Christ’s presence in His creation :—He is not a Master who, like a
carpenter or builder, when he has prepared a house or ship, leaves the house for
its owner to dwell in, or commits the ship to the mariners that they may traverse
the sea in it, and he himself goes whither he may. No; God the Father has begun
and finished all things by His Word, and preserves it also continually by the same,
and remains with His work until He wills thet it shall no longer exist (John vy. 13).
As we were made by Him without our assistance, so also we cannot be preserved of
ourselves. Thus here, were all to understand that all things created are preserved,
in being otherwise they would not long remaincreated. (Luther.) The confidence
inspired by Christ’s creatorship :—If without Christ nothing was made, then nothing
made by Him can do any injury to His kingdom. Fear loves to make exceptions ;
it allows all else to be innocuous; only that one thing which is directly in view
appears to threaten’danger. This is met with the assurance that all things, with-
out exception, were made by the Word; therefore every fear is unreasonable to
Him who has the Word on His side. If to be made, and to be made by Him, are
the same thing, there can be no enemy that is to be feared, either in heaven or in
earth. (Hengstenberg.) What was not, and what was made by Christ :—Many,
wrongly understanding “‘ without Him was nothing made,” are wont to fancy that
“‘nothing ” is something. Sin, indeed, was not made by Him; and it is plain that
sin is nothing, and men become nothing when they sin. An idol also was not
made by the Word, and an idol is nothing. Therefore these things were not made
by the Word ; but whatever was made in a natural manner, whatever belongs to
the creature, from an angel even unto a worm. What more excellent than an
angel among created things? What lower than a worm? But an angel is fit for
heaven, the worm for earth. He who created also arranged. If He had placed
the worm in heaven, thou mightest have found fault; and if He had willed that
angels should spring from decaying flesh, thou mightest have found fault. And

et God almost does this, and He is not to be found fault with. For all men born
of the flesh, what are they but worms? And of these worms God makes angels.


(Augustine. )


Ver. 4, In Him was life, and the life was the light of men.—The life which
Christ lived was so radiant that it fills our lives with light. It was God-life,
without pause or interruption. I. Curisr ray rrug ire. 1. A life of the highest
knowledge. ‘No man knoweth the Father but the Son.” “By His knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many.” Any life, to be strong and influential,
must have a mighty grasp of the highest truths. The highest knowledge is that of
the moral nature of God, the spiritual nature of man, and the true nature of the
relations between God and man. This knowledge is threefold in its contents, and
is the blended result of the perceptions of the intellect, heart, and conscience,
Neither alone can reach it; for to obtain even glimpses of it we must be elevated


12 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. I.


above the uncertainties of the intellect, the selfishness of the heart, and the
bewilderments of conscience. ‘This is life eternal”; and Christ possessed it in
its fulness, because He had this knowledge in absolute fulness and certainty, and
came to bear witness to it, and thus to bridge over the gulf which the greatest
geniuses had failed to span. 2. A life of perfect love. Knowledge the most perfect
is only one element. Love is the grandest form of life, because it includes all the
other virtues, which without it are nothing. Consider the infinite difference
between the sentiments we cherish towards Shakespeare and Christ. We admire
and wonder in the one case; we admire and worship in the other. The one added
immensely to our literature and our knowledge; the other created a new religion
and discovered a God of greater goodness than the world had ever known, because
the key-note of His life was sacrifice and its crown the cross. 3. A life of perfect
doing. The greatest life is that in which the grandest ideas, emotions, and actions
are perfectly blended. Such was His life. Human nature is ordinarily so poor,
that often the men with large emotional natures have a difficulty in keeping them-
selves pure, and are not great in ideas, and vice versdé. Consider the life that must
have been in Christ. Not to insist on the wonderful quantity of work that Christ
did! Look at its transcendant quality, the nature of His acts and their motive.
IL Tue xire or CHRIST IS THE LIGHT OF MEN, because it is—1. A glorious revela-
tion. His life, composed of the highest knowledge, &c., was a revelation. It is not
speculation that can teach us the highest religious truth, but that truth embodied
in a life. We live in an age which denies or questions the truths which for nineteen
centuries have constituted the hope of the Church. What is God, man, life,
destiny? Some are able to answer these questions off-hand by turning to their
systems of theology. But men will continue to ask them, unsatisfied with such
ready-made, second-hand answers; and the only answers that will carry any
sufficient weight of evidence are those obtained by men who understand the life
and death of our Lord. He is the light of the world, ‘the revelation of the Father,
and of what man may become. But we cannot perceive the light or enter into the
revelation if we stand out of personal relation to Him. 2. A great quickening
power, like the sun. We know how one human life will act upon another. If we
place ourselves in the light of Christ’s life, we shall soon begin to realize a change
in our thoughts, hearts, conscience, and will. (C. Short, M.A.) The life and
the light:—Where Christianity is not, there are darkness and death; where
Christianity is, there are light and life. Myriads of men testify that some Divine
power in Christianity has made them new creatures. These are facts of Christian
history, present results of Christian experience. We are not the apologists of a
discredited or doubtful cause; we press the arguments on those who oppose.
Christianity is a fact that must be accounted for. One branch of the argument is
the practical influence of Christ, His fitness and fulness as the life and light of
men. I. THERE IS MATERIAL FOR THE CHRISTIAN ARGUMENT IN THE VERY CONCEPTION
AND FORM OF SUCH A STATEMENT. 1. It is one of those profound and pregnant
statements characteristic of the Christian writings, and especially of St. John.
How is it that these simple chroniclers attained to ideas more spiritual, profound,
and luminous than those of the greatest philosophers? Whence these conceptions
of Christ, so unique, that no other was ever imagined like Him, and yet so con-
gruous and vital that men confess and worship Him? 2. Not only profoundness, but
peculiarity of meaning in this conception of Christ and His work. It might have
been written yesterday, in the light of Christian history, so exact and adequate is
the representation of the peculiar facts and influence of Christ’s work. (1) It roots
all the religious powers of Christianity in the person of Christ. The way of life
not taught by, but life was in Him. Not that His words gave light, but His life,
(2) The life and light of all men are in Him. Not merely that He lived, but was
the fountain whence every stream of life flows ; and all the light that shines about
our lives and illumines our souls, bringing the life and knowledge of God. (3) The
life was the source of the light. In the world’s darkness, He, the living Mediator,
stands an incarnate, luminous manifestation of God; so that whoever looks on
Him sees wondrous revelations. Just as all things upon the earth’s surface are
physically enlightened when it turns towards the sun, so are all men spiritually
enlightened as they turn towards Him, II. Waar ucur ran xire or Curist
THROWS ON THE GREAT PROBLEMS OF LIFE AND DESTINY. We speculate on these
problems, and call ourselves theologians; we try to resolve them by practical
experiments, and call ourselves moralists. But how perplexed the theology; how
uncertain the morality! What human thought has thrown any light upon them ?


——p-- S


ouapP, 1.] ST. JOHN. 13


In Christ the only solution of them lies, 1. Has God given us a supernatural
revelation of His character and will? It is sufficient to point to Christ. The life
is its own light. It is the greatest miracle of history. The impression of perfect.
goodness is produced by every word and manifested feeling ; perfect holiness blends
with perfect tenderness into an excellency which has neither defect nor excess.
Christ’s innocence, contrary to ours, was marked by no ignorance. Virtues almost
incongruous blend in Him—greatness and gentleness, holiness and pity, strength
and sympathy. He is nobler than the greatest man, tenderer than the gentlest
woman. He commands not only the homage of the good, but of the wise. His.
intellectual character is as great as His moral. The very conception of His king-
dom is a miracle—a spiritual, holy, catholic kingdom of God, the consummation
of which should be the conversion and service of a whole world. Does not this
marvellous life solve the problem of Divine manifestation? Who could have
invented it? With it before us, to ask for proofs of the truth of Christianity is as
reasonable as to ask at noonday for astronomical proofs of the sun. 2, Men are
perplexed with the question of human sin. Wherever they are found they are con-
scious of wrong-doing. Philosophers and poets of all ages recognize it and lament
over it ; and the religious problem of every age in the face of it is, ‘‘ How shall a
man be just with God?” What human philosophy has furnished a solution?
What can appease my awakened conscience, the memory of a guilty life? Nota
mere general assurance of God’s mercy. I recognize something beside mercy, even
an inflexible righteousness. And just in proportion as I believe in that, my hope
is disabled. It is only when Christ is offered as the Mediator between a holy God
and sinful men that light is thrown on the problem. When He is recognized as
having been offered as a propitiation for human guilt, then God is seen to be just,
and the justifier of the ungodly. His salvation respects every requirement of the
Divine government, and satisfies every demand of our moral nature. How can this
salvation be a personal experience? In Christ is the answer. The same cross
which honours the Divine law attracts human hearts, and through Him I
receive the atonement. 3. Next comes the problem of human character; its
degradation, unholiness, selfishness, and shame. What hope is there for man’s
moral future? Apart from Christ, none. In Him is the only regenerating
power to be found. (1) Through Him we receive the great teaching and gift
of the Holy Spirit. With the teaching of holiness, comes a Divine power to
enable it. Man wanted moral light, but moral life also. Quickened from
death in trespasses and sins, he has the powar of spiritual vision given him;
he sees the blessed light. But (2) he has in Christ the ideal of holiness,
and after what a perfect and noble life he has to strive. This model we may
imitate, and be ever approaching that peerless example. (3) Christ in His sympa-
thetic brotherhood encourages us not to despair at failure and gives us grace which
strengthens. 4. There is the problem of human sorrow. But suffering is relieved
from its anathema, exalted into sacrifice, converted into a gospel, and made the
minister of the noblest perfection in the human life of Christ. 5. There is the
problem of death. But Christ has brought life and immortality to light. Even
death becomes a gospel to immortal men; the transition from this darkness to that
light, this sinfulness to that holiness, this sorrow to that blessedness. (H. Allon,
D.D.) ‘The life and light of men:—I, THE SUBLIME DECLARATION. In its ultimate
origin all life is mysterious. It must rest on an eternal life. The Divine life the
only true life. “ In Him life was.’’? In us dependent, continually becoming. — The
text a contradiction if employed ofa mere man. The life in Christ was the life of
the Spirit. Reason leads us to the conception of a continually ascending life,
vegetable, animal, rational. Revelation adds the spiritual—the life of inspired men,
of fellowship with God, of angels of Christ who had the Spirit without measure.
His was the life of God—perfect purity, ceaseless activity, infinite love. II. Tur
PROCLAMATION. The life was the light of men. 1. In paradise. Man walked in it
and saw God face to face. 2. Then followed a long period during which the light
shone on chosen men, places, institutions. Light in the midst of gross darkness,
The heathen world was full of evil. Some light shined here and there, 3. When
the fulness of time came the life was the light of men. Power, gladness, gracious-
ness, adaptation, acceptability of the gospel represented in the analogy of light in
darkness. Light calls out energies, helps growth, reveals faces, turns bloom to
fruit, and fruit to perfection. Life and light intimately blended. 4. What was
wanted then is wanted now; light of men as wellas of man ; in communities, nations,
individual heart and conscience, Light in the household—among dark anxieties,


ee
14 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHaPr, L


ee ee ee eee
sorrows, desolation. Light in the prospects of mankind—a bright future the out-
come of the light of Jesus. Light on the sepulchre—not now a mere sombre
monument of fallen pride, but affection’s memorial written in the language of hope.
The life will reappear, and we shall appear with Him and be like Him, and so be
ourselves that life and light of men. (R. A. Redford, M.A.) Christ the life and light
of men :—I, In Him was ure. God is self-existent. Every being but He had a
beginning. Every other being, therefore, must have been created. All life which
had a commencement must be derived and not inherent. Christ’s life was un-
derived and inherent. Therefore He was Divine. II. THE LIFE was THE LIGHT OF
meN. John does not declare it to be the life of men ; which would betrue. Every
tribe of animated existence draws its life from God: But man placed above beasts
and birds. The difference consists in deriving life from the Word and having the
life which was in Him as our enlivening, illuminating principle in us. This light
is that which enables man to walk in a wholly different region from the beasts which
perish, penetrating the wondersand scanning the boundaries of the universe, while
other creatures are limited to a single and insignificant province. This light is the
soul: reason, judgment, conscience. If this soul be eclipsed man is morally and
spiritually blind. It isa fine testimony to this light when we find it described as
the life which was from all eternity in the Word. It gives a majesty to reason and
a dignity to conscience when a man realizes that these are part of the life of his
Creator. The man who debases them debases no earthborn or perishable thing.
The Word endowed human nature with His own life; hanging upinits chambersa
lamp, and continually feeding the flame with the flashings of His own eternity.
Shall this lamp be substituted now that it has been fractured, its light dimmed, for
the Word Himself? Or shall we boast ourselves free from all need of Him just
because there glows in us a principle derived from Him? The strangest spectacle
is that of a man taking reason and rejecting Christ as his guide, fancying that in
directing himself by the shining of his own spirit he shows himself independent of
Christ. Man shows his ignorance of creation in putting scorn on redemption. He
draws from the Word those very energies by which he would prove himself indepen-
dent of the Word. The intellectual capacities were Christ’s shinings into the un-
corrupted, even as our pardon, and renewal, and acceptance into the depraved and
ruined. What gave virtue to His sacrifice was that the Self-existent died, and that
which gave this worth was emphatically our light. Reason still burns brightly,
conscience is not quenched, and immortality is assured because the Word who never
had a beginning consented to be born; the Word who never can end consented to
die. (H. Melvill, B.D.) Christ the life and light of men :—I. He is ESSENTIALLY
tirE—the Living One, as opposed to dying men. II, He is the EXEMPLARY LIFE;
for all things exist in the Word, which is the idea of all things living. III. He is
the CAUSE AND SOURCE OF NATURAL LIFE to all; the Maker of all things, from whom
life has been communicated to all things living; and He is also the sustainer of that
life which at the first He imparted; both the giver and the preserver of life to all.
IV. He is the CAUSE AND SOURCE OF SUPERNATURAL LIFE; the grace and the glory of
all God’s faithful children; commencing this life by the communication of His
grace, and so bestowing upon men faith, hope, and charity; perfecting this life by
the communication of His glory, in which we shall enjoy the beatific vision of God.
(W. Denton, M.A.) Christ the life and light of individual men :—I have seen one
out of whom had gone all heavenly resemblance, and in whom all rudeness, coarse-
ness, profanity, worldly lusts were incarnate. There was no pressure that inclined
him downward, to which he did not yield. Had his soul been of stone, it could not
have been less responsive to the Divine solicitations. There was not a function in
him which was not petrified on its heavenward side; there was not a capacity in
him that did not, so far as righteous action goes, lie dead. Well, mark now 3 one
night, while he was lying on his bed, the Lord, in the shadow of the darkness—not
violently, but still as the stillness around and above his bed, more dreadful, per-
haps, because of the stillness; perhaps more gentle because of it—drew near to
this dead soul; breathed on it once, gently took its hand and said, Soul, arise!
And that dead soul felt strange currents run through all its frame; felt the thrill
of Divine life charge through its veins, until the frozen current melted, ran, became
warm, began to throb, and life came into it—life to stand, to move ; and that dead
soul arose and stood before the Lord, and then full of rapture bowed down and wor-
shipped. And, ever after—for I knew him well—that man lived a life that took
knowledge of all God’s mercies, a life as innocent as the bird’s is that has no beak
vor talons, and cannot wound nor strike, but can only sing ; yea, as innocent as the


ee


EEA YE eer een ie Oe


2


CHAP. I.]
ST, JOHN. 15


little stream that has no deep, dark places in it, i i
in it, i
a aaa le cas ogee but which ath clear ia ae es 4
) i i i Aneel
pee cite . roots of flowers that fringe it, and be drunk up of thirsty
¢ g men. So he lived his life, I say, and in him I
ma oe 3 he life that Christ said He was, meant W. n
‘ay. Christ the light and life of nature and of If lw he, Relds
of science and nature gives up one secret afte th Shag oe
sublimer mysteries of grace, and study the ai Baan haem erie tanne ee
this earth from the bondage of soreittion thes ae. Sees a Raat ew
ent ae et ue me debtor. "Whilst Hearty cesta
gs of space, and enabled by intellect to take the d i
the architecture of God, I owe all to the Word just eRe ee
strengthened to cast off evil. As a rational bein T atc geaet aan Se
a redeemed being I owe everything to the Word His ee octiy einer ire
owe, ° lligence by which I
may count the stars; His the atonement through which I oe rene i
His the memory in which I can treasure ith and th He acti.
d t hteousness in which I
may come before God. His the judgment by which I Rae: h shoe:
positions as well as the intercession by which I can b helt igi Conenias Loads
the imagination by which I can wander through im care ae Teo cote
the inheritance for outshining all I can S eanive if, then . te ee
ITadore the Word made flesh, shall I not because end an i eae _ ee
Word as the Self-existent? If as a redeemed petite 1 abies Haan ome ioe aare
He humbled Himself and became obedient unto the detith 66 re erties
a rational creature pour forth this grateful tribute to the Word : “ In Him : life ;
and the life was the light of men”? (H, Melvill, B.D.) Christ’s aust a h
ee sey Bee Rog e to-day cere was there a time when erin co
of in the world as now, because the human i
a condition to accept the Divine activity, and to be pai Sime teate
the sun never had such harvests as now, so there never were such harvests of the
Sun of Righteousness. As there is more raised in the State of Illinois in a ye :
now than there was in ten thousand years before the prairies were brought ne es
state of cultivation, so the products of morality and spirituality are more abudlant
than they ever were before. In proportion as the minds of men are cleared and
rendered susceptible to the activity of the Divine mind, human inspiration i
increased individual by individual, family by family, nation by patinn (HZ W.
Beecher.) The difference between life and light:—I. In the Son or Gop. II. In
THE WORLD, Til. In man. IV. In the Curistian ure. (Lange.) The life a
light of men:—I. In man: consciousness, II. For man: the works of God as the
signs and words of God. III. Resprctine man: Christ the light of the life
(Ibid.) Christ was the light and life of men in that He delivered men from
ignorance, unbelief, and vice, and from the ruin and misery which are their
invariable attendants; and brought them to the knowledge of Divine things, to
faith and holiness, and to that temporal and eternal happiness with which ehage
are inseparably connected. This change He effected—I. By His poctrine, which
is of Divine efficacy, not only for enlightening, but for purifying and transformin
the soul, and imparting consolation and happiness. II. By His 1ncaRNATION ies
AND DEATH. For these were the clearest revelation of God, the benevolence of His
nature, and His paternal love to men, of the Saviour, and His great and glorious
work, of the dignity of man, and the certainty of a state of immortal existence
beyond death and the grave. Ill. By His exametn. The example—l. Of His
holiness, which gave evidence and efficiency to His doctrine. 2. Of His ‘‘ suffer-
ings, and the glory that should follow,” in which He is our pattern (2 Tim. ii. 11 ;
Rom, viii. 17, 29). IV. By His rstirurions. Shedding down the Holy Ghost
upon the apostles, instituting baptism, the Lord’s Supper, the Christian ministry
public worship, and other religious exercises, which are the most effectual means
for banishing ignorance, and unbelief, impiety, and misery from the earth, and for
the diffusion and establishment of knowledge and faith, virtue and genuine happi-
ness among men, Thus extensive is the signification, whilst the primary idea is
that of felicity, to which He leads men in many ways. (C. C. Tittman, D.D.)
Christ’s life the light of men :—It was not the wisdom of Christ’s words, nor the
splendour of His works that filled those three years and a half with great event; it
was He, the life that was in Him; and with all that was stimulating in His dis-
courses, startling in His works of wonder, and harrowing in His sufferings, the life
that was in Him would be quite as likely to issue in effects that would be healing,


a
16 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. I.

eR bk valine 0 OPE SN, Se eae te ee
when its creeping forth was a quiet and stealthy one, just as it is the light, not the
lightning that best fills the earth with radiance; not the hurricane, but the gentle
breath out of the south that stirs air and sea and standing corn into most healthful
play, and not the deluge but the rain that drops upon the furrows with most of |
fertility. (C.H. Parkhurst, D.D.) Life in Christ :—To know the scope of the
Word, we begin with life in its lowest and simplest forms, as it is seen in the Arctic
moss or the ooze brought up from the sea-depths by the Challenger. Even in such
lower forms the physiologist cannot tell us what life is, nor the microscopist, nor
the chemist, nor the wisest philosopher. They can tell us the signs of it, and the
laws according to which it is continued or extinguished; but that is about all.
From the lowest and simplest we pass upwards, through one order of being after
another, till we come to man, in whom life reveals itself so much more marvellously,
in sense, intellect, emotion, conscience, will. We mark how different a thing it is
in different cases: to the unlettered peasant and the man of profound and various
culture ; to the playful child and the grey-haired saint, ready to enter the perfect
kingdom of righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. In this passage
the term “life”? is not to be restricted to any single province, wide or narrow,
“ physical,” “ moral,” ‘¢ spiritual,” or “eternal,” but is to be taken in the whole
breadth of its significance. Besides the marvel and mystery of life in its nature
and infinitely various forms, there is also its immensity of volume—all that is, all
that has been, in air, and earth, and sea. As an illustration of the impossi-
bility of dealing with this aspect of the case, a single fact may be selected from the
microscopic researches of Ehrenberg: one cubic inch of the hardened clay called
tripoli he found to contain between forty and fifty thousand millions of the silicious
fossil shells of infusoria. In presence of such a fact our minds are utterly helpless
to conceive the extent of life even in this little globe that we inhabij. All the life
of creation, so vast in its sum, so wonderful and glorious, from the life that lasts
only a summer evening to that of the archangel who bows before the eternal throne
—all that life, the Evangelist tells us, ‘was in Him.” He is the Fount whence it
has all proceeded. Being in Him, the outcome was a necessity. If there is life in
the vine, it comes out in branch, and leaf, and grape cluster. So with the life that
was in the Word: it has come out in the vast and varied life of creation. Because
in Him was life, therefore this is a living world, and not a mere material and
ponderable ball, or a world of automatons, destitute of understanding and volition.
All the life of which we have any knowledge is the out-blossoming and fruiting of
the life that was in Him. (J. Culross,D.D.) Life in Christ :—There is a project
for turning the great desert of North-Western Africa into an inland sea by cutting
through the bank which separates its vast depressed surface from the Atlantic; so
that large existing populations may be reached, and new towns and fertile country
may fringe the then obliterated wilderness of death with smiling contentment and
prosperity. It may be but a scientific romance. But it points to the holy privilege
and blessed service of the Christian Church. Our Master says: ‘‘Speak the words
of this life. Cut through the bank of ignorance and prejudice and worldliness and
sin, and admit upon the vast spiritual deadness of the world, the rolling tide of a
pure and immortal life, that souls and churches and nations may spring up in the
freshness of gospel life, and wear the everlasting beauty of Him who has redeemed
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. And lo! I
am with you alway, even unto the end.” (W. H. Jackson.) God’s self-revelation
through life:—I. Tus ScrreruRE OPENS UP TO Us GoD’s LIVING WAY OF MAKING Him-
SELF KNOWN To us. ‘The Bible is the record and interpretation of a way of creation
and life, which leads from the promise of the beginning on and on, with a purpose
never given up, and toward a goal never lost from sight, and against all human
gravitation downward from its high intent until it completes its course in that one
sinless life through which God shines—the true light. God has been present as a
living power in man’s life, as the educating and redemptive power in Israel, as the
grace and truth of life in Jesus Christ. II. Turis Scripture piscuosrs Gop’s way or
ILLUMINING OUR Lives. Christ entering into human life is its light. He lights up
all our history. Other lights of human kindling illumine but portions of our life, and
all go out in death. But there is no phase of our nature, no need of our common
humanity, no possibility of our love and hope which His life does not purify and
irradiate. God with us in our life is alone adequate to human nature. Shall I not
trust myself to the life which meets at every point my life? The real gospel thus
is God’s life through Christ touching our life and making it new. It has Divine
tight in the midst of the business of the world. It cannot, without disloyalty, be


-
4
a
:
=
3
=

:
J
*


CHAP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 17


divorced from common life, sundered from its vital relation to the trade, the politics,
and the conduct of men. Jesus Christ brought the kingdom of heaven down to the
streets of Capernaum, and what the Church wants is to bring His life through the
relations of society around the whole circumference of human life. III. Onny
THROUGH LIVES IN REAL SYMPATHY WITH GoD AND CHRIST ARE WE TO RECEIVE THE LIGHT
OF THE WORLD. Not that the mystery of God in Christ is not to be the subject of
theological inquiry, but that we are to learn Christian truth, first and best of all in
the school where Jesus came to teach it—the school of real life. Our best light
always is the kindling of the life into truth. Through life to knowledge is the
Christian way. As God has come home to man through the life of Christ, so are
we to draw near unto God through the Christian life. If we will live Christ-like
lives doubt not that God will reveal His truth and His goodness through them.
(Newman Smyth.) The joy of living :—I. Aut MEN DESIRE TO LIvE. Life, if it be
healthy, is joyful. All lives created of God are happy, for He is happy. II. This
instinct to live is EVIDENCE oF ouR DIVINE ORIGIN AND QuaLiry. However stained
and defiled, the image within us is not wholly forgetful of its origin. Within us
lingers a sentiment which forbids life to despair of itself. Hence out of the fulness
and joyfulness of life springs the conception of immortality. III. We knowthat all
life is of God, that of the bee, the bird, the dog, and other wonderful and fine ex-
pressions of life. But finer and more wonderful THz Lire waicH Hk BREATHES INTO
THE SPIRIT OF FALLEN MAN. The new birth is the waking up of dormant faculties,
the resurrection of buried powers. Then power comes to the man, spiritual, soul
power. The man’s life becomes Divine in its harmonies. He begins to grow. IY.
This new life wENS THE RANGE OF EXISTENCE. V. ALL LIFE HATES DEATH. We
sympathize with the falling leaf, weep over the dying friend, in spite of all the
natural and spiritual knowledge which recognizes in death the gate of life. But
what must God feel as He beholds the death of the soul. VI. Tum soy oF LiviNG
IS FOUND IN THE PURE AND PROPER GOVERNMENT OF THE LIFE. The life of Christ,
therefore, or growth into a life like to the one He lived, is a growth into joy. VII.
ALL HUMAN LIVES THAT ARE NOT SELF-DESTRUCTIVE ARE GROWING TOWARDS HAPPINESS.
The old aches cannot always last, or the old pains for ever sting us. So there is a
hand somewhere that shall take all weakness up, and wipe all tearsaway. (W. H. H.
Murray.) God’s living light:—There are three words around which we may
group our thoughts of Christ. I. Man. These words touch and lay bare the dis-
tinctive necessity of man’s nature. When that nature awakes to the true knowledge
of itself it becomes conscious of needing the direction and sustenance of a higher
life. We do not attain satisfaction when we seek it on a level with the animal
creation, although we belong to it. Nothing is plainer than man’s need of God. He
must have relation to the inexhaustible and changeless; and if he is to receive a
light that can shine on the problems of his own being, that light must be a life. IT.
Reveuation. The text reveals the distinctive provision of Christianity. God isthe
creator of this deep necessity, and He has made it not to mock it, butto satisfy it,
“ God hath given us eternal life, and this life is in His Son.” Christ is exhibited not
as some gorgeous pageant to be admired, nor as a carefully filled museum to be
wondered at; He is a new communication from the Eternal Father. And the
design of the Christian faith is not grasped by us, nor its provision enjoyed until we
see all its avenues leading up to the disclosure that our Lord came to give
life. The unique life has established itself as the light of men, wise to guide
and safe to follow. ‘The distinctive need of man is met by the distinctive
power of Christ. III. Userunness. These words provide us with a Divine test
of the value of all churches and Christian work. As the life is men’s light, so
“holding forth the Word of Life” is the Christian’s duty. To this test we must
bring our schools, societies, literature, methods, principles. None of them are good
unless they serve His purpose, as lamp-stands from which the life of Christ can
shine more widely and brightly upon the hearts of men, (W. H. Jackson.)
Life in Christ:—1. CuRIsT IS THE SOURCE OF LIFE AS He 1s THE CREATOR OF
EXISTENCE. 1. This is true in the widest sense. 2. He is Creator, not by delega-
tion, but as Principle. 3. This claim He vindicated in His wiracles. Il, Cunist
IS THE SOURCE OF LIFE AS HE IS THE REDEEMER OF HUMAN EXISTENCE. 1. This
is the one rational explanation of His death. 2. Redemption is by price. 3.
Redemption is also by power. III. Man’s TRUE LIFE CONSISTS IN HIS UNION WITH
Curist. 1. There is no true human life apart from God. 2. This true human
life we forfeited by sin. 3. But we recover it in Christ. (Homiletic Magazine.)
The light of ife:—I. THaT THIS LIFE IS ITS OWN EVIDENCE. 1. For life is a


18 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (crap. 1.


a


resisting force. (1) Inanimate things are submissive to the forces of nature. — Thus
a stone fe ated ck without resistance, to the law of gravitation. (2) But things of
life resist the mechanical forces. Thus even a blade of grass pushes its way
upwards through the resisting soil, in the direction opposite to that of gravitation.
As we ascend in the scale of life, these resistances become more remarkable. The
eagle darts sun-ward, in every stroke of its pinion resisting and triumphing over the
force of gravitation. (3) Men who are spiritually dead are like the stone or the
feather, under the control of worldly fashion and sinful influences. They are
‘‘earried captive by the devil at his will.”’ (4) Men who are spiritually alive resist
and vanquish these influences. To do this the more effectually they avail them-
selves, by prayer, of the promised help of God. So, like the eagles, they mount
sun-ward (cf. Isa. xl. 31). Thus spiritual life is its own evidence. 2. Life is an
appropriating force. (1) A living animal seizes the vegetables around it and
appropriates them as food for its nourishment. A dead animal is a prey to the
chemistry of nature. (2) Life is an appropriation, even in the vegetable form.
The root of the plant performs functions analagous to those of the animal stomach,
absorbing from the soil, digesting, and elaborating the juice which nourish its stem
and branches. The leaves perform functions analogous to the twigs. (3) The
Christian will avail himself of the means of grace, public, domestic, private. He
is not in them, like the formalist, a mere observer of what ispassing. He is in them
as feeder, 3. Life is a propagating force. (1) Let a stone be buried, and after
thousands of years it will be found as it was. Witness the Nineveh marbles. Let
an acorn be buried; it will germinate and develop into an oak. (2) So the germ of
religious life unfolds into the maturity of Christian manhood. It exerts a
propagating influence upon the spirits of othermen. (3) The waste of life in nature
is enormous. So is the waste of spiritual life in the Church. The failure of the
propagating energies of spritual life is serious. II. THat THIS LIFE LIGHTS UP
IMMorTaLITY. 1, Life touches everything into beauty. (1) During winter the face
of nature is dreary. (2) But what beauty is comparable to that of holiness which
springs from spiritual life? The beauty of the saint is the reflection of the
image of God. It is seen in the integrity that cannot be bribed. It is seen in the
magnanimity of sacrifice. It is seen in the tenderness of kindly sympathy. 2.
Life illuminates the chambers of the tomb. (1) It prevents not the dissolution of
the body. The saintliest die. (2) But while spiritual life prevents not physical
dissolution, it modifies death into sleep. The Christian “sleeps in Jesus.”” The
sleeper expects an awakening. (3) The labourer sleeps expecting not only to awake,
but to awake refreshed. So does the Christian worker. No more weariness. 3.
Life is the germ of immortality. (1) The spiritual life here is the power of an
endless life hereafter. The principle is even more than the promise of immortality.
(2) Hence “ the kingdom of heaven is within you.” ‘The heaven of heavens is
love.”’ (8) Christ is eternal life. Having Him, we have eternal life (cf. chap. iii.
16; v. 24; xi. 25; xiv. 6; John i. 1,2; v. 11, 12, 20). (Ibid.) Christ the
pre-eminent and illuminating Life :—I. His LIFE WAS PRE-EMINENT. ‘In Him was
life.” 1. ‘In Him was life” without beginning. Life in all other existences had
acommencement. 2. ‘In Him was life” without dependence. 3. ‘In Him was
life” without limitation. All other life has its limits, not so with His. His is
without limit—(1) As to kind. In His life were the germs and archetypes of all
other life, material and spiritual. (2) As toamount. All other life is circum-
scribed. (3) As to communicativeness. (4). As to duration. II. His tire was
ILLUMINATING. ‘* And the life was the light of men.” Christ’s life, whatever its
variety and fulness, had all a moral character, for He was a moral Being. There
are several things taught here concerning His life as light: 1. That His life was
‘‘ the light of men.” 2. That this light was heralded by the Baptist. 3. That this
light become available by faith. 4. That this light is the true light of “ every
man.” (D. Thomas, D.D.) Christians the reflectors of this light :—There is
a little church on a lonely hill-side where they had neither gas nor lamps, and
yet on darkest nights they hold Divine service. Each worshipper, coming a
great distance from village or moorland home, brings with him a taper and lights it
from the one supplied and carried by the minister of the little church. The build-
ing is thronged, and the scene is said to be ‘“‘ most brilliant !’’ Let each one of our
lives be but a little taper—lighted from the life of Christ, and carrying His flame—
and we shall help to fill this great temple of human need and human sin with the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God. The life of Christ will be the new sun-
shine of the world. ‘Men shall be blessed in Him; all nations shall call Him


4


CHAP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 19


blessed”’; universal man shall receive “God's Living Light.” (Ibid.) Christ
living :—A missionary in China stated that on one occasion a number of persons
who were hearing him, mostly women, manifested the greatest astonishment when
he told them that the God he worshipped and wished them to worship was a living
God. Uttering an exclamation peculiar to themselves when much surprised, they
said, a The foreigner’s God is better than ours—ours has no life.” Christ the
universal light :—The sun does not shine for a few trees and flowers, but for the
wide world’s joy. The lonely pine on the mountain top waves its sombre boughs
and cries, “‘ Thou art my sun.” And the little meadow violet lifts its cup of blue,
and whispers with its perfumed breath, “‘ Thou art my sun.” And the grain in a
thousand fields rustles in the wind, and makes answer, “Thou art my sun.” (H.
W. Beecher.) Christ a living Saviour :—A Smyrna native agent came across a
Turk from some town in the interior, who showed considerable acquaintance with
the Christian Scriptures. He said he had long studied the gospel, and had once
nearly got into trouble through it. He was called before the authorities for reading
Christian books, but before judgment was passed upon him he begged to be allowed
to ask a question, Permission having been granted, he said, “I am travelling ; I
come to a part where the road branches off in two ways; I look around for some
direction and discover two men; one is dead, the other alive. Which of the two
am I to ask for advice—the dead or the living?” ‘Oh, the living, of course!” all
cried out. ‘* Well,”? he added, “why require me to go to Mahomet, who is dead,
instead of to Christ, who is alive?” ‘Go, go about your business!” were the
words with which he was dismissed. Christ's influence in relation to hwman co-
operation :—You cannot tell how much is done by the pure shining of His light and
the emission of this life, and how much by your ownreceptivity. Nor is it necessary.
Christ fructifies and stimulates the original and moral faculties and makes them
productive. If I take a plant out of a cellar where it has grown etiolated, and with-
out chlorophyl, and put it where the light will shine upon it, and when it turns
green, will you tell me what part of the green ig plant and what part sun? I would
say that the sun developes this chlorophyl by injecting itself, so to speak, into the
leaf. So that the light and the life co-operate with the faith, the love, the recep-
tivity of the individual who receives them. (H. W. Beecher.) Christ’s influence
known by its fruits :—What is the evidence that the sun is active? The fact that
every root is sprouting. What is the evidence that the sun has brought summer ?
The fruits of summer. What is the evidence that the sun has been shedding down
upon the earth its light and warmth and ripening power? The flavour of the fruit.
Bring me an apple. If it is hard and acid I know that it is the product of a rainy
sunless summer. Bring me another, and if it is mellow and full of sugar and
aroma, I know that the sugar and aroma do not come out of the ground, but from
where there was light and: heat. And I can judge of the influence, under which
nations have been unfolded by the nature of the fruit they produce. Show me a
nation developing coarse animation, and I will show you a nation that has not been
true to the light. Onthe other hand, show me an individual, a family, a community
that yields the products of a higher moral nature, and I will pronounce that higher
moral nature to be the result of the life and light of men. (Ibid.)


Ver. 5. The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it
not.—How different men receive the light :—1. Some merely receive it to evidence their
own darkness. 2. Some by outward profession merely. 3. Others receive and impart it
as lights which are lighted by the true light. (W. Denton.) _ Darkness and light :—
I. Tue paRKNEss. 1.Of falsehood. 2. Ofhatred. 3. Of death. II. THE LIGHT IN CONTEST
WITH THE DARKNESS; or, the progress of revelation in the sinful world. 1. The
light shining in the darkness (the shaded, coloured light), 2. The light breaking
through the darkness. 3. The meridian of gospel day. (Lange.) | Christ’s pre-
incarnate activity :—I. SHINING IN THE DARKNESS. Darkness points to the Fall.
Had the union between man and the Logos continued, His life would have streamed
in light around the souls of men, inspiring them with truth and arraying them in
purity. But man severed the connection. Turning from the light, he chose a
sphere of darkness. Nevertheless, the light continued to penetrate the dark
atmosphere of ignorance and gin which thickened round man. II. RevEcTED BY
THE DARKNESS. Though the light kept on shining through (1) the teachings of
nature; (2) the intuitions of conscience; (3) the Mosaic system and the prophets ;
yet men had not hold of the light, because—1. They did not fully understand it.
2, Because they did not see it. 3. Because they did not deserve it, 4, Because


20 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. I.


hated it. (Z'. Whitelaw, D.D. The manifestations of the light of the Word
aa aarknee se The light sere the Conscrences of men. A man without a
conscience has never been born: never amidst the dreariness of heathenism—a
faculty to distinguish right from wrong, to know that the Supreme Being is pleased
with righteousness and angered at wrong-doing, and that sin will be punished.
But this light shone in darkness. Conscience persuades resistance of evil passions,
but inclination quenches the light. Conscience warns respecting the future, but is
silenced by the gratification of the present. Conscience reminds of allegiance
owing to a Creator, but the inducements of other masters drown its voice. II.
Creation glows with radiations of its Maker. But its illumination has to enter that |
darkest of spots, the human heart, where it is opposed by mists of passion, clouds é
of ignorance, the night of unwillingness to know God. Hence, in spite of the light,
men abandoned themselves to every kind of unrighteousness and fell into most
degrading superstitions. III. THe PATRIARCHAL RELIGION was derived from imme-
diate revelation. The Eternal Word <hone upon man, as soon as he had trans-
gressed, in the promises of deliverance and institutions of worship. But when men
multiplied they forgot their ancestral religion while retaining some of its features,
disguised and debased, but recognizable. Hence the universal prevalence of sacri-
fice and the hope of salvation. In every age and district of heathenism the light
has thus shone, so that men, in the midst of their idolatries, are witnesses that a
revelation has been vouchsafed. This light, too, preserved in the legends of
paganism of the Fall, Deluge, &c. Yet the slaves of superstition comprehended
not the light. IV. THe TYPES AND FIGURES OF THE LAw sent forth rays converging
towards the Sun of Righteousness, which, in the fulness of time, was to cross man’s
horizon. Yet the understanding of the Jews was so cloudy, and their hearts so
gross, that they substituted the type for the antitype. V. What can be declared
of those who are privileged with the full shining of rox GosprL? The theology of
conscience, creation, tradition, type, fade away from the revelation of these last
days. The true light now shineth. How? Men are insensible to it. By placing
men under a variety of dispensations God would prove that no amount of light will
suffice to illuminate fallen creatures unless the Holy Spirit purge the sight. The
sun may be in the heavens, but if the light in us be darkness, we shall not be
illumined by his beams. The Holy Spirit alone can remove that darkness. (H.
Melvill, B.D.) Darkness and blindness :—If persons who can see are shut up
together with others who are blind, in a perfectly dark room, the seeing and the
blind are in the same situation; no object is perceived by any, no colours dis-
cerned; but if light is introduced into the room, there is then a wonderful
difference. To those who are endowed with sight, every object appears in its
true form and just colouring; but to the blind all things remain as they were;
they are in darkness still; and this because the darkness is in themselves. So it is
with the outward revelation of Divine truth : while it is withheld, all are in darkness,
but it may shine not only on those who live, and are awake, and can see, but also
on the dead, and onthe sleeping, and on the blind. (J. Fawcett, M.A.) Men in
darkness :—There are some vines that never actually come to the surface ; they can
scarcely be called vines—they are roots, rather, whose home is in the earth. They
feed on the loam, and not on the sunshine. Grow as much as they may, they are
never anything but a prolongation of fibres. They are earth-eaters; they live in
the soil and they die in the soil, They add nothing to the beauty of the landscape ;
and among the higher orders of life and growth their names are never mentioned.
So it is with some men; they are only human roots, that might become men. They
live underground. All the fibres of their lives suck in earthiness. Their growth
is all lateral. They spread out on all sides. They are never lifted up into moral
and spiritual expression. They are of the earth, earthy. They die where they
lived, and God alone knows what becomes of them. We only know that the
Divine life is not in them, and, therefore, the Divine destiny cannot be. For there
is no destiny that does not germinate here. (W. H. H. Murray.) The dense
darkness of the period when the true light appeared :—At no time was it so universal
or so deep. All the powers and principles of the world had been tried to the utter-
most, and found utterly wanting. The religion of heathenism had stretched to that
extent that, according to Varro, there were three hundred different gods in Rome
alone. The Romans had consummated their idolatry by deifying their emperors
and great men, and so had degraded themselves to the basest form of man-worship.
The Greeks had speculated in religion till they had brought themselves to a convic-
tion and acknowledgment of their ignorance, as testified in their altar inscribed at


dia atiadh be his 8s me ey po 4s SR RR a ee a


CHAP. I.] ST. JOHN. 21


Athens, the very seat of religion (Acts xvii. 22 devowWaipoveorepove) and learning, “ to
the Unknown God.” Their wisdom and philosophy had burnt itself out ; and there
was no longer any one of their successive schools of doctrine, however formerly
dogmatic, which now had an ascendency even among themselves. The Eclectic
school had selected something from each of them, and in so doing had condemned
them all; and even thus it had not obtained a privilege for itself; for so each
person was, of course, at liberty to make his own selection; and so every one in
effect condemned every other, and no one gave to any other, or obtained for him-
self, any respect. The Powers of the world were also in their last stage, both of
greatness and corruption. The Babylonian empire was represented by a golden
head; the Persian by a breast of silver; the Grecian by thighs of brass: aud now
the Roman had swallowed up all other nations, and was become universal ; but its
substance was iron; it was the last of the worldly empires; it was tottering to its
fall with its own weight and immensity; it was but feet and toes, base, divided,
corrupted, and diseased, and was about to crumble into ruins. The religion of the
Jews had also run its course, and had at this time fermented into a new separation.
The general mass had corrupted itself. The law of ceremonies had lost its own
small portion of life—vegetable life—and had become a mere dead letter only,
graven in stone, as obstinate and immovable—a withered and dry tree—yet still
raising its barren and leafless branches with proud and pompous pride, and self-
conceit, and defiance: but its barrenness had procured it disrespect and distrust,
and men refused to shadow under its shadowless top, and even its own vitality was
denied and disregarded by the Sadducees. At the same time a spiritual seed had
been sown, not resting in the letter; not branching from the now spiritless trunk ;
but, though small, and lowly, and young, and tender, having yet the real principle
of life within it, and meet for the digging, and pruning, and watering of the
husbandman. At this time, in the fulness of preparation and unpreparedness, of
superstition and infidelity, of ignorance and learning, of power and weakness, of
evil and good, of hope and unbelief, Christ came in the flesh ; the Sun of light and
life was embodied, to convince and dispel the darkness, to lighten the ignorance, to
overcome the power, to consume the dry tree, to vivify the green tree, to divide
between day and night, between the good and evil, to rule over the one, to condemn
and expel the other. (S. R. Bosanquet.) God’s candles are and have been ever
shining :—This world has never been given over to the unchallenged reign of dark-
ness: there have always been souls wherein the life has been kindled, and through
whom it has shot its rays into the world’s gloom—God’s candles lighted and placed
according to His own will. In this respect the Father of lights has never been left
without witness. (J. Culross, D.D.) The condition of receiving the light :—It is
a fact in physical nature that the sunlight passes through empty space, and neither
warms nor lights it. Climb up to the top of the highest mountains at noonday,
and the stars come out. The air is thin—it is therefore dark ; we see only by as
much light as is intercepted. So with yourear. That alone is music which you
hear. That is pleasure which you feel. That which your nerve does not report to

ou does not exist. It is precisely so in morals. There must be something to
intercept the light, or that light itself is nothing. It was so with Christ. He was
an infinite light. He sat there where there was no soul. They do not know He
was God. Itis soto-day. Hesits among men. He is not God to those who only
call Him God. You teach a man nothing if you only teach him to do that. The
souls that intercept His rays, to them He is God. There is not one to whom all of
God is revealed, because there is no soul that can intercept all there was in Jesus.
The light still shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not.
Have whatever soul we may, there is ever more soul to be gained. Even Paul said
the one yearning of his soul was to apprehend that for which also he was appre-
hended. (Octavius Perinchief.) The historical parallel to the truth of the text :—
This fact respecting Christ, that His light shone in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not, hath its parallel in history respecting all truth. All the
substances of nature, and all their laws, have been in being, certainly, ever since
man has existed. Why did man not see them? Steam has been a fact ever since
heat was first applied to water. How was it that man knew it not? The electric
current has passed round this earth ever since the earth was made. How is it
man but yesterday discovered it ? Facts as plain as the daylight have been staring
man in the face, sporting with him, and he sat there in his blindness and knew
them not. To-day, endless facts, things we sadly need, are across our path; we
are stumbling over them, and yet see them not, Coal lay in the earth, how many


22 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. I.
na ene MEE e NT

years? oil, how many centuries? Men needed them both. Why are they but now
found to be serviceable? We say that things come just as man wants them. That
is true. God must look in very pity upon us. Our misfortune is, we want not yet
the tithe of what He is rich enough to give: “ The light shineth in the darkness,
and the darkness comprehended it not.” Men are everywhere hunting fortunes.
Where are they hunting them? With the old muck-rake. Why not open the eye?
Why not introduce ourselves to some of the wonders that are yearning to make
themselves known to us? We think a man is crazy when he begins to see. (I bid.)
The light needed :—Pythagoras admitted the necessity of Divine interposition to
teach man his duty. Zenophanes died at the age of nearly one hundred years, and
is said to have thus expressed himself: “‘ Oh, that mine were the deep mind, prudent
and looking to both sides! Long, alas! have I strayed on the road of error, beguiled,
and am now hoary of years, yet disposed to doubt and distraction of all kinds; for,
wherever I turn to consider, I am lost in the One and All.” Heraclitus, after all
his researches, asserted that ‘Vain man hath no accurate knowledge which is
possessed alone by the God, but that man learns from the God as the boy does from
the man.”? Socrates saw and confessed his ignorance, and deplored the want of a
superior direction. Aristotle’s last prayer was, ‘‘I entered the world corruptly, I
have lived in it anxiously, I quit it in perturbation.” Cicero confessed that no
excellence could exist without a celestial afflation. MHierocles and Seneca tell us
that but by the help of God no man can become either good or prosperous; so that
he who would repudiate the necessity of a Divine revelation to lead him by the Holy
Spirit into all truth arrogates a power which the greatest reasoners of ancient times
disclaimed. Without Christ—darkness :—Varro, 2 Roman writer of the first
century, B.c., states that, in his day, he had been at the pains to collect the various
opinions on the question, ‘* What is the true object of human life?” in other words,
‘What is the supreme good ?”? He had reckoned up as many as three hundred and
twenty different answers. How needful is Divine revelation, and how essential to
those who are starting in life, that a heavenly guide should teach them the true end
and purpose of earthly existence ! The darkness of the natural mind :—A good
many years ago, in Washington, there were two Congressioners who met once every
week to talk about the immortality of the soul; but they despised the Bible. They
found no comfort. Their time expired, and they went home. Years passed along.
They both visited Washington at the same time, and happened to meet at the presi-
dent’s levée. They saw each other at a great distance across the room. They
pressed their way through the crowd until they came to each other, and, after years
of absence, the first thing that one said to the other was: ‘John, any light?”
“No light.” Then this one accosted the other, and said: ‘ Henry, any light?”
“No light.” They said nothing more; they parted to meet at the judgment. Oh,
are there any who have swung off from this grand old gospel of Jesus Christ,
thinking to find rest for their soul? Have you found comfort, peace, joy, heaven ?
From a score of souls there comes up to me the cry to-night, ‘No light! no light!”
(T. de Witt Talmage.) Christ is full of light :—Going into a village at night, with
the lights gleaming on each side of the street, in some houses they will be in the
basement and nowhere else, and in others in the attic and nowhere else, and in
others in some middle chamber ; but in no house will every window gleam from top
to bottom. So is it with men’s faculties. Most of them are in darkness. One
shines here, and another there ; but there is no man whose soul is luminous through-
out. But Christ presented a perfect character. Every room in His soul was filled
with light. He is light. (H. W. Beecher.) An alternative rendering :—“ The
darkness overcame it not.” Sin did not succeed in extinguishing the inner light.
“The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord ’’—a candle lit by God’s own breath.
When man fell the candle was sadly bruised, but it did not blow out. The great
fundamental truths God planted in man continue to shine despite sin and its
grievous consequences. Accordingly the darkness of the Fall was not complete—
complete, I mean, in the sense that it could not be blacker; a little light was still
continuing to glimmer—candle-light, if you like, but light all the same. Much talk
is indulged in concerning original sin, though not quite as much as in former years;
but we ought also to speak of original light, a light deeper and more primitive even
than our sin. Do I not believe in the total depravity of the race? Yes, in the sense
that every power is more or less tangled, that every faculty is more or less corrupt.
No, in the sense that the derangement could not be greater, that the putridity could
not be more advanced. The confusion and depravity here are great, but in hell they
are considerably greater. So far a little light doubtless glimmers in the soul of


ee Oger igh fs ting ay


—


a i a a


onp. 1.] ST. JOHN. 23


every man on his coming into this world; the golden beams of the Sun of Righteous-
ness are to be seen playing in the mental faculties of childhood. ‘‘ The light shineth
in darkness ’’—the darkness of our fall—‘‘ and the darkness overcame it not’”’; the
light still burns. But if the darkness did not overcome the light, on the other hand
the light did not overcome the darkness. In the other world, the world prior to the
Incarnation, the light and the darkness confronted each other without making much
impression one on the other. The darkness did not conquer the light, neither did
the light conquer the darkness; and if the light is to win the victory, it must
receive an ample increase, and this increase we find in the gospel of Jesus Christ.
(J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.)


Ver. 6. There was a man sent from God whose name was John.—The fore-
runner :—I, THE mission oF THE Baptist. 1. It was immediately connected with
the appearance of the Word in the flesh. 2. It was of God. And as His mission
so his name, 3. It had as its special end to testify of Christ. 4. Its aim was to
bring sinners to believe in Christ. This was not merely God’s intention, but his
own desire, All true ministers have the same object. 5. It contemplated ‘‘all” to
whom he addressed himself. II. TH DISTINCTION BETWEEN CHRIST AND JoHN. 1.
A current error was corrected. Men thought John the Christ. He confessed him-
self only the friend of the Bridegroom, the witness-bearer of the Light. 2. This
correction vindicated the proper glory of Christ. All honour to the witness, but the
glory of the light cannot be given to another. 3. In the marked distinction between
the forerunner and Him “who coming after him was preferred before him,” over-
weening thoughts of mere instruments, however valuable, are reproved. 4. John’s
honour consisted in his proclamation of his Master’s glory. Nor was this honeur
denied him. Ministers are esteemed for their works’ sake. 5. The distinction in
Christ’s case from John and all His ministers is that He is ‘‘ the true Light which
lighteth every man that cometh into the world.” (A. Beith, D.D.) The mission
of John and of Christ :—I. THE TRUE NATURE OF A CHRISTIAN MINISTER’S OFFICE. 1.
Ministers are not priests or mediators, 2. They are not agents into whose hands
men may commit their souls, and carry on their religion by deputy. 3. They are
witnesses (Acts i. 8; ii. 40; xx. 21). II. ONE PRINCIPAL POSITION WHICH oUR Lorp
OCCUPIES TOWARDS MANKIND. As light. 1. He is the centre and source of all
spiritual illumination, warmth, life, health, growth, beauty, and fertility. 2. He
shines for the common benefit of mankind—for high and low, rich and poor, Jew
and Greek. 3. He is free to all. III. Tam DESPERATE WICKEDNESS OF MAN’S
NATURAL HEART. 1. Christ was in the world invisibly long before He was born
(Col. i. 17). Yet He was neither known nor honoured. 2. But Christ came visibly
into the world when He was born at Bethlehem and fared no better. His own
rejected Him. IV. THE VAST PRIVILEGES OF ALL WHO RECEIVE CHRIST AND BELIEVE
on Him. 1. The privileges are those of children. 2. These privileges are to be
possessed by faith (Gal. iii. 26). 3. Are we sons of God? Have we the marks of
Sonship. 4. Do we desire to be sons of God? Then we must receive Him as
Saviour. (Bp. Ryle.) The ministry of men:—I. A special way whereby Christ
shineth to the world, and helpeth the world to know Him, is the MINISTRY OF MEN ;
whereby—1. He condescendeth to our weakness, who could not endure more
glorious instruments. 2. Trieth our obedience and acknowledgment of His
authority in the weak messengers. 3. Maketh manifest that the excellency of the
power whereby they do so great things is of Him. II. Mrnistrrs or Curist MUST
NOT RUN UNSENT, but ought to have a calling from God, either extraordinary (in
extraordinary times and cases) or ordinary ; as being that which will afford them
matter of courage in undertaking their work, of comfort under difficulties, and of
hope of success ; for so John was a man sent from God; to wit, in an extraordinary
way, as Christ’s forerunner. III. MINISTERS WILL IN A MOST LIVELY WAY PROCLAIM
THAT GRACE OF GOD BRINGING SALVATION WHO HAVE THEMSELVES OBTAINED GRACE AND
Favour Brit. And it is a sweet thing when men. prove answerable to these names
and titles which Scripture giveth them because of their Christian profession ; for
this forerunner’s name was John, a name given by the angel, which signifieth one
to whom the Lord had been gracious that he might actively proclaim the same to
others, and a name to which John’s carriage was answerable. IV. THE CHIEF AND
SPECIAL END OF A MINISTRY, is to point out Christ in His excellences and usefulness
to lost men, to declare Him in His person, offices, and benefits, how He should be
believed in, served or suffered for; John came to bear witness of Christ in His
glorious excellency, and as He is the light of dark man, in his comforts and


24 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. ,CHAP. I.
np a aaa
directions. V. MrisTeRs ARE TO PREACH CHRIST WITH PLAINNESS AND FIDELITY 10
not adding or diminishing with boldness and constancy. VI. THE END AND SCOPE
OF A MINISTER’S WITNESSING and preaching, is, and should be, to bring self-condemned
sinners to believe in Christ ; his preaching of the law and wrath is in order to that,


and to bring men to see their need of Christ, and should be joined with the doctrine —


of the gospel ; his preaching of the doctrine of sanctification and holiness should be
joined eith the abouts of Faith in Christ, from whom virtue floweth for that end.
(G@. Hutcheson.) The witness of the Light :—I. His APPEARANCE. “There came” —
suggesting origination, commencement, dependence, mutability, decay, in opposi-
tion to the Word whose creature He was (ver: 3). II. His nature. ‘‘A man.’

Parted from the Word who was God: although honoured by the near relationship
in which he stood to the Word asinstrument, minister, herald, and forerunner. III.
His name. “Jehovah is gracious”—a fitting designation of one whose birth was a
gift of grace (Luke i. 18), whose manhood was the flower and fruit of grace (Luke i.
80), and whose life work was to be a publisher of grace (Luke i. 76). IV. His
uisston. 1. In its character, prophetic. 2. In its authority, Divine. 3. In its
work, witness-bearing. 4. In its object, saving. V. His ReLaTion To THE LiGHT.
1. Negatively. 2. Positively (ver. 8). (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) The personality of
John :—I image to myself a man of calm, saintly look, with eyes that seemed to
pierce the invisible, moving men not by his wild gesticulations, but by the deep
solemnity of his spirit, the simple, fearless truth he spoke, and his appeal to the
Messianic longings and hopes which then prevailed. Withdrawn from the luxurious
world, with its enervating and selfish influences, he had lived to the age of thirty
among the mountains west of the Dead Sea, preparing in solitude for the brief but
great work of his life. He is, however, no hermit cut off from his fellow-men and
taking no interest in their affairs, but a keen observer and discerner; and at the
appointed hour he steps suddenly forward, crying to the nation, “‘ Repent,” ‘‘ Behold
the Lamb of God!” (J. Culross, D.D.) The character of John :—The Baptist
was characterized by—I. Strenetu. If ever there was a man unlike the little reed
that gives itself to be tossed by the wind (Matt. xi. 7) it was John, Your strong
man is self-conscious. He has presided over the slow and painful elaboration of
his character. He has looked on with satisfaction at the stiffening of his moral
fibre into steel, and knows what it is worth. Humility has never been a feature of
strong Jewish natures. Yet this strong man says, ‘‘ He that cometh after me is
stronger (toyupdrepoc) than I.” II, InpEPENDENcE. Yet like David in God’s
presence declaring, ‘‘I will be base in my own sight,” so the Baptist exclaims,
‘‘ Whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose.”” III. Above all, purrry. An effective
moral teacher must in purity of manhood stand upright. Never could he have
brought men to repentance if he had not himself repented. The words ‘‘generation
of vipers” would have been a mere scream of impotent rage if he had not crushed
the serpent in his own heart. Yet, in the presence of Jesus, that pure soul seems
black like the waters of a mountain lake in the neighbourhood of the newly fallen
snow. The baptism of water he knew; of the baptism of fire, searching and sifting
to the marrow, he recognized the need—‘‘I have need to be baptized of Thee.”
(Bp. Alexander.)


_ Ver. 7. The same came for a witness.—A witness is wanted in the period of
ignorance and darkness. Such a witness is the moon, which reflects a borrowed
portion of light from the sun, and so assures us of him; but when the sun itself
arises, himself becomes invisible, and as not existing. His borrowed light also is
temporary and changeable. It waxes and wanes, and is sometimes full, and round,
and perfect almost as the sun himself; at other times it diminishes and decays, and
dies away till it is invisible. So the prophets had the Holy Spirit by time and by
measure; and sometimes they were bright and luminous, and shone, as it were
with a celestial and perfect brightness; but then at other times, again, the Spirit in
them declined and departed, and left them only the dark lump, waiting till its office
should again return, of reflecting some greater or less portion of the sun’s own
proper rays, and invisible till illuminated. But when the sun itself arose upon the
world, this should be the sign of him. The light by which he shone should be
his own; and should be in himself, and inherent in him. When the Spirit of
God should descend upon him; when the hitherto unembodied light should find
this rest, and take this place and station—the embodied Sun of Righteousness, and
the light and life, the Divinity itself should be incarnate—then, this Spirit of God
the Godhead itself so united to man, should be the sign of the expected Messiah,


a a


CHAP. I.] ST. JOHN. 25
and the witness himself become extinct, in this the last triumphant exercise of his
office and witness. (S. R. Bosanquet.) The witness of the light :—Does the light
then need that witness should be borne to it? Is not light its own evidence? Yes

if men have eyes to see; but because they lay in the darkness and slumber of sin,
it was necessary to arouse them, and to give testimony to the true light, distinguish-
ing it from all false lights that could only lure to death. In an obvious sense, ‘the
law and the prophets” formed a great system of “ witness” to the coming On:

(Acts x. 43; Rom. iii. 21, 22); but it required completing, and John’s ministry wa
the completion of it—the grand close of the prophetic symphony. The morning
star, day’s harbinger, bears witness of the sun, by shining in his light; and so alsa
does the mountain top, kindled with the first rays of morning, to the dwellers in
the deep valley beneath, or the far-stretching plain. But John’s testimony went
beyond even this: he not merely preceded the Messiah, closing the prophetic line,
but, having first aroused the nation by that cry, ‘‘ Repent,” he actually introduced
and named Him to Israel. (J. Culross, D.D.) The force of testimony :—
Testimony is like an arrow shot from a long-bow; the force of it depends on the
strength of the hand that draws it. Argument is like an arrow from a cross-bow,
which has equal force though shot by a child. (Lord Bacon.)


Ver. 8. He was not that Light.—The personality of the Baptist:—I. John the
Baptist was WELL Born. The best Jewish blood flowed in his veins. Hereditary
forces are the conservative forces of society. Voice, stature, longevity, mental and
moral qualities descend from one generation to another. It is not true, however,
that inherited tendencies necessarily make character. If this were so there could be
no adyance or retrogression. A child could be no better, no worse than his parent.
Every mind is an original power for good or evil. Still, be thankful, Timothy, that
Eunice was your mother; John, that Zacharias and Elizabeth were your parents.
IJ. He was wELL TRAINED. Jewish homes did not let go the training of children.
Training tells more than birth in formation of character. Faith, reverence,
obedience, courage, humility, are elements of a soldierly training. Let a child see
love illustrated at home, and if he cannot be scolded into the Lord’s ranks he may
be won. III. He was A man oF couraGE (Matt. iii. 1-10). Witness his treatment
of the dominant Jewish parties and Herod, This was a real quality, not an affecta-
tion. Ask for no trimmers in the pulpit. In the long run the brave man is
popular. IV. He was A MAN oF HUMILITY (vers. 29-36). How hard for one
preacher to be overshadowed by another, not in some remote town, but round the
corner! Let every man do his level best, and, if beaten honourably, rejoice in
another’s success. V. He was A MAN OF DouBT. But he took his doubts to Jesus,
and had them resolved. Doubter, let Jesus speak for Himself. (B. J. Hoadley.)
The danger of mistaking John for Christ:—To mistake the forerunner for the
Messiah, the Baptist for the Christ, the man for the Lord, was not the first charac-
teristic blunder of the Church against her Divine Head. It repeated Eve’s mistake
of her firstborn for the firstborn of God. If we had not seen the subsequent errors
of the Church, we should have been almost tempted to count John’s statement un-
necessary, perhaps gratuitous, that the Baptist was “not that Light.” The only
true relation of any ordinance is that of testimony to Christ. At the point where
an ordinance ceases to testify of Christ, there it begins to betray Him. Then the
betrayal of a Judas is followed by the denial of a Peter. The agency of priestcraft
is at the bottom in either case. A false apostle sells, false priests buy, and Christ
is crucified between them. The symbol of the thirty pieces of silver is, the
nominal Christian barters to the nominal Jew the Divine reality. And so it has
been in allages and with every heresy. You cannot reconcile priestcraft and Christ-
craft : they are the antagonism of God and mammon. The process is in every case
essentially the same, confounding the testifier with the thing testified. Men began
first to mingle representative rites with spiritual realities, then inseparably to unite
them, and lastly to identify forms with the spiritual facts which they symbolized.
Hence arose the transubstantiation of one sacrament, and the transpiritualism of
the other. Transubstantiation, which identifies the Lord’s body with the bread and
wine which He appointed as its symbolic testifiers, and transpiritualism, which
identifies the baptism of the Spirit with that of water, are cognate heresies. ‘he
ordinance, in either case, displacing the Ordainer, the form neutralizing the fact,
and compelling us to protest against sacramentalism on behalf of the sacraments,
as well as on the part of the Saviour, that sacramental elements are “not that
Light, but sent to bear witness of that Light.” (J. B. Owen, M.A.) The secondary


26 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. 1
(je ne DAS WURDE ES
light :—The brightest light which the hand of man can enkindle is instantly paled
when the sun shineth in hisstrength. Beautiful indeed is that secondary light when
shining alone, and not beautiful only, but precious, exceedingly to men who without
it would be in darkness; yet, could it speak, it would say, ‘Iam but a spark of
another fire; your admiration’of my splendour will cease when you see the sun.”
Such is the speech of the most luminous men. Our light is lunar, not solar, or
solar only because Christ is in us; and according to the measure of our capacity He
sheds His glory through our life. (J. Parker, D.D.) A witness to the Light :—
He is content to claim for his master as for himself the noblest human work, ‘to
bear witness of that Light.” No one may add to it; all may, in word and life, bear
witness to it. very discovery in science and advance in truth is a removal of some
cloud which hides it from men; every noble character is bearing it about; every
conquest of sin is extending it. It has been stored in mines of deepest thought in
all ages. The heedless pass over the surface unconscious of it. The world’s
benefactors are they who bring it forth to men as the light and warmth of the rays
of the Sun of Righteousness. (H.W. Watkins, D.D.) The exact position of John
in relation to Christ :—Just as when we see some object lit up by the sun’s beams,
we are aware that the sun has risen, though we may not be able actually to see him
ourselves; and just as a man, however weak may be his power of sight, at any rate
is able to look at a mountain or tree shone upon by the sun, though he may not yet
be able to look at the glorious luminary itself; so in like manner did John give light
to those who as yet were not able to look at Christ, and through him, while he
acknowledged that his light was that cast upon him by the rays of another, the
shining and enlightening One Himself was perceived and recognized. (Augustine.)
Other witnesses to Christ besides St. John :—Was the saying less true of Jeremiah
preaching beside the temple that was to be desolate, of Ezekiel preaching by the
river of Chebar? Was it less true of St. Peter on the day of Pentecost, of St. Paul
at Antioch? Was it less true of Bernard, of Francis of Assisi, of Luther, of any
man who in later days has awakened men out of the slumber of death? What can
be said of each except this, ‘“The same came for a witness’”?? What would each
have said of himself but this, ‘‘I am not that Light,'but am come to bear witness of
that Light”? (F. D. Maurice.) The true glory of John :—John is something truly
great, of vast merit, of exceeding grace, placed on a high eminence. Admire him
we must, but how? as a mountain height, which, unless irradiated by the sun,
abides in darkness. Therefore raise your thoughts to Him, who illumines this
mountain top, elevated for the very purpose of first receiving the light, and so of
imparting it to your eyes otherwise pained with so great a glare. John was a light
lighted ; Christ was a light-giving Light. (Augustine.)


Ver. 9. That was the true Light.— The true Light which lighteth every man :—I.
CHRIST IS THE TRUE LicHt. This is seen when we reflect that—1. He is the source
of all the knowledge we have of the Divine Being—His relation to us, His infinite
love, and the wonderful plan of salvation He has devised. 2. He is the source of
all the knowledge we have of the life beyond. 3. He is the source of all the con:
solation we experience under the pressure of trial. II. Hr wiGHTETH EVERY MAN.
1. The general direction which the beams of the true Light are here directed to take
is a marvellous instance of His condescension. The noble chandelier which floods
the throne-room of the palace with its dazzling light throws not a single ray into
the murky gloom of the squalid courts not far away. That Christ, the trae Light
should dart His beams downwards to this abiding-place of sin is part of the
wonderfulness of the gospel which we preach. 2. To Him we owe the gift of
reason, which is one of the two great foundation stones of natural religion. 3. He
has placed within us the gift of conscience—God’s eye and voice, a witness against
ourselves. 4. The proclamation of the gospel in every land. III. Taz truer Licur
If MADE EVIDENT FROM THE WORKING or His Spirit AND GRAcE. (H. W. Price).
Christ's light is—I. The light of naruran reason, which He has given us to cultivate
and improve, for the benefit of ourselves and others, especially in the great concerns
of religion. This light, which even the Gentiles had, was sufficient to have led
them to the knowledge of the true God, and, by the visible works of the creation
to understand His “‘ eternal power and Godhead” (Rom. i. 10). II. The light of
REVELATION. By this light His will has been made known to us in the Holy Scrip-
tures ; the religion of nature commenced revealed; and the lesser light of natural
reason was not extinguished by, but absorbed in, revelation. This further light
was typified to us by the Shechinah in the tabernacle, and by that bright cloud by


a


ae
:


ae a ae}


CHAP, 1.| ST. JOHN, 27
ree ee (eS ay Pree ES Be tee er SE
day and pillar of fire by night which conducted the Israelites through the wilder-
ness. IIT. The-light of the aospru: and this is represented by that noblest and
brightest of all the heavenly luminaries, the Sun; Christ Himself, who is therefore
styled “‘the Sun of Righteousness,” having now arisen on His Church “ with
healing in His wings.” This is the light which constitutes our present day. IV.
The last and most perfect light of all will be that of aLory, which shall never set,
nor ever change. But this light none shall ever behold who neglect the use of those
lesser lights, who advance not gradually from reason to revelation, from revelation
to faith, from faith to glory. (Wogan.) The arrival of the Light :—I. Its nature.
“ True,” not the genuine as opposed to the false, but the substantial, the essential,
the original, the permanent, as opposed to the shadowy, phenomenal, derived,
transitory. II. Irs mrnvence. Set forth—1. Intensively, it lighteth. 2. Ex-
tensively, as reaching to every man, i.e., to all mankind, in the sense that its light
exists for all, and to some degree shines on all, and to all souls who inwardly admit
its beams. III. Its conprrion, described as—1. Coming into the world, z.e., in pro-
cess of passing from a Divine and Eternal into a human and temporal mode of
existence, and—2. Coming into His own, i.e.,as unfolding His glory before the
theocratic people. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) The true Light :—I. He is unpEcEIvine
light, the true light in opposition to all the false lights of the Gentiles. II. He is
REAL light, true in opposition to ceremonial types and shadows. III. He is unpE-
RIVED light, true in opposition to all light that is borrowed, communicated, or par-
ticipated from another. IV. He is suprRemrnent light, true in opposition to all
that is ordinary and common. (Arrowsmith.) Christ the Enlightener :—Jesus
Christ enlightening every man—I. From wirutn, i.e., in the intuitive conceptions of
the mind. 1. This light is internal, shining in the mental constitution of every man.
What was life in the Word pre-incarnate was light or reason in men. 2. This
light is innate in every man. “ That was the true Light which lighteth every man
as he cometh,” &c., is a translation of many scholars. God takes care to write
His name on the soul of every man; human nature bears the sign-manual of its
Maker in its deepest constitution (Rom. i, 19, ‘‘in them’”’). 3. This light is Divine,
the same in its nature as that which illuminates God Himself. The light proceeding
from the sun is the same as that which resides in the sun. 4. This light is per-
sistent. It continues to shine notwithstanding the Fall and its consequences—
‘“‘lighteth,’”’ present tense. II. From witHout, in the revealed doctrines of Chris-
tianity. 1. It is a supernatural light: not unnatural, or contranatural, for the most
perfect correspondence obtains between the natural and the supernatural. Railway
companies often possess running powers on each other’s property, and the natural
and the supernatural often run their trains on each other’s lines. The latter is
only an extension of the former. 2. It is a perfect light : true, 7.e., the complete
as opposed to the imperfect, the full as opposed to the partial. Christ is this; not
aray wanting. You may see God through the creation, but you may see Him in
Jesus Christ. 3. It is a universal light, (1) It enlightens every man that cometh
into the world. ‘The perfect is always universal. ‘‘Go ye into all the world,

The Sun of Christianity is as all-pervasive as the sun of nature. (2) It enlightens
every man that goeth out of the world. It can penetrate the blackest recesses of the
dark mountains along which you are descending, and dissipate the mist of the
swelling flood, and illumine your way right into the unseen. (3) it enlightens the
world into which you are going. ‘‘ The Lamb is the light thereof.”’ (J. Cynddylan
Jones, D.D.) The Light of the world :—There has been a threefold revelation of
the Word. I. THroveH natuRE. ‘In the beginning,” before there was ear to hear
or mind to understand—the mind of God was speaking with itself. There was @&
Word. Then—1. The Word is spoken of as bringing the world into being, i.e.,
God’s Word found utterance in creation, A word is an expression or a work. The
most expressive of all are not those which the lips speak. ‘The American sculptor
gazed upon the sky upon a summer’s morning. He went about haunted with the
memory of it. It was a necessity for him to express it. Had he been a poet he
would have thrown it into words; a painter, on canvas; an architect, into a build-
ing ; but being a sculptor his thoughts and syllables were expressed in stone. This
world is God’s sculptured work whereby He speaks out Himself. ; 2. This creation
is a pervading immanence. ‘‘ He was in the world.” Creation is not the work of
a Divine watchmaker, who winds it up, leaves it to go by itself, interfering now and
then in great emergences called miracles. He is in the world, the life of all that
is. The world is the form of which Christ is the Personality. The beauty of the
sea-shell and of the field-flower is the loveliness of God. The world is an everlast


ya
28 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHap. 1
nnn MeN Ne is ee N,
ing anthem hymning God’s secrets. Il, Turoven man. 1. Universally : * lighteth
every man.” Just as the sunlight shines on all, more intensely in the tropics, more
feebly at the poles, yet shines on all. Your reason and conscience are the God
within you. Thus the Fathers spoke of the wisdom of Plato and others as the un-
conscious Christ within them. Thus, too, in the Old Testament rulers and judges
are called “ gods” (John x. 35, 36). 2. Specially: ‘‘ He came to Hisown.” The
distinction is between those who received the light common to every man and those
who received the special illumination which entitled them to be His own—the
Jewish people, the inspired people. Inspiration is God’s acting on man’s higher
spirit—his worship and reverence. There is an inspiration of genius, but the
inspiration of the prophet is another thing altogether. The Jews were not great
statesmen, artists, scientists; but the thought of God, the sanctity of duty, moral
and spiritual truth were in them as in no other nation on earth. IL. TuroveH THE
Incarnation. God manifested Himself not through what Jesus taught or spoke,
but through what Jesus was and did. 1. Christ was not a transient theophany
like the burning bush, the Angel of the Covenant, or the Shechinah glory. 2. But
God Himself in man and with man for ever. The application is—(1) That all that
can be known of God is through a revelation. The light of revelation is not
contrary to, but complementary of, the light of nature. (2) That revelation is pro-
gressive. In the world; with the world; made flesh. In the world unconsciously
in nature ; nearer in man; nearest in Christ ; the time is coming when He will be
still nearer, ‘‘ when we shall see Him as He is.” (F. W. Robertson, M.A.) Christ
the Light of all the living :—I. EvERY MAN COMES INTO THE WORLD WITH A LIGHT IN
nim. Dim in infancy, but ready to be fanned by educational influences; dark in
heathenigm, but glimmering amongst fogs of superstition. This light reflects—
1. On social obligation. Every man has the sense of right and wrong. 2. On
religious worship: the sentiment of a God is universal. 3. On future retribution:
reference to a future life of reward and punishment instinctive. That all men have
their light is clear—(1) From history. Its rays may be seen in the best heathen, in
their sacred books, and even amongst the most degraded tribes. (2) From the Word
of God (Rom.i.), It is absurd to deny its existence because it burns dimly under
the glass of ignorance, and never throws a false hue on duty and destiny, &e. Any
light is better than darkness. A manuscript may contain truth, although part
may be torn away. II. THe LIGHT IN EVERY MAN Is FRoM Curist. This fact—l.
Exalts Christ as the Creator of souls (ver. 2). He puts this inextinguishable light
in them. 2, Reveals the responsibility of heathens. They are not in utter dark-
ness. Itis amongst them in those elements of truth by living up to which they
may be accepted of God. Thus heathen salvation is not independent of Christ.
3. Furnishes an argument for the congruity of Christianity with human nature.
Both the natural and the gospel light come from one gource in Christ and
harmonize with each other. 4. Supplies a motive to extend the light of
the gospel. Although Christ gave men natural light, He saw their need of a
higher light, and became flesh and died to give it. (D. Thomas, D.D.)
Christ our revealing Light:—I once spent a night on Mount Righi, and there
was nothing visible for a rod from my window. But when the morning broke,
the icy crowns of the Jungfrau and the Schreckhorn began to glitter in the early
beams. They had been there all the night, waiting for the unfoldings of the dawn.
Even so have all God’s laws of the material universe and all His purposes of
redeeming mercy through Jesus Christ been in existence from the beginning. They
only waited for the dayspring of discovery. And one of the most delightful occupa-
tions of a devout mind is to watch the unfoldings of God, and to drink in new
truths as He gradually reveals them. (Theodore L. Cuyler.) Jesus our Light :—
A visitor went one cold day last spring to see a poor young girl, kept at home by a
lame hip. The room was on the north side of a bleak house. It was nota pleasant
prospect without, nor was there much that was pleasant or cheerful within. Poor
girl! what a cheerless life she has of it, he thought, as he saw how she was situated :
and he immediately said to himself, what a pity it was her room was on the north
side of the house. ‘“ You never have any sun,” he said; ‘‘not a ray comes in at
these windows. That I call a misfortune. Sunshine is everything; I love the
sun.” ‘‘Oh,” she answered, with the sweetest smile, ‘my sun pours in at every
window, and even through the cracks.” The visitor looked surprised, ‘The Sun
of Righteousness,” she said, softly—‘‘ Jesus. He shines in here and makes every-
thing bright to me.” Who could doubt her? She looked perfectly happy. Yes!
Jesus shining in at the window can make any spot beautiful and any home


>


se


a le | al Rat | F


j


cHaP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 29
aS eek ae ee Sie PE tN a SS iy avin is Ee ey oe of BS

happy. Christ the interpreter of human life :—I. How rar 1s THIS ‘TRUE?
Is it not rather sin which explains it? Its facts meet us everywhere, and
sum up the life of the individual and the nation. We see them and feel their
curse. But do they explain all? Are there not stirrings of the awakened
conscience, longings of the soul for its lost innocence, better hopes, holier re-
solves, efforts to lay hold of God? Whence have these come? From the Light.
Sin, so far from interpreting life, is its confusion. ‘“ The path of the just is as the
shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.’ But sin has
obscured it all; caused its power and promise to be wasted, changed its blessing
into a curse, quenched its light in darkness. A saved soul—that is consistent; a
lost soul—there is bewilderment in the very thought. We cannot understand our
own being till Christ gives us light; then our darkness passes, and the true light
shineth. II. It is not only true that salvation in Christ is the end which alone
makes human life intelligible—rHe Law oF LIFE IN CHRIST IS THE LAW ACCORDING
TO WHICH WE WERE MADE. The self-devoted Saviour is “ the Light which lighteth
every man.” Men resolve every motive into selfishness. Men are always seeking,
it is said, to please themselves. But this only confuses, There is an impulse of
self-denial which cannot thus be explained away. The father labouring for his
little ones, the mother watching over her sick child’s couch, do this for love’s sake,
and not to please themselves. The patriot denies himself for his country’s goud ;
we are often ashamed of our comforts when we reflect on the wants of others. The
impossibility of living a life wholly selfish, the inspirations of pity, the passion for
self-devotedness find their explanation in Christ. In Him we see the self-devoted
life, the only true and blessed life for man. As Christ was it would be well for us
all to be; that is what God would have us all be. All falls into harmony now;
this is the true light. III. If we turn from the quenchless impulse of devotedness
to the QUENCHLESS IMPULSE OF woRsHIP; if we ask how it was that amidst the
degradations of heathenism and the corruption of the Jews, faith itself did not die
out; if we ask how it was that though philosophers often seemed on the verge of
proclaiming that all religion was only a fiction useful for civil government, men
could not rid themselves of reverence ; if we ask how it was that in even the worst
superstitions of idolatry something may be often seen which strangely suggests to
us the gospel revelation ; again we are reminded that Christ, ‘‘ the true Light which
lighteth every man,” was in the world. He would not let them sink into utter
godlessness. He preserved in them some little longing for the true, awoke in them
some dissatisfaction with the false. IV. From tHE Cross COMES THE LIGHT WHICH
INTERPRETS THE DEEPEST AND MOST MYSTERIOUS FACTS IN HUMAN LIFE. The selfish-
ness of pride is crushed as we recognize ourselves saved not by our own righteous-
ness, but by Him that bore our curse. We have murmured that we should bear a
doom for Adam’s sin: Christ bore the doom for Adam and for us. We have
murmured at our birth into a state of sin and suffering. But Christ was born into
it for us. Our Christian life is interpreted here. If we are restless amid our
pleasures, if we cannot be happy, if we are yearning to be better, it is because the
Word is within us pleading with us to receive Him. If we have not been allowed to
sink amidst temptations, to rest in a life of ungodliness, and if there be in us purer
feelings and holier aspirations, these seek their fulfilment in Christ. (A. Mac-
kennal,D.D.) The natural light in man :—God prints His own name, He stamps
some great universal truths on the mind of every man as he cometh into the world.
Men are like so many volumes, continually issuing from the Divine press; and if
nothing else be written on them, the name of the Author and Printer is indisputably
engraved on the title-page. I do not say that the name is very legible at first,
especially since the soul has been soiled by sin, but that it is there is to me a
demonstrated truth. Take a sheet of white paper; write on it your own thoughts
—your good thoughts or your bad thoughts, just as you please—and underneath
your own signature and address. Is that all that is to be read off the paper? Nay;
hold it up to the light, and you will behold the name of the manufacturer in water-
marks. You may write on it what you like and as you like; but you will never rub
off the name of the maker. Your name is on it, but his name isin it. Thus God
has written His name in watermarks on the raw material of the soul. You may
write on it, the world may write on it, the devil may write on it; but God has
written in it—He has deeply stamped His name into the soul in its first make. The
idea of God is alighted lamp hung up in the dome of every man’s soul as he
cometh into the world, a lighted lamp flashing forth its penetrating and comforting
beams in all directions. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) Light before Christ came :—


30 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. 1.
Ye EE ee eee

must not suppose that all light of faith, of hope, of justice, of purity, of truth,
bb dawned on the world when Christ came, God has been in the world ever since
there was one, and whatever there is that is noble and good proceeded from the
inspiration of the Divine mind working upon the human soul, on all nations, in
every age, and under the ministrations of the truth as it is in Jesus. He that
brought life and immortality to light was neither supine nor slumbering, but was
working everywhere before His appearance, and whatever light of truth there has
been at any time has come from Him. When, however, He came in bodily form,
He came to interpret what only life and conduct can interpret. (H. W. Beecher.)
Christ the efficient Light :—The earthly sunlight only illumines eyes that see, but
Christ the true Light enlightens the eyes of the blind; He is at once the Eye and
Light of the world. (Brenz.) Light dawning upon man :—Standing far down in
the darkness of an icy valley, I once witnessed a sunrise in the Alps. The first
beam struck the summit of Monte Rosa, and looked like a vivid crimsom spot amid
a deep gloom; and then the rising dawn fired the summits of mountain after
mountain, and floated in a river of broadening gold down through snowy slopes,
until at last the hills and the valleys and the pine forests seemed to shout aloud,
and clap their hands, as they were flooded irresistibly with the rejoicing light.
Even so, He who is the Light which enlighteneth every man dawned with an infini-
tude of blessing upon a dark and guilty world. (Archdeacon Farrar). Christ
the true Light :—That only is ‘‘ light” which lighteth another ; and that, therefore,
which should “light ” everybody is the True, Original, Primal “Light.” Nature
teaches it. You cannot conceive of “light”? which does not emit. It must propa-
gate itself. The moment that “light” does not shed itself, it is gone out. There
is no propagation in darkness. Darkness is naked. A dark room does not darken
a light room ; but a light room will lighten a dark one. And the more ‘‘ light,” the
more it brightens—up to that Perfect ‘‘ Light” which ‘lights ” everything. The
sun “ lights” the whole world. Christ is the Sun of God’s moral system. When
the: world was four days old, God gathered all the “light ”’—which vibrated and was
diffused in the atmosphere—into one great centre: or, more accurately, He made
for all that ‘‘light”’ one great reflector to ‘“‘ rule the day”; then He made another
reflector for the sun—the moon, “ to govern the night.’? When the world was four
thousand years old He gathered all moral and spiritual “ light”—of the law, of
prophecy, of grace, of love, of hope—which was scattered and indistinct before,
into one grand depository; or, more accurately, He gave a perfect mirror, to give
back all His own lustre and glory, to be the ruler and arbiter of the Gospel Day
(Heb. i. 1). And then God made a reflector of that Divine luminary—the Church ;
the Church, to catch and disseminate its rays in a dark world; the Church, to rule
and govern the world’s night. (Sermons by the Monday Club.) The safety of
the Light :—The night is of the darkest; the moon has hid her face behind the
swift-rolling clouds, and not a star ventures to peep out upon what is going on far
below on earth. Her anchor weighed and sails broadly spread, a noble ship moves
steadily on her way, her captain on the bridge, her trusty steersman at the helm,
the watch at their posts. We hear the low, firm word of command, and feel the
movement of the vessel responding slowly to her rudder as her course is changed in
obedience to the indications of the chart, or in consequence of the observations of
the look-out. Now she rounds a rocky headland, and, passing from its shelter,
enters a narrow strait, on which, in striking contrast to the gloom behind, a flood
of brilliant light is cast from the lighthouse which stands in the centre of that
short but dangerous channel, whence it sends forth guiding rays to help mariners
who pass through from one great sea to another beyond. The light makes the
channel safe ; let it be removed, and, striking against the rocky isles which stud the
strait, the brave ship, in vain effort to escape, will beat out its life. Do you ask me
on what map you will find this channel marked? what are the names of the two
seas which it connects? I will tell you. The name of the ocean on the one hand
is Eternity ; the name of the ocean on the other hand is Eternity ; the name of the
channel is Life, and its Light is Jesus Christ. Without Him we perish ; but with
Him, overcoming the perils of the passage, we reach at last the great and wide sea
of the Father’s infinite love. (H. W. Price.) Christ the Light of the future
world :—Into the impenetrable darkness of ‘the hereafter He alone has entered :
only His sacred feet have trodden that awful path of gloom. We read, a little time
ago, of some of our English officers exploring a subterranean cavern never yet
visited by man—how they groped, and climbed, and crawled for hundreds of yards
into the darkness that was but feebly lit up by the glimmer of their tapers. ‘They


natinepnan nail


CHAP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 81
sa Se I es Ore ee
pressed onward in spite of every difficulty, till an impassable obstacle prevented
their further progress, and the gallant explorers had to return. They might have
perished in their perilous enterprise, and left their bones to moulder in their un-
known charnel-house till the resurrection morn; or they might have threaded their
way through mazy intricacies until, at last, they came again within the welcome
sight of daylight, and emerged from their underground wanderings on the other
side of the mountain. The Great Explorer passed right through! The Founder of
our Faith came out of death into a fuller and more glorious life than He laid down
when He yielded up His spirit. It is from Christ—messenger from the land of
light and love, victor over death and the grave, that we learn all we know of the
home beyond, of the many mansions, of the place prepared, of the thrones, and of
the crown. (Ibid.) Christ the Light of every man :—How can this be true when
there are, and always have been, so many who live on still in darkness? First, it
was God’s intention that ‘‘ light” should be all-pervasive, and it does not make
that intention untrue if, through the negligence of His people—to whom it was
committed to carry it out—it has not yet taken place. The orb of day is not less
the ‘‘light” to the universe, because you choose to eclipse it with your little hand.
Neither is Christ less ‘the true Light, that lighteth every man that cometh into
the world,” because they, to whom it was given, have not transmitted its beams.
But, evil as things are now, it is impossible to calculate what may be the indirect
rays of “light” which have reached, from the gospel, through the whole earth.
There is a twilight of truth in almost every superstition and every error. Is that
dim twinkle a refraction from the cross? (Sermons by the Monday Club.) God
the Light of life:—When we grasp a truth, and the exquisite pleasure of knowing
what is true abides with us like a noble guest ; when we conquer a selfish or worldly
desire and lie down to rest on the goodness we have won and feel at peace; when
in the golden summer-time we pass through the happy woodland and hear the
stream and the trees talk to one another, and the beauty that flows into the eyes
and ears kindles its instructive fire in our hearts; when we give love or pity or
kindness to those that need it, and the quick thrill of heavenly joy, such as the
shepherd feels when he finds his lost sheep, swells the heart—what is it that we
feel? We feel not only ourselves but God within us. His is the truth, the good-
ness, His the beauty and the tenderness, and His the joy. He is mingled with us
then. His light and life make our light and our life. It is more or less in all men,
it isof different kinds in different men, but it shines in all. One may hold it ina
soul which is a palace for the crowned Truth to dwell in; another may keep it ina
soul which is a ruined cabin where many an outlawed thought and many a felon
feeling dwells: but its eternal fire burns in both—in one as brightly as the sun,
in the other dimly as in the dying star. (Stopford A. Brooke, M.A.)


Vers. 10-11. He was in the world.—The treatment of Christ by men:—I. By the
WORLD, 1. They were in a condition in which they might have known much of
Him. He made the world and preserved it and wasinit. Yet there was no proper
recognition of Him. 2. This ignorance of Christ was the sin of the world, and it is
its sin now, a@ sin for which there is no excuse. In addition to creation and provi-
dence we have revelation. II. By His own. 1. Who are His own. In a sense (1)
All mankind by the right of creation; (2) The converted by the right of redemption
and adoption; (3) As distinguished from both these, the Visible Church. That its
members are His own arises from their possession of advantages peculiarly dis-
tinctive—the oracles of God—the ordinances of the kingdom. They are in cove-
nant. Christ is under engagement to grant to them eternal life: they are under
engagement to seek that gift and accept it. (a) Virtually such was the covenant
at Sinai. Christ engaged to bring His own to Canaan, through their obedience to
the law by which they were to live. They engaged to go up and possess their
inheritance in reliance on Him. The covenant was typical as well as temporal,
and typified a spiritual salvation. (6) Israel violated this covenant, by the
rebellion in the wilderness, and by slowness of heart to understand its moral
meanings. (c) This covenant has passed away, the substance of its shadows
having come, but thousands like Israel are false and perfidious to the new and
better covenant: they have the profession without the power of godliness. 2. He
came to His own. (1) This was unsolicited by them, the kindness and considera-
tion were all His. (2) He came to them in the wilderness and at various periods
of their history, but they rejected Him. 3, He came as the Incarnate Word, and


they received Him not. Is this also true of the Visible Church to-day? The un-


\


32 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP. Te


OE


nverted hearers of the gospel are more guilty than the Jews, and will therefore
te visited with a hedelcn weuiemnntion: (A. Beith, D.D.) The rejection of the
Light :—I. GrneRALLY AND PRIOR TO THE INCARNATION BY THE WORLD, The world
knew Him not, which was—l. Inexcusable (Rom. i. 20). 2. Unnatural, since
+hose who lived and moved and had their being in Him should have known Him
who made them (Psa. ciii. 22). 3. Heinous. The non-recognition less intellectual
than moral, arising not from failure to discern, but from want of inward affinity to
the light (John iii. 19; Eph. iv. 18; Job xxiv.13). 4. Prophetic, since it fore-
shadowed Christ’s reception by Israel with the outlook towards which it is here
introduced, II. ParTicULARLY AND DURING THE PERIOD OF His INCARNATION BY
His own, i.e., by the Jews, whose rejection of Him, besides sharing the criminality
incurred by the world, displayed—1. Monstrous ingratitude. He selected them for
no peculiar excellence on their part, and vouchsafed centuries of gracious teaching
and discipline to preparedshem to recognize and embrace Him. 2. Shamefaced
robbery. Christ presented Himself as the Heir claiming His inheritance (Matt.
xxi. 38); as a Master (Matt. xxv. 14) only to find His possessions forcibly withheld
from Him, and Himself cast forth and killed. 3. Incorrigible wickedness. They
could not discern the signs of Messiahship in Him. 4. Dire infatuation, for in
rejecting Him they thrust from themselves the kingdom of God, and missed the
true vocation of their race. (ZI. Whitelaw, D.D.) Christ rejected by the world :—
His own world rejected Him, as a rebel country might reject a lawful and beneficent
king. The very work of His hands, that which was indebted to Him for its very
being, refused to recognize Him. (G.J. Brown, M.A.) The world :—Corrupted
mankind are called the world, because they love the world more than their
Creator. Through love, we make something our dwelling-place; and therefore
what we have made by our love to be our dwelling-place, from that we have
deserved to be called. (Augustine.) The world knew Him not.—Let us give the
largest scope to these words. If you apply them to the world of matter, I need not
say that matter can never interpret spirit. God cannot be known in the charity
and richness of His inward nature by anything that matter represents. Nor can
men whose whole intercourse with matter either disprove or affirm the invisible and
inward truth of Christ. Neither does the race know Him: for they are seeking to
live by bread alone. Three-fifths of the world live as the sheep, the ox, and the
swine do. The heavens to them contain little unless it be some terror that super-
stition interprets. They cross the plain of life, with heads down, as herds of cattle
cross the prairie browsing as they go. They live for and by the senses. They know
not the God who created them, and sustains and blesses them. (H. W. Beecher.)
The non-recognition of Christ :—When Ulysses returned with fond anticipations to
his home at Ithaca, his family did not recognize him. Even the wife of his bosom
denied her husband—so changed was he by an absence of twenty years, and the
hardships of a protracted war. In this painful condition of affairs he called for a bow
which he had left at home. With characteristic sagacity he saw how a bow so stout
and tough that none but himself could draw it, might be made to bear witness on
his behalf. He seized it. To their surprise and joy, like a green wand lopped
from a willow tree, it yields to his arms, it bends till the string touches his ear.
His wife, now sure that he is her long lost and lamented husband, throws herself
into his fond embraces, and his household confess him to be the true Ulysses. If I
may compare small things with great, our Lord gave such proof of His Divinity
when He, too, stood a stranger in His own house, despised and rejected of men,
He bent the stubborn laws of nature to His will. He proved Himself Creator by
His mastery over creation. (ZI. Guthrie, D.D.) Genius unrecognized :—When
Verdi the celebrated musician first made application for admission as a student at
the Conservatoire Musicale at Milan, he was rejected by the director, Francesco
Basily, on the ground that ‘“ he could make nothing of the new comer, who showed
no disposition for music!’ How this early verdict was reversed is a matter of
notorious history. (H. O. Mackey.) Recognition :—Some literary reputations
are like fairies, in that they cannot cross running water. Others, again, are like
the mystic genii of the “ Arabian Nights” which loom nighest when seen afar.
Poe, ¢.g., is more appreciated in England than at home; and Cooper is given a
higher rank by French than by American critics. (Matthews.) Judgment by
contemporaries :—Contemporary judgment is least of all judicial. The young
forestall novelty itself. The old mistrust or look backward with a sense of loss. It
is hard for either to apply tests that are above fashion ; we adopt, as lightly as
formerly we contemned, a fashion that at last we avow we rightly interpret. (E. C.


———————


CHAP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 33
a ee a Pe 2S
Stedman.) God present but unknown :—‘*I have swept the heavens with my
telescope and have found no God.” (Lalande.) God unrecognized in His own
world :—Sir Isaac Newton had among his acquaintances a philosopher who was an
atheist. It is well known that the illustrious man, who takes the first rank as a
mathematician, natural philosopher, and astronomer, was at the same time a
Christian. He had in his study a celestial globe, on which was an excellent repre-
sentation of the constellations and the stars which compose them. His atheist
friend, having come to visit him one day, was struck with the beauty of this globe.
He approached it, examined it, and, admiring the work, he turned to Newton and
said to him, ‘Who made it?” ‘No one!” replied the celebrated philosopher.
The atheist understood, and was silent. (Christian Age.) Christ is often near
but unknown :——Every faculty of the soul, if it would but open its door, might see
Christ standing over against it, and silently asking by His smile, ‘‘ Shall I come in
unto thee?” But men open the door and look down, not up, and thus see Him
not. So it is that men sigh on, not knowing what the soul wants, but only that it
needs something. Our yearnings are home-sicknesses for heaven; our sighings are
for God, just as children that cry themselves asleep away from home, and sob in
their slumber, know not that they sob for their parents. The soul’s inarticulate
moanings are the affections yearning for the Infinite, and having no one to tell them
what it is that ailsthem. (H.W. Beecher.) He came to His own.—Christ’s coming
and rejection :—I. In wHat sense He came To His own, AND His own RECEIVED Him
nor. He came as the long-expected Messiah (Hag. ii. 7; John iv. 26), answering all
the characters given Him as such in the Old Testament. 1. He came as Immanuel
(Isa. vii. 14, ix. 6, xxxv. 4, xl. 9,10). His testimony to this effect was confirmed by

exercising the authority of God—(1) by forgiving sins (Matt. ix. 2); (2) by healing
the sick (Matt. viii. 3) ; (3) by raising the dead (Mark v. 41 ; John xi. 43) ; (4) by calm-
ing the storm (Mark iv. 39). But so far were His own from receiving Him that they
accounted Him a ‘‘sinner” (John ix. 24), a “ deceiver’? (Matt. xxvii. 63), “mad”
and possessed of the “‘ devil’ (John x. 20). 2. He came as the Prophet like unto
Moses (Deut. xviii. 15), whom He resembled in many things. But they rejected
Him because His doctrine contradicted their prejudices, censured their vices, and
laid a restraint on their dominant lusts. 3. He came as High Priest and Mediator
between God and man, typified by Aaron; but they, depending on being Abraham’s
seed, on circumcision, the priesthood, and expiations of their law, received Him
not. 4. He came as Redeemer and Saviour (Isa. lix. 20, xlii. 6, 7), but not seeing
their want of redemption (chap. vili. 33), and having no desire for spiritual
blessings, they received Him not. 5. He came as King (Psa. ii. 6; Jer. xxiii. 5, 6;
Zech. ix. 9), to rescue them from their enemies, and govern them with good laws.
But as His kingdom was not of this world they rejected Him (chap. xix. 14, 15,
xviii. 40, Luke xix. 14), II. In wHar smnsz IT IS NECESSARY THAT WE SHOULD RE-
ceive Him. We receive His name, and therefore receive Him by profession ; the
Scriptures, as declaring His will; His ordinances: but do we receive Him in all the
offices and characters He sustains? 1. Acknowledging Him as a Divine Teacher,
do we learn and practise His precepts? 2. Acknowledging that He is Mediator, do
we rely on His atonement and intercession? 3. Confessing Him to be all-suflicient
Redeemer, do we glorify Him in our body and spirit, which are His? 4. Do we
in reality as well as in profession receive Him as our King? It is implied in these
questions that we receive+-(1) His doctrine as the rule of our faith, experience, and
practice; (2) His merits as the ground of our confidence; (3) His Spirit, without
which we are none of His; (4) His example as our pattern; (5) His exaltation as
the ultimate object of our desire. III. THE GREAT PRIVILEGE THEY ATTAIN WHO
RECEIVE Him. 1. They are unspeakably near to Him as made sons of God by
regeneration (John y. 1). 2. They are dear to Him above all others. They are
favoured with access to Him, taken under His protection, and assured of a great
reward, (J. Benson.) Christ’s coming to His own :—The Jewish nation was “ His
own,” by choice (Deut. vii. 6) ; by purchase (Exod. xix. 4, 5); by covenant (Deut. xxvi.
18) ; and by kindred (Heb. ii. 16). (F. H. Dunwell, B.A.) Christ rejected by His own
people :—He came unto His own things, and His own people received Him not. He
was as a householder coming to his own house and being kept out by his own
servants. What is the earth but one great apartment in the house of God! Its fur-
niture (its hills and valleys, and rivers, fruits and flowers, and harvest fields) is Jesus
Christ’s, for, apart from Him, was not anything made that was made: yet when He
came to His own house His ownership was denied by the servants who had been put
into temporary possession by His own power and grace. (J. Parker, D.D.) The


34 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. I.
SO EEE eee
vent :—The coming of Christ had—I. An Ozszct. 1. Men had lost sight of
Goan Some had lost ite Others had never had it. All were destitute of it except
a small class of Hebrew believers. Three kinds of sin had blinded, corrupted,
usurped the human soul. (1) Self-admiration, which makes a rebel of the intellect ;
(2) Self-will of the conscience; (3) Self-indulgence of the passions. Curiosity was
all that was left as the highest aim in science; war, in enterprise ; and a sensuous
enthusiasm for the beautiful in art. Alexandria, Rome, and Athens represented
these three ambitions. 2. In losing God, man had lost himself. Faith in God
and the dignity of man went down together. With Divine worship fell human rights
and liberties. | Seneca stood for the world’s idea of learning; Cesar, for its idea of
politics ; Corinth, for its idea of pleasure. 3. The object of the Advent, therefore,
was to restore to man his God and Father, and himself. II. A merHop. Not by
creating a religious capacity, but by quickening men with trust and love. 1, Not
first by a book: that would have reached not one in ten thousand, nor him in his
heart, 2. Not chiefiy by oral instructions, which have to be certified to the under-
standing before they can inspire faith. 3. Not by a mere creature-image of Deity,
for that would have been only adding another to the old Pantheon of idolatries.
4, This infinite goodness, this One Spirit of God, must come in a life. Christ
must be the Son of the Father ; must touch humanity and enter into it; must wear
its flesh ; must lift its load; must partake its experience ; must be tempted with it;
must be seen, nay, felt, suffering for it. This will complete the manifestation.
This will be, not an education, not an inspiration, not a human self-elevation,
which neither history nor logic hints at; but a coming of Heaven to earth; a
theophany, or manifesting of God. This is perfect compassion, and effectual relief.
This gets the sundered souls together. Even stolid and blinded eyes will behold
their Lord. This will move, and melt, and convince of sin, and arouse to holiness.
III, A mortve. There could be but one (John iii. 16). (Bp. Huntington.) The
Advent of Christ. I. Toe Great ADVENT ; OR, THE ARRIVAL OF THE Herr. 1. The illus-
trious personage described. (1) The Word of God ; implying personality, intelligence,
eternity, divinity. (2) The Creator of the universe. (3) Thelife and light of men ;
the source of whatever mental, moral, or spiritual truth ever entered into the soul of
man. (4) The heir of Israel and humanity. He came into His own possessions.
(a) Into the world which by reason of His creatorship was His. (b) Unto Israel,
the special creation of His grace, and His peculiar treasure. 2. The manner of His
coming pictured. He came (1) Voluntarily. The Baptist was sent; Christ came.
(2) Opportunely. In the fulness of the times ; the time pre-appointed by God ; the
time pre-eminently adapted for a new religion. The false faiths had been tried and
found wanting. The Mosaic economy had served its purpose. The Roman power
had provided a means of universal communication, and Greece a universal language.
(8) Graciously. To communicate the life and the light without which neither
Israel nor humanity could be saved. It would not have been surprising had He
come to condemn rather than to save, (4) Unostentatiously. We might have
anticipated an advent in great power and glory.: instead of that it was in the form
of aseryant. II. THe MoURNFUL REJECTION; OR, THE REPUDIATION OF THE HEIR.
Israel’s conduct representative of the world’s. This rejection was—1. Symbolized
at His birth. ‘No room for Him in the inn.” Manger for His cradle. 2.
iixperienced throughout His life. ‘Despised and rejected of men.”? Calumniated
as a wine-bibber, a blasphemer, an impostor, a confederate of Beelzebub, and per-
secuted and scorned. 3. Confirmed by His death. ‘ Away with Him ”! “ Crucify
Him”! Learn (1) The amazing condescension of Christ. (2) The supreme claim
of Christ. (8) The wickedness and danger of the unbelief which rejects Christ.
(1. Whitelaw, D.D.) Jesus of Nazareth the true promised Messiah :—No Scrip-
ture has so directly and immoveably stood in the way of opposers of Christ’s
divinity, from Socinius backwards, than this chapter. In the text we have—I.
CuRIST’s COMING INTO THE WoRLD. 1. The person who came. The Second Person
in the Trinity, whose infinity makes the act of His coming miraculous. But Christ,
who delighted to mingle mercy with miracle, took a finite nature, so that what was
impossible to a Divine nature was done by a Divine Person, and being made man
could do all that a man could do except sin. The endeavour to account for this
mystery has been the source of all heresy, both of hypothesis and denial. 2. The
state and condition from which Christ came. From the bosom of the Father,
eee ceptiem een joy, Loy Pn eae _How great the humilia-
SROTe Shawn a eo ed malefactor And yet it was perfectly voluntary.
2 e came. verything was “His own” by creation, possession,


CHAP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 35


and absolute dominion; but the Jews were His by (1) The fraternal right of con-
sanguinity; and (2) Churchship, as selected by Him. That it was Palestine and not
Rome He came to was of His sovereign mercy. 4. The time at which He came.
When they were at their worst, (1) Nationally. Only aremnant left, and that under a
foreign yoke; when to be a Jew was a mark of infamy. (2) Ecclesiastically. When
most corrupt, hypocritical, sceptical. In this we may see (a) the invariable strength
of Christ’s love; (b) the immoveable veracity of God’s promise, II. Cuntsw’s
ENTERTAINMENT BEING CoME. May we not expect for Him a magnificent reception,
a welcome as extraordinary as His kindness, especially when we consider His
purpose? But His own received Him not. This is not strange. The Jews only
followed the common practice of men, whose emulation usually preys on those
superior to them. 1. The grounds of His rejection. (1) Christ came not as atem-
poral prince, which frustrated their carnal hopes. They therefore derided “the
carpenter’s son.’? (2) They supposed that He set Himself against the law of
Moses by His spiritual interpretations, human exceptions, and exposures of rab-
binical glosses. 2. The unreasonableness of these grounds. (1) He came to be
not a temporal prince, but (a) a blessing to all nations, which is inconsistent with
the idea of a warrior Messiah. This is the burden of prophecy—(bd) of a low,
despised estate (Psa. xxii.; Isa. liii.) (2) He came not to destroy the law but
to fulfil it. The ceremonial law was fulfilled and passed away, therefore, of itself,
3. The reasons which should have induced them to receive Him. (1) All the
marks of the Messiah appeared in Him. (2) His whole behaviour was a continued
act of mercy and charity. Conclusion: The Jews are not the only persons con-
cerned in this guilt, but also all vicious Christians. (R. South, D.D.) The in-
gratitude of man :—I, THE PEOPLE AMONGST WHOM OUR LORD DWELT WERE GUILTY OF
INGRATITUDE TOWARDS Him. 1. It was an act of distinguished favour that He
should be born among them; yet they rejected Him, which was a high-handed act
of national ingratitude. 2. Special cases occurred involving still greater ingrati-
tude. (1) Among them were many whom our Lord healed. Strange ingratitude
that a man should owe his eyes to Him and yet refuse to see in Him the Saviour ;
should owe to Christ his tongue and be silent in the great Physician’s praise.
(2) He fed thousands of hungry persons: yet they followed Him, not for Himself,
but for what they could get out of Him. (3) When He acted as a teacher they tried
to murder Him. 3. The further our Lord went on in life the more ungratefully
was He treated. He forgot Himself and gave Himself away that He might seek
and save the lost; and yet men strove to take away His life which was more valu-
able to them than to Him. 4. At last that evil generation had its way with Him
and crucified Him. 5. When He rose and tarried for forty days to minister bless-
ing, they first doubted and then invented an idle tale to account for it. 6. In this
ingratitude those who were nearest to Him had a share. One denied Him, and all
orsook Him and fled. II. Wr atso HAVE BEEN UNGRATEFUL TO ouR Lorp. 1. Those
who are most indebted to Christ’s love and grace—believers. (1) Every sin is
ingratitude since Christ suffered for it and came to destroy it. (%) The setting up
of any rival on His throne in the heart, when Christ is dethroned in favour of
wife, child, frierid, ambition, pleasure, wealth, is base ingratitude. (3) The same
ig true when we lose large measures of rrace; when the Holy Spirit admits us into
peculiar nearness to God and we act inconsistently. (4) And so the little service
we render and our lukewarm love. Christ’s love is like the ancient furnace which
was heated seven times hotter; ours like the solitary spark which wonders within
itself that it is yet alive. (&) The rare consecration of our substance is another
case in point. Our gifts to His poor, His Church, missions, are an insult to Him.
(6) How base is our ingratitude when we neglect His commands and have to be
driven to obedience. 2. There are those whose ingratitude is even greater. (1)
Those who refuse to trust Him, in spite of gospel announcements, loving invita-
tions, the evident manifestation of Christ. (2) Those who oppose Him, jest at His
gospel, and treat His people with indignity. What evil has He ever done you?
When has He given you an ill word or look? It is to His silence that you owe
your life. There is no chivalry in such conduct as this. 3. Those from whom,
above all others, such conduct ought not to have proceeded. (1) Children of pious
and sainted parents. (2) The restored from sickness. III. Waar tuen? What
comes out of all this? 1. Let us appreciate our Saviour’s sufferings. 2. Admire
our Saviour’s love. 3. Apply the cleansing blood which can take away the scarlet
sin of ingratitude. 4, Learn how to forgive. Christ loved men none the less for
their ingratitude. 5. Judge how we ought to live in the light of this subject:


36 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. ba


ee


devote ourselves entirely to Him. In conclusion, what will become of the finally
ungrateful? (C. H. Spurgeon.) His own ;—There are two ways of belonging to
another : unwilling and inevitable, or willing and hearty. You may belong to a
nation by birth, and dislike it; to a family, from dependence or self-interest, and
care for no welfare in it; to a university, and be out of harmony and out of temper
with its administration. But so you cannot belong to the brotherhood that is of
the body of Christ. You must be in sympathy both with the brotherhood and its
head. The legal ownership you cannot help; it brings no animation and no com-
fort. By your creation you are the Lord’s; His to be disposed of, to live or die, to
be judged. The business of your new heart, “ receiving Christ,” is to change this
reluctant belonging for the closer and grateful loyalty of affection; the legal bond
for the gracious one of faith. (Bp. Huntington, D.D.) The coming and rejec-
tion of the light :—The light came into men’s hearts as into its proper native
dwelling-place. The Word from whom that light issued asserted His right over all
the feelings, instincts, impulses, and determinations of these hearts, as over His
own rightful domestics and subjects. But the light was repelled; the rightful
Ruler was treated as an intruder by these domestics and subjects. There was
anarchy and rebellion where there should have been subordination and har-
mony. A usurper had reduced those into slavery who would not have the ser-
vice which is freedom. (I. D. Maurice, M.A.) Christ rejected :—His own
were those who believed with Him in the Scriptures; the teachers of Israel,
those who had been trained for His reception. The peasants of Galilee knew
Him and received Him when He fed them; for the ox knoweth his owner,
and the ass his master’s crib. He was rejected by those who were the most
rigorously orthodox; by the men who believed that their whole life should expend
itself in maintaining the temple and its worship. The last days of Christ, the
illustrious days of His controversy, were spent with the best, the highest, the most
moral of all the people then upon the globe; and they knew Him not. The poor
knew Him, and followed Him; the blind knéw Him, and cried out to Him; the
dead knew Him, and came to life; but the armour-bearers of the then regnant
faith—the priests, the teachers—looked upon Him with blank faces, and treated
Him as a pretender, a traitor, and slew Him. Is the Christian spirit any more
acceptable to-day? Is the policy of Christian nations saturated with blood, and
bearing every insignia of the cross imbued with that spirit? Are all pompous
churches, with all forms of superstition connected with their worship, and full of
symbols of Him who came not to destroy but to save—are they truly Christian?
Listen to the Te Dewn when men knee deep in blood come back with victory on
their banners. See the government of most Christian nations ; how degraded have
been the empires over which they have ruled. See how the Christian nations
of Europe lie over against each other, like hungry lions waiting only for an
opportunity to spring! What Christian nation, looking at its past history and
present policy,can be said to have received Christ? (H. W. Beecher.) Christ
still rejected :—As, John’ writes, there was an advent and a rejection: a bodily
advent, a bodily crucifixion: the image and outer form of the Word that was from
the beginning, the ever-living Emmanuel, the Christ that comes to-day. If He is
rejected to-day, it is by the pride and fashion and self-indulgence of to-day. It is
our compromising consciences, it is our well-dressed sensuality, it is our com-
mercial cunning, it is ¢ i siterary conceit, it is our making merchandise of men and
of men’s virtue, our covering up cruelty, and calling it patriotism ; dishonesty, and
calling it regular trade; hollowness and mutual flattery, and calling it good
society ; prayerless self-idolatry, and calling it a rational religion—it is these


things that prepare and build His cross, and ify Hi }
Daa ; crucify Him afresh. (Bp. Hunting-


Vers, 12-14. As many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the
sons of God.—St. John’s jirst view of Christ the key to his Gospel :—I. These verses
DESCRIBE THE SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE or St. Joun. In this point of view the order
of time is different from the order of the statements. ‘The several steps are these—
1. The apprehension of the glory of Jesus, 2. The receiving Him and believing on
His name. 3. The effect of the power to become sons of God. This agrees with the
acne experience of the evangelist. 1. He sees Jesus as pointed out by the Baptist.

ut where was the glory ? (1) That of ‘*the Lamb of God.” (2) The revelation of grace
and truth in him. God’s infinite love, holiness, justice : His own self-sacrifice. 2. He
goes home with Jesus and gave himself up to His gracious influences, believed on


Pe a


ee ee


CHAP, 1] ST. JOHN. 37
a a a
His name, 3. What followed we know. He became a son of God. IL. Tuts
EXPERIENCE DETERMINED THE STRUCTURE, SUBSTANCE, AND SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL.
1. It serves to account for the subordinate place which miracles and Christ’s


external life generally hold in it. John’s grand purpose, as marked by his own


experience, was to illustrate the self-commending glory of Christ as the Word and
only-begotten of the Father, that those who had never seen Him with the eye of
sense might come to the blessedness of those who had not seen and yet had
believed. 2. It serves to account for the prominent place which the inner life of
Christ and the manifestation of His Sonship-glory occupies here. The two grand
pivots on which the Gospel turns are Christ the Lieut, and Christ the Lirz, Christ
the Light, revealing the Father and all that concerns the Father ; Christ the Life,
communicating by the Spirit a new life to men so as to make them God’s sons. Its
twofold purpose is to set forth Christ as the Incarnate Word and Only Begotten,
full of grace and truth; and also the reception of Christ, the believing on His
name as the commencement of the new life of sonship. Thus it is that so much
prominence is given to Christ’s relation to the Father on the one hand, and to the
fellowship of Christ with His people on the other. 3. From these considerations
we see the groundlessness of the objections against the Johannian authorship of
the Gospel. Given John’s conversion, as here shadowed forth, and his warm,
fervid nature, his life of Jesus could not well have been any other than it is.
Ill. THE MORE GENERAL RELATIONS OF THE SUBJECT, as setting forth the es-
sential glory of Christ and the glory communicated to all who, by receiving
Him, become sons of God. 1. What is the connection between the two?
That there is a connection is seen in the difference between John and his
companions and the mass of the Jews. The one perceived His glory, the other
saw it not. To the one He appeared a miserable pretender, to the other the
Eternal Son. Moreover they recognized in Him the Saviour that taketh away the
sins of the world. They received Him, and then the standing and spirit of sonship
became theirs. 2. How is it that this view of Christ’s glory is followed by such
effects? (1) By such means we see our emptiness, guilt, and misery. (2) But He
invites us to Him, tells us of His fulness, pardon, grace, asks us to receive Him
and let Him put forth His power. (3) Must we not welcome Him? The blessed
change is wrought in the very act of seeking it. (W. G. Blaikie, D.D.) Receiv-
ing Christ and becoming sons :—I. CHRIST WHO HAS COME INTO THE WORLD SEEKS
ADMISSION TO THE HUMAN HEART as @& lawful and everlasting tenant. The Christ in
the book, in the creed, in the church, effects but little for us. Christ in the heart
becomes all our salvation and desire. II. Tur RECEPTION or CHRIST IN THE HEART
IS FOLLOWED BY soNSHIP. 1. There is a natural sonship pertaining to all men; for
we are all His offspring. 2. There is a special, redemptive, restored sonship
bestowed on those who receive Christ. 3. All that pertains to this sonship is
supernatural. Adam was not a son by blood, nor by the will of the flesh, but by
the will of God; and a restored son is as marvellous a creation as Adam. III.
THIS SONSHIP INVOLVES A NEW BIRTH AND ELEVATION TO THE HIGHEST POSSIBLE
position. There is nothing higher than being admitted to sonship with God. What
we want is not some new spiritual dignity, but the recognition of this exalted con-
dition. IV. Tru FAITH IS HERE DESCRIBED AND EVIDENCED, 1, Faith in receiving.
Christ comes into the believer. Christ without does not save, but Christ within,
2. Faith is evidenced by the opening of the eyes to see the glory of Christ, and the
affiliation to God which follows. V. Gop HERE RECEIVES ALL THE PRAISE. 1, The
power and the will are of God. Ascribe to Him the wisdom andthe glory. 2. The
Christ whom we receive is God’s ‘“‘ unspeakable gift.” 3. Faith and its attendant
privileges are by power bestowed by God. (S. Martin.) The connection between
receiving Christ and becoming sons :—I, These two things are connected IN RESPECT
or Gop: it is the will of God that all should believe in Christ, and He has
appointed the mediation of Christ as the channel through which all should receive
salvation, and all that is necessary for its attainment. II. These things are con-
nected IN RESPECT oF Curist: for, in consequence of what He has done, all may
become the sons of God, and»may be enriched with all the blessings of His grace.
III. They are connected in RESPECT OF MEN: all who would obtain salvation must
receive Jesus Christ as the only Saviour. (C. C. Tittman, D.D.) That act by
which we do effectually apply Christ to our own souls :—Il. Tue NATURE OF THIS
RECEIVING or Curist. 1. No man can do this in the darkness of natural ignorance.
If we know not His nature and offices we do not take, we mistake Christ. The
receiving act of faith, then, is guided by knowledge. 2. This receiving of Christ


ia.


ee
implies the assent of the understanding to the truths of Christ in the gospel—His
Peres offices, incarnation, satisfaction—which assent, although it is not saving
faith, is its groundwork. This is more than conjecture or opinion, it is belief.
3. This also implies hearty approbation, liking, and estimation; yea, the very
acquiescence of our souls in Christ as the most excellent remedy for wants, sins,
and dangers (1 Peter ii. 7). There are two things in Christ which must gain the
approbation of the soul. (1) That it can find nothing unsuitable to it in Christ as
it does find in the best creatures—no weakness, pride, inconstancy, or passion.
He is the altogether lovely. (2) That it can find nothing wanting in Christ neces-
sary or desirable. In Him is the fulness of wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption. 4. It consists in the consent and choice of the will; and this is
the opening of the heart and stretching forth of the soul to receive Him (see Christ’s
complaint, chap. v. 40, and Ephes. i. 19). 5. The respect that this act of accept-
ance has unto the terms upon which Christ is tendered to us in the Gospel.
Faith answers the gospel offer, as the impress on the wax does the engraving on
the seal (1 Cor. xv. 11). There is no receiving Christ but on His own terms. (1) He
is offered sincerely and really, and is received with a faith unfeigned (1 Tim. i. 5).
(2) He is offered entirely, and is received in all His offices as Christ Jesus the Lord
(Acts xvi. 13). (3) He is offered exclusively, and the soul singly relies on Him
(Acts iv. 2; 1 Cor. iii. 11), and not partly on His righteousness and our own.
(4) He is offered freely as the gift, not the sale of God (John iv. 10; Isa. lv. i.;
Rev. xxii. 17). So the believer comes to Him with an empty hand. (5) Heis
offered orderly. First His Person, then His privileges (Rom. viii. 32), so the
believer does not marry His portion first. II, THis 1s THE JUSTIFYING AND SAVING
act oF FaITtH. 1. The faith which gives the soul right and title to spiritual adop-
tion, with all the privileges and benefits thereof, is true saving faith. 2. That only
is saving faith which is in all true believers, in none but true believers, and in all
true believers at all times. III. Tue ExcELLENCY OF THIS ACT OF FAITH (2 Peter i.7;
James ii. 5; John vi. 29). 1. Considered qualitatively it has the same excellency
that all other precious graces have. It is the fruit of the Spirit. It is singled out
to receive Christ. As it is Christ’s glory to be the door of salvation, so it is faith’s
glory to be the golden key that opens that door. (1) It is the bond of our union
with Christ (Eph. iii. 17). (2) It istheinstrument of our justification (Rom. v. 1).
(3) It is the spring of our spiritual peace and joy (Rom. v. 1; 1 Peter i. 8, 9).
(4) It is the means of our spiritual livelihood and subsistence. Take away faith
and all the others die (Gal. ii. 20). (5) It is the great scope and drift of the Gospel
to get men to believe. The urgent commands aim at this (1 John iii. 23; Mark
i. 14,15; John xii. 36). Hither, also, look the great promises and encouragements
(John vi. 35-37; Mark xvi. 16). The opposite sin of unbelief is everywhere
threatened (John xvi. 8, 9; iii, 18,35). IV. Appricattion: 1. For information:
If there be life in receiving Christ, there must be death in rejecting Him. 2. If
faith be accepting Christ, then there are fewer believers among professors than.
were thought to be, and more believers than dare conclude themselves such.
3. Those who have the least degree of saving faith, have cause for ever to admire
the bounty of the grace of God to them therein (Eph. i. 3). 4. For examination:
(1) The antecedents of faith—illumination (Acts xxvi. 18); conviction (Mark i. 15);
self-despair (Acts ii. 37); vehement and earnest cries to God for faith. (2) The
concomitants of faith—seriousness (Acts xvi. 29) ; humiliation (Ezek. xvi. 63; Luke
vill. 38); a weary condition (Matt. xi. 28); a longing condition. (3) The conse-
quents of faith—evangelical meltings (Zech. xii. 10) ; love to Christ, His ways, and
His people (Gal. v. 6); heart purity (Acts xv. 9); obedience (Rom. xvi. 26). 5. For
exhortation: (1) What is in Christ whom you are to receive ? (2) What is the
offer of Christ by the gospel? (3) What is in the rejecting of that offer ? (J.
Flavel.) Reception of Christ our introduction into sonship :—I. Tue HoNovR. To
become sons of God not merely by adoption, but by generation (Rom. viii. 16;
1 John iii. 1). On our side is sonship, on God’s Fatherhood. Sonship is—1. Higher;
2. Nearer; 3. More blessed; 4. More glorious than—creaturehood. There is son-
ship in the angels, in unfallen man; but this is beyond these. As—(1) Introducing
us into a more intimate intercourse ; (2) Making us partakers of the Divine nature.
II. THE GIVER OF ir. Christ Himself; elsewhere it is the Father. All gifts are in
Christ’s hands—living water and bread of life, Himself, sonship. This right or
power of sonship He purchased for us; for those who had no right, or power, or
title. III. Tum way oF arramnment, 1, Receiving Him—doing the reverse of what
Israel had done; accepting and owning Him for all that God announced Him


38 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. 1.


» mb eneer eee ae = ’


=. =


CHAP. 1.] ST, JOHN. 39
ener eeeee tere Wea ee tee oe
to be. 2. Believing on His name, i.e., Himself. IV. THe PERSONAL CHANGE THROUGH
WHICH THIS IS REACHED. ‘‘Born:” 1, Not of natural descent. 2. Not by natural
generation. 3. Not by human adoption. 4. But of God (Jamesi. 18). (H. Bonar, D.D.)
The grace of Christ to those who received Him :—The grace appears in—I. His pre-
VAILING WITH MEN TO EMBRACE THE OFFER MADE TO THEM, and in what is implied
in that. 1. Christ offers Himself, and we welcome and receive Him. The first
acting of true faith is to accept Himself; not merely the special benefit He brings.
2. We exercise implicit confidence in Him. We have a right knowledge of Him;
rejoice in His character ; accept and hide Him in our hearts. 8. In the form in
which Jesus is proclaimed in the Gospel, His saved ones receive and believe in
Him. ‘So we preach; so ye believed.” There is a correspondence between the
Gospel and faith of the same kind as that between the seal and the wax. (1) Christ
is offered sincerely, and He must be accepted with a faith unfeigned. (2) He is
offered exclusively, and must be accepted as the sole basis of our hope. (3) He is
offered as a gift; we must not attempt to merit Him. 4. The actual committing of
our all to Christ when we receive Him. What is the saving act of faith? (1) Not
assent, although that must be a part of it. (2) Not assurance, although that will
follow it. (3) But acceptance of Him and confidence in Him. II. Tue sprcran
PRIVILEGE WHICH HE BESTOWS ON THOSE WHO RECEIVE Him. 1. The saved are by
nature the children of wrath; but in His person God is reconciled towards them.
2. Having reconciled them, He makes them sons—co-heirs with Himself. 3. Of
Him also is the comfort and dignities of sonship. III. Tue cuance wrovuGutT IN
THEM WHO RECEIVE Him, to which their accepting Him is ascribed. 1. A new form
of existence—a new birth; all things have become new. 2. This change is (1) not
by natural inheritance ; (2) nor by the operation of the natural will; (3) nor the
fruit of superior endowment or acquisition ; (4) but of God, by the office and opera-
tion of the Spirit. (A. Beith, D.D.) Man’s part in the advent :—I. THE RECEP-
tron. A true reception of Christ for every man alike is of three parts. 1. Belief
that He is what He says He is. For any messenger the first condition of accept-
ance is that He be found to be what He claims to be—much more the Saviour of
mankind. 2. Sympathy. A plenipotentiary, an agent, a purely mental operator
does not need this. But the moment you include a moral purpose, spiritual in-
fluence, there must be common feeling and assimilation. Interests must be felt to
be identical. Loyalty must bind the subject to his king. Enthusiasm must mount
at the leader’s name. If Christ’s purpose was to fill human hearts with love, we
cannot be His without loving Him. 3. Service: not compulsory, but that which
love disdains to call service. In the hungry, sick, ignorant, &c., the Lord makes a
new advent to your heart every week; and Christ will not be received till every-
body within our reach is made, somehow, better by our faith in Him, II. Tue
BLESSING. Servants and creatures we were before, and, in a sense—but not the full
and glorious sense—children of God. Now sons of God, a royal line, conquerors,
sufferers rejoicing in the midst of temptation. Born now, their immortal seed
remained inthem. III, THose wHo BELIEVE IN CHRIST’S NAME WILL SEEK TO RECEIVE
Him. 1. By giving up the dearest preference that hurts the simplicity and humility
of their faith. 2. In the New Testament, Christian instruction, prayer, doing God’s
will; and counting faith, not doubt, the glory, and power, and joy of man. 3. In
the communion of His body and blood. (Bishop Huntington.) A new year’s
guest :—The text in connection with Matt. xxv. 35. Suggested by the motto on a
new year’s card. JI. A STRANGER TAKEN IN. House-room is a larger gift than
refreshment at the door. We must not be satisfied with benefactions to His repre-
sentatives. Notice three strange things. 1. That He was in the world and the
Maker of it, and yet a stranger. (1) When born in the Bethlehem of His father
David, there was no room for Him in theinn. (2) Soon there was no room in the
village itselt, whence He had to flee into Egypt, a stranger in a strange land.
(3) On His return, there was no room among the mass of the people. Jew and
Gentile proved how truly He was a stranger. All this a sadly singular thing; and
yet we need not wonder, for how should a wicked and selfish world know Jesus or
receive Him. 2. That we should be able to receive the Lord Jesus as a stranger.
He has gone to glory, but we can yet receive Him, (1) By owning Him when and
where believers are few and despised. (2) By showing brotherly kindness to a poor
saint. (3) By holding fast His faithful Word when its doctrines are in ill-repute.
(4) By taking up our cross where Christ’s precepts are disregarded, His day for-
gotten, and His worship neglected. (5) By receiving the gift of spiritual life.
Profession is abundant, but the secret life is rare. 3. That Christ will deign to


40 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. ” [enix ~
i a a aa — - — — — >


well in our hearts. This is a miracle of grace, yet the manner is simple enough.
fe A humble, repenting faith opens the door, and Jesus enters. (2) Love i to
the door with the hand of penitence, and holy watchfulness keeps out intruders.
(3) Meditation, prayer, praise, and obedience, keep the house in order. (4) And
then follows the consecration of our whole life as His people. Il. Tuz STRancER
MAKING STRANGERS INTO sons. ‘The moment Christ enters the heart, we are no
more strangers and foreigners, but of the household of God. 1. He adopts us and
puts us among the children. 2. The designation of sons. brings with it a birth,
with the actual condition of sons. 3. Living, loving, lasting union seals our son-
ship. 4. This union creates in us a likeness to God. A small window will let in
the great sun; much more will Jesus let in the life, light, and love of God into our
souls, making us like God. III. Havine nEcriveD JESUS AS A STRANGER, WE FEEL
A TENDERNESS HENCEFORTH TOWARDS ALL STRANGERS; for we see in their condition
some resemblance to our own. When Christ is in us, we search out opportunities
of bringing prodigals, strangers, and outcasts to the great Father’s house. (C. H.
Spurgeon.) Receivers and sons:—I. BELIEVING IS A RECEIVING OF Cunrist.
1. Under what notion should we receive Christ? As our Mediator. (Isa. lxi. 3-4).
(1) Our Prophet, receiving His doctrine as delivered by Himself (Heb. i. 2; ii. 2, 3);
by His prophets and apostles (Heb. i. 1; Matt. x. 40); by His ministers (2 Cor. v.
19, 20; Heb. iv. 11,12). (2) Our Priest (Heb. vii. 23-26) ; and so we must believe
—(a) His satisfaction for our sins (2 Cor. v. 21; Heb. ix. 28; 1 John ii. 2), to the
justice and law of God (Gall. iii. 13); (b) His intercession for our souls (Rom. Viil.
34; Heb. ix, 11, 12, 24). (3) Our King (Psa. cx. 1, 9): so we must—(a) acknow-
ledge His sovereignty (Matt. xxviii. 18) ; (b) obey His laws (Luke vi, 46; John xiv.
15); (c) submit to His penalties (Col. iii. 24, 25). 2. How should we receive Him?
(1) Penitently (Acts ii. 36). (2) Willingly (Psa. cx. 3). (3) Affectionately (Luke
xiv. 26). (4) Constantly (Rev. ii. 26). (5) Only (Acts. iv. 12). II. BeLirvers ARE
THE SONS OF Gop. 1. In what sense? Not by generation, but regeneration (John
iii. 31). (1) Man lost the favour of God (Rom. v.19). (2) The Son undertakes his
redemption—(a) by becoming man; (b) by dying, whereby He purchases all believers
to Himself, to be members of His body (1 Cor. vi. 20; Titus ii. 14); (c) and so
from Himself the dead conveys His own spirit unto them (Titus iii. 5, 6). (3) The
Spirit regenerates and makes them new creatures (2 Cor. v.17). (4) Being new
creatures, they are received into the favour of God (Rom. viii. 15), and made His
sons (Rom. viii. 14). 2. With what privileges? (1) Privative. They are freed
from the slavery of sin (Rom. vi. 14); from slavish fears (Rom. viii. 15); from the
curse of the law (Gal. iii. 13). (2) Positive. (a) They have access to God (Gal.
iv. 6). (b) They are interested in God’s providence (Rom. viii. 28; 2 Cor. vi. 18).
(c) They rejoice in God (Phil. iv. 4). (d) God rejoices over them (Zeph. iii. 17).
(e) Their glorious inheritance is assured (Col. i. 12, 13). (f) This inheritance is
witnessed to them here (Rom. viii. 16, 17), and sealed (Eph. iv. 30), whereof they
now have the pledge (Eph. i. 13, 14). 3. How known? (1) By prayer (Gal. iv. 6).
(2) Obedience (1 Pet. i. 14,15). (8) Purity (2 John iii. 9). (4) Conformity to the
Divine image (Rom. viii. 29). (5) Faith (Sol. iii. 26). Usms. 1. See the honour
of believers. 2. Live like the sons of God. (1) By despising the world. (2) By
patiently enduring/all chastisements (Heb. xii. 6-9. (3) By longing to come to
your inheritance in heaven (Psa. xlii. 1, 2). (Bishop Beveridge.) Faith and its
attendant privileges :—I, FarrH MAKES ‘THE GRANDEST OF DISTINCTIONS AMONG MEN.
‘‘He came to His own, and His own received Him not’—that is one company ;
“but as many as received Him ”’—that is another. 1. There are many distinctions
among men—rich and poor, governors and governed, teachers and taught. But
these will pass away. The grand distinction, which will out-last all time, is that of
faith or the want of faith. 2. This distinguishing faith is—(1) A receptive faith ;
one which accepts Christ by confiding, trusting, and depending on Him. (2) Faith
in His name, as—(a) The Word: receiving His messages from the Father. (6) The
Life: receiving His vitality in spirit. (c) The Light: seeing all things in the light
of Christ. 3. This distinction is one which obliterates all others. Ifa chimney-
sweep receives Christ, he is a child of God; so is an emperor—but not the one
more than the other. II. Farrm oprarns THE GRANDEST OF ALI ENDOWMENTS.
“Sons of God.” 1. There is a distinction here between son and servant. The
believer ceases to be a slave, and becomes a child; and yet he becomes a servant.
Christ was first His Father’s Son, and then His servant; so we, being sons, have
the joy of serving our Father. 2. We are also sons by likeness—miniatures, and
sometimes caricatures, yet resemblances. 8. We are sons, in having the privilege


CHAP, I.] ST, JOHN. Al
of free access to our Father. III. Farr 1s THE EVIDENCE OF THE GRANDEST EX-
PERIENCE. Every believer is a regenerate man. It is of no use to attempt to mend
the old nature. A man brought his'gun to be repaired. The gunsmith told him it
wanted a new stock, lock, and barrel. That looked like making a new one. You
must begin de novo. Baptism cannot regenerate; nor blood, the natural way of
birth ; nor man’s carnal will, nor his best will; but God, who, as the Creator, new-
creates the soul. IV. Farrah Raises THE BELIEVER TO THE NOBLEST CONCEIVABLE
conpiTIon. He is fitted to be a child of God. 1. Notice the inconceivable honour.
All others pale before it. 2. The safety. 3. The happiness. 4. The duties.
There is an old French proverb which says, ‘‘ nobility obliges.” There is an
obligation on nobles. If you are a son of God, you must act like one. (C. H.
Spurgeon.) Faith ts receiving :—It is the empty cup placed under the flowing
stream ; the penniless hand held out for the heavenly alms. (Ibid.) | Sonship more
than adoption :—The sonship is not effected in virtue of a mere act of adoption
on the part of God. A child may be taken out of the family to which he
originally belonged, and be planted in another; he may get a new name; he may
be trained to forget that he had other birth ; he may be made heir to great estates ;
he may be as dearly loved and as tenderly cared for as if he were own child to those
who have adopted him: but the fact remains that he is really the child of another,
and nature may prove too strong for the new bonds, and he may pine for his native
home, and at length go back to it. The “sons of God,” however, are sons by
birth, for such is the significance of the word: here used, having not only a new
name and position, but also a new life. It is not simply that they are called sons;
they are sons, partakers of the Divine nature, with a filial relationship, and a filial
resemblance to the eternal God. The sonship is already established in fact and in
principle, though it awaits its full manifestation hereafter (1 John iii. 1, 2).
(J. Calross, D.D.) Comfort for the dying :—When Philip Melanchthon was
dying, he said aloud and distinctly to his surrounding friends, ‘‘ I have those words
of John concerning the Son of God, my Lord Jesus Christ, before me continually :
‘The world received Him not; but as many as received Him, to them gave He
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on His name.’”
(R. Besser, D.D.) Receiving the light :—Suppose you were in a dark room in the
morning, the shutters closed and fastened, and only as much light coming through
the chinks as made you aware it was day outside. And suppose you could say to a
companion with you, ‘‘ Let us open the windows, and let in the light.” What would
you think if he replied, ‘‘No, no; you must first put the darkness out, or the light
will not enter”? You would laugh at his absurdity. Just so we cannot put sin
out of our hearts to prepare for Christ’s entering ; we must open and take Him in,
and sin will flee; fling the window open at once, and let Christ shine in. (J.
Edmond, D.D.) The honour of adoption :—I have heard of some fine gentleman
in London, dressed in all his best, walking out in the park. He had a poor old
father who lived in the country, and who came up dressed in his rustic raiment to
see his son. As the son was not at home when the father reached the house, he
went into the park to find him. Now the fine gentleman did not absolutely disown
his father, but he went out of the park at a pretty sharp trot, for fear anybody
should say, ‘‘ Who is that country fellow you were talking with?’ He did not
like to own his father, because he was a labourer. We could not thus wonder if
the glorious Lord refused to own us. There is such a come-down from the loftiness
of His holiness to the depth of our faultiness. But yet He has such love, such a
manner of love, that He bestows upon us this honour, that we should be openly
called the sons of God. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The treasure unreceived :—A noble-
man once gave a celebrated actress a Bible, telling her at the same time that there
was a treasure init. She, thinking he meant religion, laid the Bible aside. She
died, and all she had was sold. The person who bought the Bible, on turning over
its leaves, found a £500 note in it. Poor creature ! had she read the book, she
might not only have found the note, but the ‘‘ pearl of great price.” (Sunday
School Chronicle.) Christ must be received :—There is dew in one flower and not
in another, because one opens its cup and takes it in, while the other closes itself,
and the drops run off. God rains His goodness and mercy as wide-spread as the
dew, and if we lack them, it is because we will not open our hearts to receive them.
(H.W. Beecher.) Believing is receiving Christ :—He comes to your door. He wants
toget in. He knocks, He waits. Is not that wonderful? I was lately visiting that
part of the country where our beloved Queen stays when she comes to Scotland.
She visits among the poor. I saw some of the cottages to which she is in the habit


42 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. 1.
Oe SE I I a a ee
of going. In the house of one of her servants I saw her own likeness, and the
likenesses of several of her family—all gifts from themselves. You say, What
kindness! what condescension! And so itis: But what would you think if I told
you—what I am glad I cannot tell you, for it would not be true—that when they
saw the Queen coming, they locked their doors and pretended to be out, and kept
her standing knocking at the door, refusing to let her in, though she came to speak
kindly to them and to do them good? You would say, Surely the people must not
be in their right mind. And yet that is just what King Jesus does—Queen Vic-
toria’s King. He comes to your door to bless you, to save you. He says, ‘‘Behold,
I stand at the door and knock.’? Most people keep Him out, and will not have
anything to do with Him. They say, “(Depart from us, for we desire not the know-
ledge of Thy ways.” Opening the door to Him, saying, ‘‘ Come in, Lord Jesus,
come in ’—taking Him to our heart, and only fearing lest He should ever go away
again—is believing. The believing heart is the heart that has let in Jesus, and in
which he dwells (Eph. iii. 17). (J. H. Wilson.) Privileges of adoption :—By
adoption, God gives us—1. A new name (Numb. vi. 27; Rey. iil. 12). 2. A new
nature (2 Pet. i. 4). Whom God adopts He anoints; whom He makes sons,
He makes saints. 3. A new inheritance (Rom. viii. 17). When the Danish
missionaries in India were translating a catechism, with some of the con-
verted natives by their side, and when they came to a part where it was said of
Christians that they were the sons of God, one of the natives, startled at so bold a
saying, as he thought it, said, “It is too much; let us rather translate it, ‘ They
shall be permitted to kiss His feet.’” Adoption and justification :—Justifi-
cation is the act of God as a Judge, adoption as a Father. By the former we are
discharged from condemnation, and accepted as righteous; by the latter, we are made
the children of God and joint-heirs with Christ. By the one, we are taken into
God’s favour; by the other, into His family. Adoption may be looked upon as an
appendage to justification, for itis by our being justified that we come to a right to all
the honours and privileges of adoption. (Dr. Guyse.) Which were born.—Three
great negations :—The children of God are born—I. Nor or snoop. Grace does
not run on the lines of nature. Many beautiful and graceful things do come by
gentle and noble blood, but not this. It needs a very narrow field of observation to
convince us that no parent, however pious, can command the conversion of his
children, Else why should there be in this world that bitterest spectacle of a pious
parent’s heart being broken by a wicked child! II. Nor oF THE WILL OF THE
FLESH. The expression relates to any desire which, ruling in a man’s mind, might
be supposed to lead him to some act whereby he should become a child of God, and
the idea is utterly repelled. Hvery one who is a subject of the grace of God is so
first passively, that afterwards he may be so actively. He is first acted upon by a
will and power without him, and then he acts out that will and manifests that
power. III. Nor oF THE wit or MAN. Observe the steps. Not of parents, not
of self, nor of any creature whatsoever. One man, indeed, may will the conver-
sion of another; and if he clothe that will with prayer, if he offer that will with
faith, and if he does all in his power to forward that will, God may give him that
man’s soul. But God never promises He will do this. A soul passes into the
family of God and becomes an heir in the register of sons when he receives Christ,
and only then. (J. Vaughan, M.A.) The three negations illustrated :—When it
pleased God to bring Abraham and his family into covenant with Him, that family
consisted of three classes of persons; first of all, there were his own children:
secondly, there were those who were born of his men-servants and maid-servants ;
thirdly, there were those slaves, whom he purchased and adopted. All these three
classes were admitted into covenant with God, by reason of their relation to
Abraham. ‘ Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house
and all that were bought with his money, and circumcised them” (Gen. xvii. 23).
Of these classes, Ishmael was born of blood, as being his own flesh and blood as
we say ; those born of the flesh were the other children born in his house, not his
own ; and those born of the will of man were those who, having no right to his
protection, being yet bought of his free will, acquired a right by purchase and
adoption. To these three classes were the benefits of the first covenant confined
. . . The truth, which St. John here announces, is that to all who received the
message of the Lord Jesus, all who believed on His Name and submitted to His
ordinances, to all those He gave the same power, even to become sons of God


(Gen. iii, 16, 17; Rom. v. 13). (G@. Cornish.) The being born of blood and of


God considered:—I. In their antagonism. II. In their essential DISTINCTION


odin, geondpatn ae


CHAP, I.] ST, JOHN. 43


III. In their congenial connection. IV. In the Mepiator of THEIR UNION. (Lange.)
The new, celestial, divine birth constitutes the true nobility of grace as contrasted
with:—I. The aristocracy of srrtH. II. The aristocracy of monny. III. The aris-
tocracy of merit. IV. The aristocracy of ramz. (P. Schajf, D.D.) Not of
blood :—The blood through which the chyle is distributed to the different parts of
the body is the seat of life, hence the connection between child and parents is called
blood relationship; and in classic usage also we have the expression ‘to spring
from the blood”—that is, from the seed of any one (Acts xvii. 26). (Tholuck.)
Not of the will of man :—According to the teaching of some men, howisit? ‘I
am a minister of God—I am a man—as a man I may will to take a child and
baptize it, and I may will to baptize it by a certain hour of the clock; and just as
I am going to baptize it, I may will to put it off till to-morrow; and when to-morrow
comes, I may will that I will not baptize that child at all—for if baptized, the child
may die. And so, according to the caprice of my will, the child is baptized at this
hour, or at that, to-day, or to-morrow, or it is not baptized at all; and therefore,
following the caprice of my will, and just according to my will, the child is inevit

ably a child of God at this time of the clock, or at that time of the clock—to-day,
or to-morrow, or the next day, or never at all.’ What, I ask, is this but to be
“born of the will of man”? (J. Vaughan, M.A.) The simultaneity of faith and
regeneration :—We must be careful that we do not interpet the words ‘‘ which were
born” as if the new birth was a change which takes place in a man after he has
believed in Christ, and is the next step after faith. Saving faith and regeneration
are inseparable. The moment that a man really believes in Christ, however feebly,
he is born of God. The weakness of his faith may make him unconscious of the
change, just as a new-born infant knows little or nothing about itself. Bnt where
there is faith there is always new birth, and where there is no faith there is no
regeneration. (Bishop Ryle.) The spirituality of reiigion:—This verse is most
emphatically in the style of John. Never can he lose sight of the perfect spirituality
of Jesus Christ’s work. John shows the very religiousness of religion. Christianity
is to him more than a history, more than an argument, more than a theology—it is
a spiritual revelation to the spiritual nature of man. On the part of man it is to
be not an.attitude, but a life—the very mystery of his spirit, too subtle for analysis,
too strong for repression, too divine to be tolerant of corruption. (J. Parker, D.D.)
The higher generation:—The result of receiving Him remains to be explained.
How could they become “sons of God”’? The word which has been used (ver. 12)
excludes the idea of adoption, and asserts the natural relation of child to father.
The nation claimed this through its descent from Abraham. But they are Abraham’s
children who are of Abraham’s faith. There is a higher generation, which is
spiritual, while they thought only of the lower, which is physical. The condition
is the submissive receptivity of the human spirit. The origin of life is “not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.” (H. W.
Watkins, D.D.)


Ver. 14. The Word was made flesh and dwelt among.us.—The God-Man satisfy-
ing the desire of humanity :—I. Tux pestre. The desire of a Saviour had attained
its maturity in the period of universal decline which preceded the Advent. This
desire was a prophecy of its own satisfaction because inspired, nourished and
developed by the God to whom the heart addresses itself. A child is born called
Jesus whose name announces all that He came todo. What do men say about
Him? 1. That He is a fabulous symbol of that union of man with God realized
in the development of reason. But if this be the case why has man desired one
outside of his own reason? What meaning is there in the history of religions.
2. That He was a great social reformer. But His gospel is profoundly spiritual
and traces all external reform to inward moral renovation. But is man’s heart
satisfied with the idea of a social reformer? Had Christ swept away every social
abuse and satisfied every national need, the human heart would still have yearned
for a Saviour. 8. That He was a philosopher, the Socrates of Jerusalem, But
man does not need such. The ancient world had more than it required. It had
the greatest and purest of sages, but found no rest in their schools. Man desires
something higher, shall his Christ then be—4. A prophet? Prophets will not
avail, for the greatest have most ardently desired a Saviour and were but men.
5. An angel? No, or Mary would have seen Him in Gabriel. Angels could celebrate
His birth but not take His place. Turning now to the desire we shall see that
man’s cry has been for a God-Man. Two well-defined sentiments enter with it.


44 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. I.
ii a CRE SRC OOPe L6 S S e
. The hope of finding God. For this alone has man passed from one religion to
aed %) This God not the inert and isolated God of philosophy, lost in the
solitudes of heaven: but (2) a living, present God. 2. The sorrow of condemnation.
Man longs to appease a justly offended God. He therefore offers sacrifice, the
produce of his fields, the first-born of his flocks, nay, his child, his brother. But
it avails nothing. A sacrifice must be found that is both pure and human. For
many ages man has sighed for an incarnation in order to redeeming sacrifice.
This is what has been promised. Ancient prophecy recognized in the Messiah’s
person the man and the God, the Victim and the King. IL Tae accomPLisHMENT
OF THE DESIRE. ‘The Word was made flesh.” 1. What is this but that before
He existed in God as a personal being. Had the Word been a Divine virtue or
influence, it would had in it nothing special or distinctive, and therefore could
have been no Saviour. Nor could it have communicated the knowledge of the true
God. ‘God is love.” A God who did not love would be a God dead. But how
should God be from all eternity, a God of love, if He had no object for His love?
Where, then, will you find this object if not in that Word which is God, and yet
is distinct from Him. ‘The Son gives as the Father. 2. He shows us the living
nature of God’s revelations. A perfect revelation of the living and eternal God is
living and eternal as Himself: the express image of the Father. Each utterance
has life like the Word Himself. God has spoken (1) In Eternity, and His Word
is His only Son, (2) In Time, and Creation was the echo of the Word. (3) In
Revelation, and each of the syllables of the Word was a fact of mystery. (4) In
redemption and now the Word is made flesh. While giving full weight to His
Divinity, let us not attenuate His humanity. The one is as necessary to our
salvation as the other. By being Man and yet one with the Father, He was able
to consummate on the cross His redeeming sacrifice, drawing the heart of man to
God and the heart of God to man. III. THE PRoors oF THIS DoctRINE. 1. The
history of Jesus shows us Divinity and humanity united in His person. His
personal humiliation from the manger to the cross side by side with the glory of
His morals and perfect character. 2. Jesus was conscious of and professed His
union. He speaks of Himself as the Son of Man and the Son of God; and
insisted on His oneness with the Father. 3. The apostolic Church confirmed this
doctrine, proclaiming His Divinity and worshipping Him. IV. THe meporTance
OF THIS DOCTRINE. Christianity stands or falls with it. 1. For whose sake do the
impugners of the doctrine denyit? (1) For the sake of God? But the Deist gives us
instead of the living, consummate God an abstract and distant Divinity. We don’t
know where to find Him, and He has never dried a single tear nor gladdened a
heart. Thus God is libelled and His cause compromised. (2) For the sake of
man? But man has desired this God-Man: He only has blessed the race. 2. If
what the impugners say is true, Christianity is an imposture and Christ a deceiver,
And yet He is admitted to be the noblest of Beings. ‘Let these considerations be
weighed. V. CHRISTIANS ARE ENTRUSTED WITH THIS DOCTRINE, Let it not slumber
in creeds, but be preserved in a living faith and communion. (E. de Pressense, D.D.
Bethlehem and its good news:—1. There was nothing great about Bethlehem
(Micah v. 2). It was but a shepherd village or small town, yet here the great
purpose of God became a fact. It is in facts that God’s purposes come to us that
we may take hold of them as realities. The city is poor, but its lowliness makes
it more suitable as the birthplace of Him who though He was rich, yet for our sakes
became poor. And all about it seems to suit Him. It is ‘‘ the house of bread,” fit
dwelling for Him who is the Bread of God: Ephratah “ the fruitful,” as if pointing
to the fruitful One, 2. It is not named in the text; but you cannot read the latter
without being transported to it. 3. At Bethlehem our world’s history began, for
His birth has influenced all history, sacred and secular, before and behind, As
regards our text, let us see—I. Wuar iris. Christ, Immanuel, Jesus, are our Lord’s
names in time; but ‘“‘ Word” and “‘Son” are expressive of His eternal standing.
The inaccessable Godhead becomes approachable, the incomprehensible, com-
prehensible. All the nations of the earth God hath made of one blood, and of
that one blood the Word was made partaker. Thus Bethlehem hecomes a link
between heaven and earth. God and man must meet here and look each other in
the face. II. Wuar ir rEacnzs, God’s thoughts of peace. The message is a
decided but not a finished one. You must associate Bethlehem with Calvary.
1, Would you learn the way to God? Go to Bethlehem: the Infant in the manger
is the way. 2. Would you learn the vanity of earth? Go to yon manger where
the Lord of Glory lies. 3. Would you have a safeguard against worldliness and


ay
'


CHAP, I.] _ ST. JOHN. 45


sin and error? Keep the child’s companionship. 4. Would you learn to be
humble? Go to Bethlehem; there the Highest is lowest. 5. Would you learn
self-denial? See the Word made flesh. (H. Bonar, D.D.) Why God became
Man :—This Gospel contains no record of the Nativity like the others. They record
the fact, this the underlying principle of the fact. Unless you take John’s point
of view, you cannot understand Luke’s story. I. Tus ractirsetr. Three things:
1. The Word: personal, eternal, Divine, the active energy of the Divine Nature.
(1) The Author of creation. (2) The Source of all life and light. (3) The medium
of all revelation. 2. With the audacity which is the true work of Divine revela-
tion, the text draws together the two discordant ideas ‘‘ Word” and “flesh”; not
this tremulous, feeble, mortal body with its needs, weaknesses, pains, desires, cor-
ruption, not the whole humanity, body, soul, spirit, the entire sweep and range of
what a manis. 3. How He “became” it; which involves the willing transforma-
tion, by the energy of the Person Himself. Became—not assumed. It was not a
transcient manifestation such as the Buddhist incarnation or Hindoo avatar; not
God coming down in the likeness of men for a moment or two; but so becoming
us, He ceased to be the Word. So the living heart of Christianity is supernatural.
That round which it turns is the biggest of all miracles, and if you take that all
the rest is natural. II. THE VARIOUS PURPOSES WHICH THIS MIGHTIEST OF ALL
MIRACLES SERVES IN THE WORLD. Here is a five-fold star, with five rays. 1. To
show God. As the Shekinah glory abode in the Tabernacle, so God tabernacled in
Christ’s flesh. Christ shows God as He was never seen before, full of grace and
truth. The mightiest and brightest light that makes God known, is that of gentle-
ness, tenderness, self-oblivion, patience. If you want to know God, and not to
guess Him, not to shrink from Him, and not merely to see the fringe of brightness
about the Infinite heart, you must turn away from everything else to Christ. 2. To
show what man ought to be. How perfect Christ’s example is ‘we may gather from
the admission of enemies, from our own hearts and consciences. Instead of being
handed over to a mere law “ Do this and live,” it means ‘‘ Do as I do, because I love
you and you love Me.” 3. That He might die. You cannot understand Christmas
without Good Friday, the meaning of the cradle unless we see the shadow of the
Cross. Christ came to bear our sins that we might be born again unto newness of
life. 4. That He might have sympathy with us. He has trodden all the road
before us, and is near us to help us on. 5. That manhood might be glorified. He
has stooped down that thereby He might befit us to be like Him. Where He is, He
will lead us. What He is, He will make us, (A. Maclaren, D.D.) The incarna-
tion:—I. THE INCARNATION of THE Son oF Gop PLAINLY assERTED. 1. Tue
Person assuminc. The Word, i.e., the second Person in the most glorious God-
head, called the Word, either because He is the Scope and principal Matter, both
of prophetical and promissory Word; or because He expounds and reveals the
mind and will of God to men (ver. 18). 2. THe Nature ASSUMED flesh, i.e., the
entire human nature, consisting of a true human soul and body (Rom. iii. 20; Gen.
vi. 12). The word flesh is rather used here than man, on purpose to enhance the
admirable condescension and abasement of Christ; there being more of vileness,
weakness, and opposition to Spirit in this word than in that, as is pertinently
noted by some. Hence the whole nature is denominated by that part, and called
flesh. 3. THe Assumption itseLr. Not fuit, He was (as Socinus would render it,
designing thereby to overthrow the existence of Christ’s glorified body now in
heaven) but factus est, it was made, i.e., He took or assumed the true human
nature into the unity of His Divine Person, with all its integral parts and essential
properties, and so was made or became a true and real Man by that assumption. ‘The
Apostle, speaking of the same act (Heb. ii. 16), uses another word, fitly rendered
“He took on Him,” or He assumed: which assuming, though inchoative, it was
the work of the whole Trinity, God the Father, in the Son, by the Spirit, forming
or creatiug that nature; as if three sisters should make a garment betwixt them,
which only one of them wears; yet terminative, it was the act of the Son only;
it was He only that was made flesh. And when it is said, He was made flesh, mis-
conceive not, as if there was a mutation of the Godhead into flesh; for this was
performed, not by changing what He was, but by assuming what He was not. As
when the Scripture, in a like expression, saith, He was made sin (2 Cor. v. 21), and
made a curse (Gal. iii. 13), the meaning is not that He was turned into sin, or into
a curse; no more may we think here the Godhead was turned into flesh, and lost
its own Being and nature, because it is said He was made flesh, II. Tus assER-
TION STRONGLY CoNFIRMED. He dwelt among us, and we saw His glory. This was


46 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. L
Re eee
no phantasm, but a most real and dubitable thing. For He pitched His tent or
tabernacled with us. And we are eye-witnesses of it (1 John i.1, 2,3). (J. Flavel).
The Incarnation:—I. Cunist’s HUMmIATION. He took the whole nature of man.
1. That He might suffer. 2. That He might obey the law of God in the nature
that bad broken the Law. 3. That He might die. He could not have died without
a body. He could not suffer death while in His Father’s bosom. 4. That He
might sympathise with men (Heb. ii. 17). II. Curist’s COoNDESCENSION. “He
tabernacled,” as ina tent. He lived on earth for a time, just as a man might live.
The word is used particularly—1. As a reference to the tabernacle of old. This
was a meeting place between God and His people. Such was Christ. Through
Him a just God can meet thesinner. 2. It intimates His condition. A tent is an
inferior dwelling to a house or a palace. Christ went about from place to place,
and had not where to lay His head. He was dependent upon others for His rest and
food. 3. It sanctifies affliction. No one need be ashamed of his poverty, since
Christ was poor. III. Curist’s cuory. Amid all His humiliation, His glory burst
forth and manifested itself—‘‘ We beheld,” &c. Clad as our Saviour was in the
garments of a man, it was impossible entirely to veil His higher nature. Neither
was it advisable. It was necessary that the world should know that He was God.
His Divine glory was constantly manifesting itsel{—when the star led the wise
men—when He taught the doctors in the Temple—when He healed the sick and
raised the dead. But the chief glory was only visible to spiritual eyes. 1. Divine
wisdom. The world considered His wisdom to be folly. It was not His outward
manifestation, not His miracles or acts, but the plan of salvation, and the scheme
He accomplished when He said, ‘‘It is finished.” 2. Divine love. There is more
glory in the love of God than in all the universe of material creation. This can
only be discerned by the eye of faith. When a sinner is brought to find peace, he
realises the glory of Christ. We have seen. Have youseen? IJV. Curist’s FUL-
ness. ‘Full of grace and truth.” Hence His glory need not deter us from
coming to Him. 1. Full of grace, i.e., He is easy to approach, merciful, loving,
gracious, in aspect and nature. 2. Full of truth. Himself the truth. Hence we
have a firm foundation for our faith. All Christ does is true, His pardonisa
true pardon. His promises are true, &. (Preacher’s Analyist). The necessity
of the Incarnation:—I. THAT MAN MAY POSSESS A FULL AND FAITHFUL REVELATION
or Gop’s CHARACTER. Jesus became a medium through whom the dazzling attri-
butes of Deity were modified, and a focus in whom the infinite perfections of Diety
were centred, II. Tar THERE MAY BE A PERFECT EXAMPLE. Precept will often
fail, when example will succeed. Christ was made like His brethren that they
might be stimulated to be like God.. III. THar an ATONEMENT MAY BE MADE FOR
SIN, AND MAN RECONCILED To Gop. IV. THAT MAN MAY HAVE A SYMPATHETIC AND
POWERFUL Meprator at the right hand of God. Conclusion: Jesus is a perfect
Saviour—perfect in His power to save, being able to save to the uttermost; perfect
in His willingness to save, declaring that whosoever cometh unto Him, He will in
no wise cast out; perfect in His sympathy, knowing our frame, remembering that
we are dust, and declaring that He will carry the lambs in His arm, and deal with
peculiar kindness with those in special trials; perfect-in His wisdom, knowing His
sheep and knowing the way that they take; perfect in His faithfulness, being the
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever, and promising never to leave nor forsake His
own disciples. He isa perfect Saviour because in Him dwelt and dwells the fulness
of the Godhead. (J. H. Hitchens, D.D.) The purpose of the Incarnation :—
I. Tue Dicnirrep CHARACTER WHO WAS MADE FLESH. 1.'The Word partakes of
the same nature and perfections as the Father and Spirit. (1) Eternity
(Micah y. 2), (2) Omniscience (John xxi.17). (3) Omnipresence (Matt. xxviii. 20).
(4) Immutability (Heb. xiii. 8). 2. This dignified Person was made flesh. (1) He
had a true body, not merely the appearance of one. (2) He hada reasonable soul.
(3) All the Persons of the Trinity were concerned in His Incarnation. The Father
prepared His body; the Spirit formed it; the Son assumed it. 3. He dwelt among
us—(1) Performing the most astonishing miracles; (2) Preaching the most inter-
esting truths; (3) Living the most holy life. II. Some Reasons way THE SAVIOUR
BECAME INCARNATE 1. That ancient prophecy might be fulfilled (Gen. iii. 15;
Deut. xviii, 15; Isa. ix. 6; &e.), 2. That the glorious perfections of Deity might
be displayed—the glory of God’s infinite wisdom, almighty power, unspotted
purity, inflexible justice, boundless compassion, inviolable truth. Hence angels
and men combine in singing ‘Glory to God in the highest.” 3. That captive
sinners might be redeemed. (1) By nature man is a spiritual slave. (2) Christ


cHar, 1.] * ST. JOHN. 47


became incarnate to redeem him from—(a) Sin. ‘‘Sin shall have no more
dominion, &c.” (b) Satan. ‘The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your
feet.” (c) The world. ‘This is the victory, &c.” (d) Wrath. “Who hath
delivered us from the wrath to come.” (3) Jesus redeems us by His blood (1 Pet.
i. 18, 19). (4) In the day of conversion, the believer experiences His redemption.
(5) Christ redeems us to His image, His grace, His heaven (Psa. Ixxxvi. 11).
4. That the righteous law of heaven might be honoured. 5. That the empire of
Satan might be ruined. 6. That the gates of paradise might be opened. We
learn the amazing condescension of the Saviour. Consider—(1) From whence
He came; (2) To whom; (3) The circumstances in which; (4) Why. (T. Lewis.)
The double Incarnation ; or, the soul’s Christmas (text in conjunction with Eph. iii.
17) :—There are two births of Christ—one unto the world, the other into the soul.
Men think more of the former than of the latter and celebrate it every year; but
the latter is equally momentous. The soul has its births; the rising into conscious
existence of every latent sentiment, filial, connubial, parental, Christian. I. The
ANALOGY between those two Incarnations. 1. Both result from Divine interposition.
2. Both create great epochs; the temporal advent was the crisis of history. The
B.c. meets in it, the a.p. starts from it. And from the Spiritual advent all after
life takes its date and derives its impulse. 3. Both awaken antagonism, the former
Herod’s hostility, &c., the latter that of the depraved nature. 4. Both are mani-
festations of God. II. Tue pissmmmarrry. 1, The one may become a curse to
man, the other must be a blessing. Nothing so terrible to a lost soul as the former.
It aggravates the world’s guilt and augments its responsibility. The latter brings
sunshine to the soul and ever advancing blessedness. 2. The one occurred without
man’s choice, the other requires his seeking. (D. Thomas, D.D.) The great
birthday :—Christmas day is the greatest birthday of the year. I. Itis THe BrrTHDAY
or Carist. The greatest man, teacher, benefactor, but immeasurably more than
this. Men have misconceived and misstated the Incarnation; that two persons
were united in Christ instead of two natures in His single person ; that the infinite
Being was confined within the finate nature which He assumed ; that God ceased
to be really Himself ; that human nature was annihilated by its union with Deity.
It was inevitable that the possibility of the Incarnation should be questioned ; but
what is man but a sample, at an immeasurably lower level of a union of two
totally different substances, one material, the other immaterial, under the control
of a single human personality? As the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so
God and man is one Christ. And He who could bring together matter and spirit in
man might surely raise both matter and spirit to union with His own Divinity
under the control of His eternal Person. But what moved God to unite Himself
with a creative form? Is not such an innovation on the association, if not on the
conditions of His Eternal Being? Yes, but so was Creation, and Creation involved
possibilities which led to much else beyond. It involved the possibility of the fall.
‘And then as God must have created out of love,so out of love He must bring a
remedy to the ruined creature. Of other remedies nothing has been told us, but we
know that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. II. Tum BrrrHDAY oF
HUMAN GREATNESS. Man has alternately depreciated and exaggerated His import-
ance. Just now the deprivatory account is the popular one. It is no longer
possible ; we are reminded to think of this earth as the centre for whose benefit all
else exists. Itis only a small satellite of the sun while the sun is but one of
thousands of stars which are moving round some undiscovered centre. The insig-
nificance of man’s dwelling-place involves its own insignificance. And this impres-
sion is deepened by the vicissitudes to which men are exposed, and the cheapness
of human life. But apart from Christianity nature also opens out another side to
the matter. When we look at any one man, however feeble and worthless, we
become conscious of his having some title to a profound and anxious interest.
Here is a man who, before he became a criminal, threaded his way unnoticed
through the crowd; but put upon his trial for his life he becomes a centre of
universal interest. Why, if he is only an animal, should the question of his life be
followed more anxiously than that of an ox or a sheep? Men are thus moved
because a destiny is being weighed in the balance and at such moments the
depreciatory theory of man’s nature and origin gives way. The poor prisoner oa
the dock represents the ineffaceable, indestructible greatness of man. Still men’s
judgment about himself rises and falls with the varying circumstances of his life
and modes of his mind. Left to himself he has no solid ground of confidence in
any estimate he may form, To discover the greatness of his need and capacities,


et ee
48 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. i [cuae. a


ee
he requires some standard utterly independent of himeelf. Such he finds in the
Treatawion which, uniting, his nature to that of the Being who made Him, restores
to man his self-respect, and makes him feel his moral poverty without God and his
utter dependence upon Him. Think of our Lord’s life from this point of view, of
putting such high and exceptional honour on our nature. The moral beauty of
which mankind is capable appeared in Jesus as it never appeared before or since.
But we can only surrender ourselves to its power when we admit that it is the life
of the Word made flesh. A man might have uttered the Beatitudes, but as mere
man, being modest and truthful, could have said, ‘ I and my Father are one.”” All, |
however, fall into place if He is the God-Man. Embrace this truth and it is not
hard to understand how His death on Calvary availed for the world’s redemption.
Nor does it matter that His life was lived on a small planet. Since the heaven of
heavens cannot contain Him, the vastest stars and suns have no more claim, on
account of their size, to His regard. When He became man to elevate and redeem

the human family He chose the scene where the Divine work would be best achieved.

Ill. THe BIRTHDAY OF HUMAN BROTHERHOOD. At the manger of Bethlehem we may

dare to look forward to that union of human love, of human hearts, of which the
noblest of our race have ever dreamed, a brotherhood sometimes recommended as
abstract argument, sometimes dictated by revolutionary terrorism, but which, to be
genuine, must be a perfectly free movement of human hearts and wills drawn
towards each other by supreme attraction. That attraction we find in the Divine

child of Bethlehem, born that He might regenerate the world, and all the courtesies

and kindnesses of Christmas between families, households, rich and poor, old and

young, are rightly done in His honour who came to unite us to each other in union

with Himself. (Canon Liddon.) The relation of the Incarnation to modern
problems :—I. THE poctrInE or Gop. The soundest, shortest argument for the

Being of God is Christ. God is in nature; but nature is dumb. ‘No speech, no
language, their voice is not heard.” But inthe Word Godhas spoken. The Incar-

nation teaches Theism by teaching us more than Theism. God is something more

than the constructor of this curious clock. What comfort do we get from the concep-

tion of an infinite brain? Add the Incarnation to Theism and we have peace, ‘‘ Ye

believe in God, believe also in Me.” But does not my own nature teach me that

God is good? Yes, but Christ corroborates the testimony of our moralnature. The
avatars of India and the Apotheoses of Greece are only efforts of the mind to
anticipate this great doctrine of Christianity. The sense of guilt and longing for
reconciliation may have produced these myths. But that does not prove that the
subjective state was a superstition. The ability to appeal to the historic facts con-
cerning the life of our Lord is the strongest confirmation of the truth of our
religious instincts. We can proceed by way of philosophy and prove our need of a
Saviour, and by way of history prove the fact of a Saviour who reveals the

nature and fatherhood of God. II. To THE IRRELIGIOUS THOUGHT OF THE AGE.

That is marked by a tone of serious, disheartened scepticism. Yet the Positivist

tries to keep his religion after he has denied his God. What he teaches as a sub-

stitute for the Gospel is taught by the Gospel itself, is the only form in which it is
worthy of a moment’s consideration. If he would worship an ideal humanity, he

must take Christ. If he would see an example of “ altruism ’’ he must take Christ’s
atonement. But infidelity must go back to Christ or forward to despair. When a

man has discarded the eternal hope in Christ it is not strange that he should ask

‘Is life worth living?’ Christ or Pessimism, the gospel of hope or the gospel of des-

pair, salvation or suicide are the sharp antitheses presented by modern thought.

III. To arotoarrics. Applying to Scripture the argument of design, we conclude that

it was constructed on a plan which must have existed in a single mind before it was
executed in the progressive publication of the separate books. The Incarnation

gives to the Bible its unity. The Old Testament isa congruous body of doctrine
culminating in Christ ; the New Testament is a coherent body of doctrine culmi-
nating around the Person of Christ. The doctrine is woven in the very texture of

the sacred books. How did this happen? The advanced thinkers will not ask us

to believe that organisms grow by chance. The intelligence that built the world, .
made the Bible. IV. To Tue pocrrine or Grace. The paradox of the Bible is

the severity with which God looks on sin, and the tenderness with which He
regards the sinner. Is there any way in which this dual relationship can be
brought into conspicuous pre-eminence? Yes; the Incarnation is God’s testimony to

His love for man and to His respect for law. He who knew no sin was made sin

for us that we might be made the righteousness of Godin Him. The atonement ig


.


So) ee ee
r


omaP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 49


Pl ae ee ee I a

therefore based upon the Incarnation. Advanced thought a short time since
founded the hope of the universal forgiveness on the fatherhood of God. Now it
preaches that man is under law to an extent which makes it idle to speak of for-
giveness. Sin and suffering are inseparable, they say, and thus those who preached
a gospel of love without law, now preach a gospel of law without love, Liberalism
does not know how to reconcile these ideas, and by rejecting the Incarnation has
rejected the only method of reconciliation. V. To RExiGiovs communion. A man
may be a Christian who does not accept all the doctrines of the creeds, It is
equally clear that a man who denies all cannot be invited to the Lord’s table,
Where then shall we draw the line? Here. The acceptance of this doctrine draws
towards Christ; its rejection separates from Him by an impassable gulf? The
man who worships the Lord Jesus as God, and gives Him the homage of his heart
is a Christian, although he may not accept the Athanasian statement. The same
principle determines our relations with Romanism. It is not necessary to abate
any of our antipathy to her errors, but a church must not be refused a place in
Christendom which holds the Incarnation and related doctrines. VI. To THE
FUNDAMENTALS OF RELIGION. Any religion which is to take permanent hold upon
the world must offer a theory of the universe and tell me whence I am and whither
Iam going; must prescribe a code and teach morality ; must stir the emotions and
take hold of the heart; Christianity unites these three ideas in the Incarnation.
VII. To pracrican CHRIstIAN LIFE. The incarnate life of Christ stands in close
relation to the development of Christian character. That development is gradual,
and is concurrent with the study of Christ. And to study Him is to know that He
is Divine. If we study the great principles which constitute His doctrine we hear
the voice of one who spake as never man spake. So comprehensively, so minutely,
so influentially. If we study His example there is that which proclaims His Divine
perfections, and yet His human, helpful, imitable brotherhood. VIII. To Cuaris-
TIAN WORK IN RELATION TO THE EVANGELIZATION OF THE WORLD. The book of Acts
is the second volume of the life of Christ, the first being an account of all Jesus
“began.” The Incarnation, then, was but the beginning of a great career which is
still in progress. It is Christ who is still doing the evangelization of the world.
This is the only true basis of missionary confidence, and the continuously fulfilling
prophecy of the final victory. IX. To man’s PLACE IS THE SCALE OF BEING :
correcting the depreciation of man by science and the exaggerated dignity
conferred upon him by Pantheism. He is neither an insignificant atom nor
God. The Incarnation shows his reconciliation, not identity with God, and
his glorious and elect creatureship. X. To THE PURPOSES OF Gop. We know
not what we shall be, but we know that we shall be like Him. And He
is the same to day, yesterday, and for ever. The perpetuity of Christ’s
human nature is the guarantee of an immortalized personality, And our
individual interest in Jesus will not prevent us sharing the enthusiasm we may
rightly feel concerning the destiny of His Church. The marriage of God and man
eighteen hundred years ago is but the prophecy of a day when the bells of heaven
shall ring in the nuptials of a ransomed Church with her royal spouse. (Prof.
Patton.) An argument for the Incarnation :—Millions throughout the world hail
the annual return of Christmas not because of its festivities, but because it com-
memorates the birth of Jesus. Class Jesus, as some do, with Plato and Shake-
speare, and He would receive no more honour than they. This exuberance of
feeling is due to the belief that He is divine. Whence does this belief spring?
From the Scriptures. But all peuple do not accept the Bible; we have therefore
to move along other lines of argument. And Christians may find their faith
strengthened by finding the conclusions reached by the Bible arrived at by other
roads, I. AN INCARNATION oF Gop 1s Nor impossIBLE, No doubt it involves a
miracle. The process by which the two natures were united in one person is
wholly mysterious. But so is that by which spirit and matter, mind and body
combine in man. But if the one is not impossible, why the other? We are not
now dealing with the limited powers of men but with the omnipotence of God; and
what the Almighty chooses in His wisdom to do, even if it be to assume a human
form, He can do. II. AN 1NcARNATION oF Gop Is Not ImpRoBABLE. 1. It has always
been expected and desired, and the expectation has been expressed in every possible
way—in fable, philosophy, religion. 2. This instinct is natural. Man cannot be
satisfied with the manifestations of God in nature. They leave the soul with
vague, restless desires after a more perfect acquaintance. At best they give a God
for philosophers, for the intellect, not one who has influence over life, moulding


ici
50 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. 1,
“i a ae
and fashioning the heart. 3. 'These two facts point to an incarnation. For who
created the desire? God Himself. And shall He who creates the capacity leave
it unsatisfied ? III. THe CHARACTER AND CONDUCT OF CHRIST CAN ONLY BE EXPLAINED
ON THE GROUND THAT Hz, THE WoRD MADE FLESH, I8 THE SATISFACTION FOR THIS
prsmre. You cannot understand the account of His life unless you recognize His
Godhead and manhood. 1. He is the only perfect Man who has ever trod this
earth. This is the confession of friends and foes of His own day and ours. How
is this to be accounted for? Not by surrounding influences. There was nothing
in His age, home, or contemporaries calculated to produce a perfect man. 2. All His
actions and words are in harmony with the idea that He was the Word made flesh.
His wonderful birth is succeeded by a wonderful life. (W. Braden.) The rela-
tions of the Incarnation :—I. The Incarnation in relation to man. 1, It shows the
dignity of the human body. The material part of our nature has been maligned
in every age; but ever since the incarnation it has been respected more and more.
“ Matter is essentially evil,” said the Greek philosopher. ‘‘ Whoso layeth his hand
on a human body toucheth heaven,” said Novalis and Carlyle. The incarnation
took place between these utterances, 2. It shows the dignity of the human soul
in the human body—of human nature in its totality. 3. Linking man to God it
removed the antithesis between them. Something more was requisite to remove
the antagonism, even the atonement. Prior to the Incarnation a wide gap divided
the Creator from His creation, but the Incarnation filled it up, and did away with
the antithesis, There is now nota single break in the chain of existence. From
the tiniest atom to Absolute Being there is one continuous ascent. II. The Incarna-
tion in relation to Gop. It is a revelation of God. 1. It reveals the plurality of
persons in the Divine essence. This truth is the exclusive property of the Church
of the New Testament because the Incarnation is its exclusive property. The Holy
Trinity existed previously, and dim prefigurations of the doctrine are noticeable in
the Old Testament. But the doctrine would never have been fully apprehended
but for the historie reality. 2. The Incarnation reveals the Fatherhood of God.
“The glory as of the only Begotten.” Deny the Incarnation and you deny the
deepest Divine Fatherhood. It reveals the intrinsic Fatherhood. It shows usa Son,
not by creation in time, but by generation in eternity, and consequently shows us
a Father, not in virtue of His creative, but of His generative energies. By the side
of this all other fatherhoods are types and figures. 3. The Incarnation reveals the
redeeming character of God. Deny the Incarnation, and you have no positive
proof of the Divine love; believe it, and you can never desire a higher proof. He
gave His only begotten son; what more could He do? (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.)
The significance of the Incarnation :—There was an end sought; by what means
should it be reached? There was a tremendous necessity; how should it be met?
There was an infinitely gracious wonder to be wrought; in what wondrous way
should it be accomplished? This was the problem. Conjectures as to its solution
only serve to show that the way taken was the only way. 1. Almighty compulsion
would have crushed human freedom, put human virtue aside, turned grace into
magic, 2. Moral influence or persuasion would have left man’s past disobedience
uncancelled, the sanctities of law despised, authority abolished by Him in whom
it was established. At best there would have been an invertebrate manhood, a
molluscous morality, 3. Voices of audible command or promise spoken per-
petually from heaven to earth would have formed a revelation as grotesque as
ineffectual, 4. Written communications must have been subject to manifold
hindrances and limitations as an agency of salvation, a8 was shown when they
were actually employed. 5, A redemption by sacrifice must depend on the value
of the victim sacrificed; human sacrifices would contravene all the teachings of the
Divine economy touching the sanctity of human life, and of the insufficiency of the
sacrifice of brutes, apart from their typical sense, the religious history of the world
affords abundant evidence, We look, then, as we are bidden to look, for the
reuniting power between God and man, to the Word made flesh and dwelling
among us, I. This appears in THE TWOFOLD FORM OF A FACT AND A PERSON, both
being far more conclusive than any course of abstract reasoning in theodicy, or any
theological demonstration. The fact and the person both take their place in the
public scenery of events, in inspired Scriptures, in general history, in a line of
great transactions inexplicable without them; and they have become imbedded
in the experience and enshrined in the reverent and loving faith of millions of men
through fifty generations, What is this fact? The life of God appears on the
earth not only harmonized, but perfectly blended with the life of man. Humanity


its


——


VQ ae oe


cHaP. I.] ST. JOHN. 51
ee ee eee
begins again with a possibility and offer of a restoration which is salvation to all
who will receive it. As the life of God is in Christ, we share in it by being united
to Christ. He took our human nature. The Divine nature or life was not
naturally ours—it was lost. We become “partakers” of it. ach individual
believer in this covenant of grace, lives eternally. Abiding in the vine, the branch
lives, grows, bears fruit. Here is the certainty of immortality. II. Taz RELATION
OF THE INCARNATION, THEN, TO THE BODY OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE is not difficult to be
determined. 1. It is the comprehensive truth of revelation. We may take any
article of the Christian creed, except those which affirm or imply the unity of God
and the natural depravity of men, and attempt to separate it from this supreme
and central fact, and we fail. 2. As the doctrine is comprehensive, so it is dis-
tinctive. In the ancient ethnic religions, in the Gnostic theosophies and emana-
tions of the East, as in modern Deism, Pantheism, and Positivism, there is nothing
that can be mistaken for it. III. Tom pocrrine oR THE FACT HOLDS A LIKE CENTRAL
AND INCLUSIVE POSITION IN Hoty Scripture. There is a unity in the sacred writings,
and that unity is the person of the Incarnate Word. The development of the
kingdom of God among mankind follows naturally a historical method; and so
Genesis comes first, with much afterwards, in the preparatory dispensations, before
the birth of the Saviour. But the real “ beginning,” or genesis, is given in the
first chapter of the Gospel of St. John. From that radiant dayspring the light
is reflected back to Eden, and shines forward to the Apocalypse. By this reading,
innumerable difficulties, which have given superfiuous trouble, disappear. The
parts take their due proportions. IV. Looxine onwaRD, WITH THIS WARRANT, FROM
our Lorp’s ASCENSION, WE SEE THE INTERIOR PRINCIPLE oF His xinaDom as it is set
up among the nations and expands along the ages. Christ not only watches His
family from above, He dwells and works within it. His family is His body, and
His body is His bride, and His bride is His Church ; and He lives in the members.
What began in the past eternity proceeds in the eternity 10 come, and to “ the
Word” there is but one eternity. We see our calling. What an inheritance!
What privilege! What responsibilities! (Bp. Huntington.) Why was the
Incarnation delayed :—Inasmuch as God is unchangeable, and the love exhibited
in Bethlehem was in Him from days of old, I make bold to affirm that He
embraced the’ first opportunity to work out the redemption of the race. What
would be the use of sending earlier when the world was not prepared to receive
Him? Jesus Christ is the joint product of heaven and earth; He is God and
Man; hence the necessity for both to be ready. God was ready, the Son was
ready. The earth was not ready. He had to wait till humanity should be
ready. The mind of man had to be prepared. Were it a mere question
of love or power, He could have been sent earlier; but as it was also a
question of wisdom, He must not be sent at a period likely to defeat the end
in view. God could not travel faster than the conditions of humanity admitted.
He must suit His pace to the tottering steps of man. It took God longer time,
perhaps greater pains, to beget Christ in the human mind than to beget Him in
the Virgin’s womb. Four thousand years were needed to accomplish the former ;
but the instant it was brought to pass, ‘‘God sent forth His Son into the world,
made of a woman, made under the law.” (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) The dif-
ference between the Christian and the heathen incarnations :—The Greek popular
incarnations were, in the main, personifications of natural phenomena. When the
court of Olympus was constituted, the conviction—universal among the Indo-
European peoples—that the gods could not be strangers to men, made it natural
to believe that they came down to earth from time to time. Aristotle’s and Plato’s
triads: again were simply psychological. These philosophers resolved the unity
of the human personality into a triad of principles. The Hindu Trimurtti is a
classification for religious purposes of the great natural processes of creation,
preservation, and destruction; and the thought of incarnation is easily linked
to the idea of Vishnu, as the Preserver uses the agency of heroes or great men
to deliver the race from evils by which it would otherwise be overwhelmed. The
Scripture Trinity, on the other hand, is a special revelation concerning the con-
stitution of the Divine nature. The Incarnation is based upon the ultimate fact
that God is love. If we regard Christianity as a philosophy, the doctrine of the
Incarnation is its essence. If we regard Christianity, practically, as salvation for
fallen man, the Incarnation is the secret of its exhaustless Divine power. (Prin-
cipal Grant.) Voluntary sympathy :—One of the secrets of Victor Hugo’s power
over the French people was their memory of the following: When the disasters


52 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. — [cHar. i
-German war were falling thickly, and the iron band was closing
ar oe seated tec that Victor Hugo was coming to the city. He came at ee
ery moment that the investment was complete, with the last train, the last breat
fe air. On the way he had seen the Bavarians, seen villages burned with
gatroloutt ‘and he came to imprison himself in Paris. A memorable ovation was
Bien him by the people, and they never forgot his voluntary sharing of their suf-
fvings (H. O. Mackey.) Christ clothed in human flesh :—The pure epi
is terrible to behold ; we could not see it and live; but clothing Himself with our


ivi i i Now we need é

kes the Divine nature more amiable and delightful to us.

ati afraid to look upon God, seeing Him through Christ’s human nature. It ;
was a custom of old among the shepherds, they were wont to clothe themselves :


i -skins, to be more pleasing to the sheep ; so Christ clothed Himself with
SU wees ihe Divine abit “ey be more pleasing to us. The human nature
i g, through which we may see the love and wisdom and glory of God clearly
2 Seine eae Through the lantern of Christ’s humanity, we may behold the
light of the Deity shining. God incarnate :—‘‘ Christ did not gain one perfection
more by becoming man, nor could He lose anything of what He possessed as God.
The almightiness of God now moved in a human arm ; the infinite love of God
now beat in a human heart; the unbounded compassion of God to sinners now
glistened in a human eye; God was love before; but Christ was now love, covered
over with flesh.” (R. M‘Cheyne.) The grand purpose of the Incarnation :—
Christ came down to the tabernacle of our nature which had broken down and
become a ruin, and to raise it up and repair it, making it fit for the habitation
of God by His own indwelling. (W. Denton, M.A.) The ideal fitness of the
Incarnation :—The Incarnation is not true, say the Unitarians. Then it is a great
pity; certainly it deserves to be true. Deny it, and the universe loses its unity and
integrity ; it is despoiled of much of its grandeur and poetry. According to the
orthodox view a continuous path stretches from the smallest particle of matter
at the very bottom of creation right up and away to the sublimest heights of the
Absolute and Unconditioned —all things gathered together in one in Christ.
What a grand unity! The two hemispheres of being, the Infinite and finite,
wedded in one glorious orb, which is now the es Light of the World!” In this
sublime unity, effected in the Incarnation, is contained the fundamental truth
of Pantheism without the grave and multiform errors thereof. Here the advocates
of Pantheism will find all they want, the two factors, Infinite and finite, reduced
into one. Instead of a God evolving the creation out of Himself, here is a God
involving Himself in the creation. Instead of the doctrine of evolution, the one
developing into the many, here is the doctrine of involution, the many gathered
together in the one. The Unitarian doctrine, because ever confronted with a
duality of being, belittles the creation, despoils it of its grandeur and divineness ;
and its meagreness and poverty are a testimony against its truth. What advantage,
then, hath the orthodox faith? or what profit is there of the Incarnation? Much
every way. It dignifies the human body, demonstrates the potentiality of human
nature, and reduces the duality of being, finite and Infinite, into an adorable unity
in the indivisible person of the blessed Saviour. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.)
The beneficent inspirations of the Incarnation :—It is often thrown in the face of
believers in the Incarnation that we paint human nature in colours too black, that
we recklessly and unduly disparage this creature of God. But surely they who
fling this taunt in our face know not whereof they speak. True, we do cherish
very humble views of it; but humble views are not low views. How can we, who
believe the Godhead has found room enough in it to dwell in all His inexhaustible
fulness, think low of it? The Incarnation shows us its grand potentialities, and
throws upon it a thousandfold stronger light than Unitarianism possibly can.
Believers in the Incarnation, therefore, burn with a quenchless desire to go and
rescue poor, down-trodden, despised human nature in lands afar off. Only faith
in the Incarnation can create missionaries. You demand a proof: I appeal to the
story of missionary enterprise. Where is the roll of the missionaries of Uni-
tarianism? ‘‘ By their fruit ye shall know them ”—systems as well as men, faiths
as well as trees. (Ibid.) Lessons of the Incarnation :—The Incarnation of God
in human form involves or foreshadows all the great truths of redemption. It
teaches or implies—I. Tuar THE CONDITION OF MAN IS A FEARFUL AND EVEN DESPERATE
one. If sin were a trivial affair God would not have so humbled Himself. II. THatT
Gop 1n His LovE HAS SENT DELIVERANCE, Nature does not disclose this manifesta-
tion of love. Christ incarnate shows that God has a place in His heart for the


i a i


OHAP. I.] ST, JOHN. 53


guiltiest of men. III. Tuar tHE Gop-MANn WAS WILLING TO SUFFER FOR OUR SALVATION.
God’s beneficence has in it heart-sorrow and willingness to endure grief for love’s
sake. God gave His Son, but that Son was one in heart and mind with Himself,
The hand that Jesus reaches down to rescue man is the hand of the Almighty.
The stormy ages will be calmed only because a Divine voice has said ‘“ Peace be
still.” The theology taught by the Incarnation is the world’s hope. (J. H.
Barrows, D.D.) The Hypostatic Union :—I. Ivs naturr. There are three illus-
trious unions in Scripture. 1. That of three Persons in one God: essentially.
2. That of two distinct natures and persons by one spirit: mystically. 3. This
of two distinct natures in one Person: hypostatically. For the more distinct
management of this latter I shall speak of it—1. Negatively. When Christ
assumed our nature it was—(1) Not united consubstantially as the Three Persons
in the Godhead are united. They have but one and the same nature and will; but
in Christ there are two natures and wills. (2) Nor physically as soul and body are
united. Death dissolves that, but this is indissoluble. (3) Nor mystically, as
Christ is united to believers; for they are not one person with Him. 2. Positively.
The human nature was united to the Divine. (1) Miraculously (Luke i. 34, 35);
which was necessary to exempt the assumed human nature from Adam’s sin
(Luke i. 15). For God can have no fellowship with sin, and had Christ been
a sinner He could not have satisfied for the sins of others (Heb. vii. 26). (2) In-
tegrally. Christ took a complete and perfect soul and body that He might heal
the whole nature of that sin which had infected every member and faculty.
(3) With all its sinless infirmities (Heb. ii. 17; iv. 15). (4) So that each nature
retains its own essential properties distinct, and the two understandings, wills,
powers, &c., the human and the Divine are not confounded as Eutyches held.
(5) Inseparably. Although Christ’s soul and body were divided at death, yet
neither of them from the Divine nature. II. Irs errecrs. 1. By virtue of this
union the properties of each nature are attributed to and agree in the whole
Person; so that the Lord of glory was crucified (1 Cor. ii. 8), the blood of God
redeemed the Church (Act xx. 28), and Christ is both in heaven and on earth
(John iii. 13). Yet the properties of our nature are not imparted to the other, nor
is it proper to say that the Divine nature suffered, or that the human was
omniscient. But the properties of both natures are so ascribed to the one Person
that it is {proper to affirm any of them of Him in the concrete, though not
abstractedly. 2, The singular advancement of Christ’s human nature, it being
hereby replenished with an unparalleled measure of Divine graces (Psa. xlv. 8),
and so He becomes the object of worship (Acts vii. 59). 3. The concourse and
co-operation of each nature to His mediatory works, for in them He acts according
to both natures. The human doing what is human, suffering, dying, &c.; the Divine
stamping all with infinite value (2 Cor. v. 19; Heb. ix. 14,15). III. Irs erounps anp
rrEasons. 1. The Divine did not assume the human necessarily but voluntarily; not
out of indigence, but bounty; not because it was to be perfected by it, but to
perfect it. 2. And so consequently to qualify and prepare Him for a full discharge
of His Mediatorship. (1) As prophet; for as God He knows the mind and will
of God (John i. 18; iii. 13); as man He is fitted to impart it to us (Deut.
xviii. 15-18 ef. Acts iii. 22). (2) As priest; had He not been man He could have
shed no blood; and if not God it had been no value, for us (Heb. ii. 17; Acts
xx, 28). (3) As king, had He not been man He had been heterogeneous, and so no
fit head for us, and if not God He could not rule or defend His body the Church.
IV. Irs usrs. 1. Let Christians inform themselves of this momentous trust, and
hold it fast against subtle adversaries. 2. Adore the love of the Father and the
Son who devised this method for your recovery (Phil. ii. 7; John iii. 16; Heb.
ii. 16). 3. Infinite wisdom has here left an everlasting mark. 4, Infer the incom-
parable sweetness of Christianity that shows such a foundation for the sinner’s
hope. 5. Union with our natures is utterly vain without union with our persons.
6. If Jesus Christ has assumed our nature, then He is touched with and has pity
for our infirmities (Heb. ii.17,18). 7. See to whata height Godintends to build up
the happiness of man in that He has laid the foundation so deep in the Incarnation
of His Son. 8. How wonderful a comfort is it that He who dwells in our flesh is
God. (J. Flavel.) The Word made flesh :—I. THe NAME BY WHICH OUR LorpD Is
DESCRIBED. 1. He was known by this name in the Jewish Church long before His
advent. 2. He is socalled because He comes forth from God like a word, a revealing
medium from us. IJ. THE WONDERFUL ORDER OF GOD’S PROVIDENCE TOWARDS US.
This is the mighty Being by whom the world and man was made. After man had


54 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. 2.
ee a

llen He might have refused to repair the injury. But the new creation was to
Boeitt from this same hand as the bee 1, The unsearchable love which showed
itself at the beginning brought Him down again from His Father’s bosom. 2. With
wonderful condescension He came not as before in power and majesty, but in
weakness and shame, in the likeness of the fallen creature whom it was His
purpose to restore. III. Tae Incarnation as a mark of love and tenderness HAS
SOMETHING STRIKING ABOUT Ir and affecting to the heart. To have taken the nature
of angels—to have appeared on earth in the pomp of majesty had been a humilia-
tion. IV. Bur ir WAS IN THE FORM OF MAN THAT GOD’S COMMAND HAD BEEN ORI-
GINALLY DISHONOURED, AND THEREFORE Curist assumED ir. 1. It might be incon-
sistent with the good of the denizens of the unseen world if their disobedience had
been left unpunished. And yet, on the other hand, there was the love of God to
His creatures. How reconcile justice and mercy? Thus the perfect obedience
of the Second Adam atoned for the offence of the first and of His descendants.
2. But how merit this? For all creatures owe this obedience, even unfallen angels.
In the Son of God alone could the necessary merit be found. 3. Wherefore when
mediator there was none God answered for us: ‘‘a body hast Thou prepared Me,”
&e. 4, But men required something more, something to show them how to live
and to make themselves ready for their pure inheritance. Therefore to furnish
an example the Word was made flesh. V. JEHOVAH IS AWFUL IN His INEFFABLE
PURITY, BUT THAT WE MIGHT HAVE COURAGE To APPROACH Him the Word was made
flesh. VI. Wr WANT SYMPATHY IN OUR WEAKNESS, INFIRMITIES, AND SORROWS; there-
fore that we may know that He can and does feel for us rz WorRD WAS MADE FLESH.
VIJ. Turis ASSUMPTION OF OUR BODY BY CHRIST IS A PLEDGE OF ITS RESURRECTION,
and such being the case, how we ought to reverence it! VIII. In rHat sopy Cunist
WILL RETURN. 1. Then the Christian will be like Him, for he will see Him as He
is. 2. Then those who have rejected Him will meet their doom. (J. Garbett, M.A.)
The Word made flesh :—I am thinking of a word. Do you know whatitis? No,
not until I have told you. But as soon as I say ‘‘ John,’’ then you know the word
I was thinking of. You know it row because the word was made sound, and you
caught it. Were I to write it you would know it, because the word would be made
ink, and you see it. Something lke that is what our text means. We could not
tell what God’s thoughts about us were until He showed us them in a way we could
understand. And He let us know them by sending Jesus Christ into the world.
He took a body like ours in order that we might know God’s thoughts about us;
and the more we know Jesus the more we know of God’s mind. He is the Word;
God’s thought made flesh. But then we might see and hear-a word and yet not
understand it. Did you ever see a Hebrew book? The letters are little, thick,
squarish things, with dots all over them, as if the pen had been sputtering when it
was writing! Now you could see these words, but you could not understand them
by yourself. How then do we come to know Hebrew? We get some person who
knows Hebrew, but who also knows English, and he teaches us. He knows the
Hebrew word, and he tells us in English what it means, and so we come to learn.
It is the same with the Word made flesh—with Jesus. We may see Him, may read
about Him, but before we can know Him we must get help from some one who
knows Jesus Christ and also knows us. Who is that Teacher? He is the Holy
Spirit. Till He teaches us we cannot know God’s thoughts about us; we might
see the words in the Bible, might see the Word made flesh, but yet not be able to
understand their true meaning, any more than we could understand a foreign book
till some one had taught us the language. (T. R. Howat.) The Nativity :—I.
Tur Worp. 1. There are some who say this name was given because so many
excellent words of prophecy and promise, and all of Him, are spoken in this Book—
the Word objective. 2. Because he disclosed all God’s counsel—the Word effective.
3. Because‘He cometh as the Word to teach us—the Word preceptive. 4. These
are all true, but short. Heis the only-begotten of the Father. As the Son is to
the Father, so is the Word to the mind. They proceed both. The Son réfers to
a living nature, the Word to an intellectual nature. There is in Him not only the
nature, but the wisdom of the Father. The Word showeth the manner, the Son
the truth of His proceeding. (1) With us the Son is-begot by propagation; the
Word therefore was requisite to show that His proceeding was not after a carnal
manner, (2) But lest we should think that God’s Word is no more to Him than
ours is to us, we are told that He is “‘ only-begotten,” and so of the substance of His
Father. II, Fires and m vs is used—l. To express His union with human flesh
fully. Itis part for the whole. If He abhor not the flesh: of the Spirit there will


watt aoe


cHaP. i. | ST. JOHN. 55


be no question. 2. From the flesh came the beginning of transgression : so of all
others least likely to be taken. The Word not refusing it, the rest have good hope.
3. Not man, a person; but flesh, our nature. 4. Flesh in Hebrew is the same for
good tidings, suggesting that some incarnation should be good news for the world.
Why the Word, flesh? (1) Surely, most kindly. The offended party was the
Author of the reconciliation. (2) Most fit ‘‘all things were made by Him.” He
that built repaired. (3) Most in the way of justice, that He might make full amends
for the flesh’s fault. II]. The Word was mane flesh. 1. Made, as against. (1)
Manicheus holding that he had no true body. (2) Made, not converted into flesh,
as Cerenthus, nor the flesh converted into the Word as Valentinus. (3) Not made
as friends are made, who continue two several persons still, and while the flesh.
suffered the Word stood by and looked on as Nestorius. (4) Not made by com-
pounding, and so a third thing produced of both, as Eutyches. 2. But by taking
the seed of Abraham. His generation eternal as the Word of God is as the inditing
of the Word within the heart. His generation in time, the Word made flesh, is as
the uttering it forth with the voice. The inward motion of the mind taketh into it
a natural body of air, and so becometh vocal; it is not changed into it, the Word
remaineth still as it was, yet they two become one voice. IV. Being past these
points of belief, LET US PAUSE TO STIR UP OURLOVE To HIM WHO THUS BECAME FLESH
FoR us. 1. If we were so much beholden for the Word spoken, how much more for
the performance ; if for the Word that came to flesh, how, then, for the Word
become fiesh. 2. The Word, ‘by whom all things were made,” came to be made
Himself. It is more for Him to be made than to make many worlds, 3. If made,
then made the most complete thing of all that ever He had made. But what is
man that He should be made him, or the Son of man that He should take His
nature upon Him? 4. If man, yet the man hath part—the soul. 5. What flesh?
(1) The flesh of an infant—not able to speak a word. (2) Howborn? Ina palace,
cradle of ivory, robes of estate! No! Astable His palace; a manger His cradle;
poor clouts His array. (3) What flesh afterward? In cold and heat, hungry and
thirsty, faint and weary. (4) Is His end any better? What flesh then? Rent
and torn; crowned with thorns; crucified. To be made the Head of angels a
humiliation, much more lower than the angels, much more “ despised and rejected
of men.” And why? Because He lovedus. V. And pweur. 1. A word of con-
tinuance. Not only made, but made stay. 2. Dwelt in a tent. Not a house to
stand for ever, but a tent to be taken down again. He came but of an errand, to
sojourn till He had done it, and being done He laid His tabernacle aside. 3.
Soldiers dwell in tents. An enemy we had strong and mighty. He came as our
champion ; set up His pavilion among us; took the military oath with shedding of
blood at His circumcision and passion. His engagement with the enemy cost Him
His life, but saved ours. VI. We sEnetp. 1. He dwelt not invisibly or obscurely.
The angels saw Him, and the wise men and the apostles, &., kc. 2. We, not one
but many. 3. We beheld: not ata blush, but at full sight, and at leisure and for
long. The word is that from whence a theatre is derived ; ag men with good heed
behold things there. So did we intentively all the acts and scenes of His life.
VII. His GLORY FULL OF GRACE AND TRUTH. ‘Two streams. Grace refers to the
Son, truth to the Word; grace is to adopt us, truth to beget us anew. Fitly do
these follow after glory. Glory terrifies. Grace invites ; and His glory is such
that it is full of grace; His mercy as great as His Majesty. Grace, too, as opposed
to the rigour, threats, and curses of the law; and truth as set against the shadows
and ceremonies of the law. ‘Take grace from truth and it is a mere illusion; sever
truth from grace and it is unpleasant. VIII. Now for THz BENEFIT. 1. Being
made flesh He will be a benefactor to it. ‘‘No man hateth his own flesh.” He
seeth us daily in himself. And if God the Father love the Word He must love,
too, our flesh which he has taken from us. 2. Being made flesh, all flesh may
come to him to present their request. 3. Being made flesh, He will not suffer this
of ours, the same with His, to perish, but repair it again and raise it out of the
dust. (Bp. Andrews.) The Person and work of Christ:—I. THe PERSON HERE
SPOKEN oF. The Word. 1. The origin of the expression. (1) Some have traced
it to the Jewish Targums, where the angel of the Lord of the Old Testament is
designated the Word of God. (2) Others to Philo, who spoke much of a semi-
divine person called the Word of God. (3) Others to the phrase, “the Word of the
Lord came upon him,” in the prophets, understanding by that not an influence or
a communication, but a person. But it is difficult to decide. 2. What is said
about the Word. (1) That He wasGod. (2) And yet distinct from God. (3) The


' Birerehson< “y)
56 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. — [cHAP. 1
Bre a ee
reator of the universe. 3. The appropriateness of the term. He is especially
ae revealer of God. Deity in the abstract is unrevealed ; only through the Word
has He made Himself known. Not that Divine manifestations began at the Advent.
(1) The external world reveals God’s power and Godhead through its Maker, the
Word. (2) Hence for all that men have learned from the universe they have been
indebted to the Word. (3) His are the intimations of God derived through con-
science and intuition. (4) All the truth that man has ever learned has been through
Him who is the True Light that enlighteneth every man. II. THE AFFIRMATION
HERE MADE CONCERNING THE Worp “became flesh.” The other evangelists give
us the facts, St. John the soul beneath the facts. Admit the assertion of John, and
all that the others say becomes perfectly natural. Deny the truth of what John
affirms, and everything that they tell becomes incomprehensible. What is meant
is not that He ceased to be the Word, but that in addition to what He had been He
took human nature upon Him. This union of Deity and humanity conditioned
both. 1. It made it necessary that the humanity should be pure; hence the
peculiar manner of Christ’s birth, wherein the entail of sin was broken, and His
body made a holy thing. 2. It required that His Godhead should be manifested
under certain limitations. The Incarnation was to man a revelation of God; to
angels an inveiling of God. III. THe pRooF WHICH IS FURNISHED OF THIS TRUTH.
‘“We beheld.” This verse is the text of the whole gospel, and each succeeding
chapter presents us with some new manifestation. In the first, Christ is intro-
duced to us by John the Baptist as the Lamb of God; in the second, He is the
Temple of God; in the third, He is the glorious anti-type of the brazen serpent; in
the fourth, He says, in answer to the woman’s question, “‘I Am ;” in the fifth, He is
the Judge of all; in the sixth, He says: ‘‘ I am the Bread of Life ;” in the seventh,
He is the Water of Life; in the eighth and ninth, He says twice: ‘‘ I am the Light
of the World; ’’ in the tenth, He says: ‘‘I am the good shepherd ;”’ in the eleventh,
He says: “‘I am the Resurrection and the Life ;”’ in the twelfth, He is the King of
Zion riding in triumph to His capital; in the thirteenth, He is the perfect
Exemplar ; in the fourteenth, He says: “I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life;”
in the fifteenth, He says: ‘‘I am the True Vine;” in the sixteenth, He is
the Precursor of the Comforter; in the seventeenth, He is the great Intercessor; in
the eighteenth, He is, by His own solem asseveration to Pilate, the King of a
spiritual domain, whose fundamental principle is truth; in the nineteenth, He is
the Willing Victim; and in the twentieth, He is again the Resurrection and the
Life. IV. Tur resuuts that flow from the reality of the Incarnation. 1. The
reality of Christ’s Deity gave sacrificial efficacy to His death on our behalf. 2. The
reality of Christ’s manhood assures us of perfect sympathy at His hands. 3. The
union of the two makes the resources of Deity availablefor us. (W.M. Taylor, D.D.)
Christ, the word :—1. It will be quite unnecessary for us on the present occasion to
entangle ourselves in any philosophical discussion of the name employed by St.
John—‘ The Word.” He who became flesh is the Word, the Revealer of God, at
once Power and Wisdom, Light and Life. Creation is part of His handiwork, as
the Revealer of God. In order to reveal the Father, the Word must live a man’s
life amongst men. This, then, is St. John’s contention, By sight, and by touch,
and by voice, says he, I became acquainted with a certain human life; a life, which
had a peculiar charm, a special glory about it; and that glory I can only describe
as the glory of a well-beloved and only son from a father. Uiterance, action,
suffering, all were one continuous and incessant testimony to an unseen Father in
heaven, 2. Thus, then, it appears, on St. John’s showing, that that which became
human was truly Divine ; and that which became subject to the conditions and
limitations of space and time was truly Eternal. Let us endeavour to draw out one
or two of the thoughts that are involved in these two statements. (1) The Divine
became human. That is to say, the Divine laid hold of the human in such a wa
as to make the human, so far as it could be made, a true image and reflection of
itself, All, then, that our faith in the Incarnation warrants us in asserting is, that
in Jesus Christ we have ‘authentic tidings of invisible things,” that in Him the
Divine and human are so united and blent, that we can draw certain and reliable
conclusions as to the nature of God, so far as that nature can and need be known
by us. And oh! think what this means! Think what the difference is between
saying, “ Jesus is only a man seeking God, adding one more to the many guesses as
to the nature of God:” and saying, ‘In Jesus we see God seeking man, and seek-
ing him out of pure love in order to save him”: “Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners.” When we ‘have told its isles of light, and fancied all beyond,”


CHAP, 1.] ST. JOHN. 57
be Ee Ea ae oe a mo eee arena ee eae
there must yet be heights and depths in that High and Lofty One who inhabiteth
eternity which no fancy, however soaring, can penetrate. In this sense, and under
such limitations as these, did the Divine become human, or the Word become flesh.
If I make the Incarnation the measure not only of that in God which it is
necessary for our eternal life to know, but also the measure of God Himself, I am
exposing your faith and my own in the truth of the Incarnation to a very perilous
strain. For my own sake, and for yours, I dare not do this. (2) As we may say, in
this guarded manner, that in the Incarnation the Divine became human ; so we may
say also, somewhat paradoxically, that in the Incarnation the Eternal became tem-
poral, clothed itself in forms of time and space, in order to reveal that which was
before the foundation of the world, which is from everlasting to everlasting. We
all know, I should suppose, how easy it is to drift into a notion about the work of
Christ, which amounts really to this: that He came not to do the will of God, but
to alter it. The Divine did not become human, the Word was not made flesh, if the
will of the Son on earth was not at all times and in all things at one with the will
of the Father in heaven; and if we may not accept the words, ‘“‘ Lo, I come to do
Thy will, O God,” as a full and adequate statement of the mission of Jesus Christ.
The work of Christ is, in fact, the invisible becoming visible, the Eternal becoming
temporal, the Infinite, finite. The Incarnation is, in short, the sacrament of the
eternal grace of God; +1 outward and visible sign, an effectual sign, of a grace,
of which time is no measure. 3. ‘‘ Rejoice in the Lord alway.” We can see now
what the real ground of all such rejoicing is, and how solid it is. The Incarnation
unlocks for us the secret of the Divine, Eternal Will, the Will which is at the root
of all things, and which rules all things, and shows us that its first and last word is
love. (D. J. Vaughan, M.A.) Christ, the life and the light:—“ The Word
became flesh’: such is St. John’s statement. In order to understand the state-
ment thoroughly, we must ask: First, what does St. John mean by ‘‘ The Word?”
And, secondly, what does he mean when he says, that ‘‘ The Word was made,” or
“became,” “flesh?” In the previous verses of the chapter St. John has been
speaking of the Word, though only in the fourteenth verse does he begin to speak
of the Word Incarnate. But St. John has much more to say than this. He refers
all creation to the instrumentality of One whom he calls the ‘“* Word;” whom,
afterwards, he calls the “Light”; and presently as Incarnate, the “Son.” Moving
on, step by step, St. John at this point introduces another thought. All creation
is expressive; but one part of Creation is more expressive than another. Creation
is not a dead level, but an ascending series. First the inorganic and inanimate
world; then the living being ; then the self-conscious life of man. ‘‘ Things”
first; then, ‘‘life”’: then, “light”; that is, persons, existence, self-conscious,
rational and moral. ‘ All things were made by Him.” ‘‘In Him was life; andthe
life was the light of men.” All is by the Word, expressive: but into the life which
is the light of men—that is to say, which in men becomes self-conscious, intelligent,
capable of reflecting the Maker’s image, He, the Word, can put more meaning,
more expression, than he could into the inorganic creation ; and so can render it
more significant, more declaratory of the Divine thoughts, mind, and will. From
the creative Word St. John passes to the indwelling Light, that ‘‘true Light, which
(as he says) lighteth every man.” He who is the creative Word is also the in-
dwelling Light. He who is the fount of all being, is also the light of man’s being,
the illumination of reason and conscience, the son of his soul. So it has been
since the Incarnation. And so it was before the Incarnation. Whatever the
physical basis of life may be, the metaphysical basis of life is ever one and the
same, even the Divine eternal Word. The Word, who was in the beginning, and
was in the beginning with God, did not make man, as man makes a thing—a piece
of furniture, or a house, or what not—turning it out of hand, and so leaving it to
shift for itself. In the moment of creation He became to man the mysterious basis
of that strong mysterious thing which we call life; the indwelling light, through
whose guidance and illumination man might know God, and become like God. So
wondrous, so subtle, so passing thought, are the ties which bind man to Him who
made him! In this way, all those long ages before the Incarnation, He was in the
world—a world made by Him, yet a world which knew Him not. II. And now we
can safely address ourselves to the second part of our subject, and inquire what St.
John means, when he says that ‘‘ The Word became flesh.” That the Word—being
what He has been from the first, and still is, to man, the metaphysical basis of life,
the indwelling light—should Himself become a man, and dwell for some thirty-three
years amongst men, full of grace and truth, need not surprise us; ought to be no


= ™
58 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. I.


stumbling-block to us; has nothing incredible or unnatural about it. Certainly it
would be in the highest degree unnatural and incredible and monstrous, that the
Word should become man, if that Word were not, by original constitution, so
intimately related to man, But once see the spiritual constitution of man in this
living and life-giving Word of God, as John and Paul saw it, and the Incarnation
becomes not only unnatural, but, in the highest sense of the word, natural; not
merely not incredible, but eminently credible, because so entirely in accordance with
man’s needs, and with God’s original constitution of human nature. The Light
that was only inward; and, being only inward, was dimmed and almost quenched
by man’s darkness; must needs become outward also, in order that it may
shine in all its native purity and strength, and shining thus may reveal God
to man, and man to himself. And how could it thus become outward, save in
a human life; that sweet and lovely and altogether exquisite human life which
the Gospel pages mirror to us? ‘There, in those pages, the inward voice of
conscience becomes an outward voice also; the latter attested by the former, the
former cleared and deepened and intensified by the latter. The voice of Jesus, be
sure, has its echo within every one of us. On this same Rock of the Incarnation
of the Eternal Word, Life, and Light, we can securely build all the other truths of
our most holy faith; the Fatherliness of God, the brotherhood of men, and all
else that most concerns us to know and believe for our souls’ health. Wherever,
in human nature, there is a trace or vestige of light, there we have a manifestation
of the presence of the indwelling Word, the same Eternal Word, who dwells in
our souls as Light. (Ibid). And dwelt among us and we beheld His glory.
Three sorts of men are described in the Bible as living in tents: shepherds,
sojourners, and soldiers. The phrase here used has reference to the calling
of all these three, and that it points to Christ’s life on earth being that of a
shepherd, a traveller, and a soldier. (Arrowsmith.) Christ the tabernacle
of God:—The Jews in the wilderness had a tabernacle or tent, wherein they
worshipped God, and there the glory of God was seen. Over the mercy seat
hovered the Shechinah. A glorious light, the symbol of the Divine presence,
shone ever in the sanctuary. In like manner Christ, who is ‘the brightness
of the Father’s glory,’’ the true Shechinah, tabernacled among us. His flesh,
that is, His body of human nature, was as a tabernacle, in which resided that
Divine nature of which the glory in the Jewish tabernacle was the symbol. Thus
the Tabernacle of God was with men, and He dwelt among us. (G. J. Brown, M.A.)
God dwelling with men :—Here is an answer to Solomon’s wondering exclamation :
‘But will God indeed dwell on the earth?” Here is fulfilment, higher than had
yet been known, of the ancient word, ‘I will set My tabernacle among you, and
My soul shall not abhor you,” and anticipation of what shall yet be when “ the
tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with them; and they shall be
His people, and God Himself shall be with them—their God.” (J. Culross, D.D.)
Christ’s glory in the flesh :—I. His ourwarp euory. When a Jew heard this he
must have denied it, inasmuch, as there was little in Christ which answered to
his conception of Messianic glory. Yet lowly as was our Lord’s life in general,
there were occasional gleams of it. 1. At the Incarnation. 2. At His Baptism:
3. At His Transfiguration. 4. When the Greeks had an interview with Him. 5.
At His Resurrection. 6, At His Ascension. II. But His inTERNAL GLory far sur-
passed this. Love, compassion, justice, truth. Add to these an existence which has
neither beginning nor ending, and a power which nothing can resist, and this is
God. And such as is the Father, such wasthe Son. 1. This glory is that to which
man, in his fallen condition, is most blind. Offer mana Saviour crowned with visible
power, or who shall secure wealth or pleasure, who would not acknowledge Him?
Christ did indeed offer these. They who should come to Him should conquer sin
and reign in heaven; should have spiritual riches and celestial pleasures—but who
would purchase these at the price demanded? 2. Pray to God that He may open
your eyes to see the glory of Christ and your glorious privilege. (J. Garbett, M.A.)
The glory of Christ :—What was it? I. Not a nrmpus or halo as seen in pictures,
or it would never have been denied. But that of—II. His cwaracrer and life, and
therefore open moral and spiritual eyes were needed to see it. III. His prrrecr
WisbomM, which spake as never man spake. IV. His atMIcHTY POWER, able to
minister to every need and relieve every suffering. V. His wonprovus LOVE, which
prompted Him to go about doing good. VI. A glory, therefore, which could only
have come down from rue Farner, and which led the disciples afterwards from
the earthly Master to the heavenly Father. (4. J. Joscelyne, M.A.) The True


cHAP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 59


Tabernacle and its glory :—I. LET US BEHOLD THIS TABERNACLING OF GoD WITH US.
Two Divine things are more clearly seen in Christ than aught else. 1. Consider
them together. (1) Grace and truth are spoken of in the concrete; not full of the
news of grace and truth. Others were that. There is grace in other men; but
they have it as water flowing through a pipe: He as water in its fountain. There
is truth in others; but in Him dwell the depth, the essence of the fact. And both
evermore abide in Him. (2) Grace and truth are blended. ‘‘ And” is no common
conjunction. The two rivers unite in one fulness. The grace is truthful grace ;
not in fiction, fancy, to be hoped for or dreamed of ; but grace, every atom of which
is fact, redemption which does redeem, pardon which does blot out sin, renewal
which actually regenerates. The truth is gracious truth, steeped in love, saturated
With mercy. (3) Grace and truth balanced. He is full of grace, but He has not
neglected the sterner quality. There are many who are loving but not faithful;
many sternly honest, but not kind. In Christ there is no defect either way. He
does not hide the truth, however terrible; but He utters it with infinite compas-
sion. He does not save unjustly, nor proclaim truth unlovingly. (4) These
qualities in Him are at the full. In Him the immeasurable grace of God is
treasured up; and all truth about God and Divine things hath been declared by
Him. 2. Take each by itself. (1) Fullof grace. In Exod. xxxiv. the glory of God
lay in His grace. So in Christ. This is seen in His Incarnation ; in His being
made perfect through sufferings, so that He might be a sympathetic High Priest ;
in His life, words, and actions; in His death, as our substitute and representa-
tive; and in His union with His people. (2) Full of truth; not merely in what
He said and promised, but in Himself. He is the fulfilment of all the promises ;
the substance of all the types. (3) Full of grace and truth as dealing truthfully in
matters of grace concerning our salvation ; encouraging many gracious hopes which
are all truthfully realized; working both in His people. Il. Ler vs avai ovr-
SELVES OF THIS TABERNACLING. 1. Let us pitch our tents around this central
tabernacle, as the Israelites did round theirs. 2. Let us resort to it to obtain grace
to help in time of need. 3. Let us abide in joyful, peaceful confidence in Him who
is grace and truth tous. 4. Let us tell everybody about it. 5. What manner of
people ought we to be among whom Jehovah dwells. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The
glory of Christ beheld !—The greatest glory of the Jewish Church was that God
tabernacled in its midst. The greatest glory of the Tabernacle was the most holy
place. The glory of the holy place was the Shekinah. Jesus Christ was God’s
Tabernacle, and the surpassing excellence of this Tabernacle is fulness of grace and
truth. I. A FAVOURED PEOPLE, Who are the we? 1. An elect company. 2. A called
company. — Special in the case of the apostles. General in the case of all believers.
3. An illuminated company. Christ’s glory not manifest to the rest of mankind.
Il. Turrr EXALTED PRIVILEGE. ‘‘Beheld His glory”: not heard or read of. Many
were the privileges of the disciples, but this excelled them all. How can we
behold? 1. By faith. 2. Experience. 3. Communion. III, A Most BLESSED
viston. 1. Of Christ’s complex person as Godandman. 2. Ofthe motive for which
He undertook His redeeming work. 3. Of His self-sacrifice. 4. Of His endurance
and perseverance. 5. Of His triumph. IV. THE TESTIMONY WHICH WE WHO HAVE
SEEN His GLORY ARE suRE To BEAR. That He is—l. The only-begotten of the
Father. 2. Fullof grace. 3. Fullof truth. (Zbid.) Beholding Christ’s glory :
—The noblest objects never disclose their best meaning at first sight. Sir Joshua
Reynolds says that when he visited Italy to make the acquaintance of the celebrated
masterpieces, he was much cast down. The renowned masters maintained towards
him a quiet and dignified silence; they refused to confide to him their thoughts.


He gazed steadfastly and could not behold their glory. Persevering, however, the
pictures gradually began to raise their veils, and permit him to have an occasional
peep at their rare beauty: they softly whispered to him a few of their secrets ; and
as he continued unwavering in his devotion, they at last flung away their reserve,
showed themselves with an open face, and revealed to him the wealth of beautiful
ideas that was lodged in them. As with pictures, so with characters. The diviner
the life, the closer the inspection requisite to understand it. If we begin in the
remote past, with Samson and Hercules, we shall not experience any very formidable
difficulties in grasping the principle which fashioned their characters. The story
of their lives is comparatively simple, having strength for a foundation. But as we
wend our way down to later times, we come across more complex characters ; new
factors come into operation ; and the process of analysis is harder of a successful
accomplishment. But of all characters, ancient or modern, none demand so much


oh


60 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. I.


intent gazing as that of Jesus Christ. Potences perfectly novel in the history of
the world exert their subtle influence; the human and the Divine, the grace and
the truth, are so closely associated, that not at once do we grasp the radical idea,
and perceive its subdued, tempered beauty. The depth and manifoldness of Christ’s
character form the reason for the well-nigh two hundred lives and harmonies which
have been launched upon the world. A difficult character to understand fully, for
its beauty only grows upon us by degrees. Every age discovers a new trait; every
fresh generation perceives a fresh excellence; and thus from age to age He in-
creases in loveliness in the estimation of men. He continues to reveal to the
loving earnest gaze His glory, “the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father.”
(J. C. Jones, D.D.) Beholding the glory of Christ :—Though the Israelites were
not able to look on the face of Moses, we saw the glory of the only-begotten. No
one indeed could see His glory who was not healed by His humiliation; for there
had flown into man’s eyes, as it were, dust from the earth; the eye itself had
become diseased, and earth was sent to heal it again; the flesh had blinded man,
the flesh restores him; the soul, by consenting to carnal affection, had become
carnal; hence the eye of the mind had been blinded: then the Physician made for
us ointment; He came in such wise, as that by the flesh He destroyed the corrup-
tion of the flesh. Thus “the Word was made flesh,” that we might be able to say,
‘we saw His glory.” (Augustine.) Fullof grace and truth.—The fulness of Christ :
—It was fulness in presence of the world’s immeasurable need ; fulness that stood in
contrast with theemptiness of men. The scribe and the Pharisee, the philosopher and
the guide into the paths of pleasure, the bringer forth of things new and the bringer
forth of things old, whatever their pretensions, alike failed to satisfy the cravings of
human hearts, so manifold and deep, and left them sighing, ‘‘ Who will show us
any good?”? Even the sacred ordinances of the Old Covenant, out of which it was
designed that with joy men should draw water as from the wells of salvation, had
been turned very largely into mere outward ceremonies, and the sacred services into
mere ‘‘ bodily exercise ’”—reminding one of the process of dropping buckets into
empty wells, and drawing nothing up. The Word is made flesh, and sojourns
among men; and they find in Him the very fulness of the Godhead bodily. (J.
Culross,D.D.) The character of Jesus :—In the life of Jesus we see—I. INEFFABLE
eRrace combined with RESOLUTE FiRMNESS. 1. His character is such as to forbid
undue familiarity. Avowed infidels, as well as Christians, feel almost reverent in
its hallowed presence. 2. But He was as remarkable for His firmness. Strength
is necessary to greatness. Christ possessed tenacity of purpose in an extraordinary
degree. His spirit did not faint because of the magnitude of the task He undertook
He successfully stood the test of adversity and of prosperity. II. The FEMININE
AND MASCULINE VIRTUES in sweetest harmony. He was made of a woman, which
explains partly those fine feminine traits discoverable in His character. ’ Eve
great man, especially every poetic genius, is strongly marked by womanly prathien
and delicacy in countenance, feelings, life. Christ had them pre-eminently. III
FEELINGS AND KNOWLEDGE, heart and intellect, in perfect accord. No one can read
the gospels without being deeply impressed by the exquisite sensibility of Christ
There is more heart in the gospels than in all other books put together The heat
was systematically crushed under ancient forms of civilization Sensibility was
deemed a sign of weakness. Hence men were carefully trained to repress te if
possible, eradicate all feeling. Witness stoicism. How different with Christ ! Cs
Him we witness a dignity, a loftiness, a nobility which never show to bett i
advantage than when compared with the highest ideals of Greek culture. But sa
the same time He evinces a depth of emotion and delicacy of feelin tite f ae
to them. The Greek impresses us with his cleverness: Christ with His r Sar
and goodness. The Greek sought mind in all things; taught by Christ th Chris.
tian seeks a heart. IV. THE ACTIVE AND PASSIVE VIRTUES in beautiful och tion:
The hardest of tasks is to suffer in a right spirit. Christ taught it Be Ene ey
it. No one was ever more energetic in opposition to wickedness; but wh ak ke
us more forcibly is His unprecedented meekness under wron; : d the a
originated a new type of goodness, V. THE RHA KISSING THE sees nH Nee
- fra ee ee eee humanity has ever been able to conceive the Siceee
ry an e sternest reality. Man’s i i f i
noblest Wie bac 3; in Christ both go aa chou ee oe
MELTING INTO THE Divinzr.—He moves before our vision in th f
look inquiringly and affectionately, and then we iaheaipehi sear ali
beholdithd tan ’ penetrate the outward guise and
he inner splendour. He was a man, no doubt; but no man ae looked


Ths


ee


CP ee


CHAP. I.] ST. JOHN. 61


more like God. The character of Christ can be transferred in its integrity to the
Lord of Hosts without degrading the loftiest ideal of Him. (J. Cynddylan Jones,
D.D.) _— The influence of Christ’s grace and truth upon art :—In classical times the
prevailing form of art was sculpture. The hard stone was fetched from the rock,
and carefully chiselled and elaborately polished to represent the “human form
divine.” Their sculpture exhibited a simplicity, a severity, a chaste grandeur
which far outstrips all efforts of modern ages. Indeed, a vast change has imper-
ceptibly stolen over the minds of men, which is seen in the fact that whereas
sculpture was the prevailing form of art among the Greeks, painting is the pre-
vailing form among Christians. We have not been able to cope with the ancients
in marble; but it is generally admitted, I believe, that we have greatly surpassed
them on canvas. But why has painting superseded sculpture? Because painting
is more feminine, and therefore more capable of expressing the softer, gentler
virtues. It is the female face of art. One may say with tolerable accuracy
that fine art is the creation of Christianity. Art there unmistakably was in
the world before—splendid, severe, pure, strong; but we can hardly pronounce it
fine. Christianity has softened men, it has softened manners, it has softened
art. The heathen ideal was truth ; the Christian ideal is grace and truth. (Ibid.)
Jesus Christ the fountain of Grace :—The glory of the Mediator consisted, not in
His wisdom, by which He knew what was in man—nor in His power, to which a
material universe rendered homage—but in His grace, in the kindness of His
heart, in the complete and perfect benevolence of His character. In this respect He
was the ‘‘ brightness of His Father’s glory.” His heart was an overflowing fountain
of love, a plenary spring of goodness, which perpetually sent forth streams of grace,
to bless a barren and desert world. He is exhibited to us in this character, as the
Head of the gospel dispensation, as the Founder of a new order of things, as the
Author and Finisher of our faith. I. To miusTRATE THE GRACIOUS CHARACTER OF
Jesus Curist. ‘‘ He was full of grace.” 1. The gracious character of the Saviour
appears from the great design of His dispensation. His benevolent mind contem-
plated a world lost and ruined by sin; a whole race of creatures who were in
rebellion against God, and exposed to the penalties of a just and righteous law.
His own happiness was unaffected by the apostacy of creatures. He was in the
bosom of His father. He was with God, and was God. There was nothing in His
immaculate purity, nothing in His essential rectitude, or in His inviolable ad-
herence to justice, that dictated a dispensation of mercy. The world might have
perished, its inhabitants might have been lost, and His glory would have been with-
out a stain, His felicity unimpaired. It was only the plenitude of His grace, only
the promptings of infinite kindness, that induced Him to undertake our salvation.
Believers are destined to a heavenly inheritance, to live with Christ, to enter into
His joys, to share in His dominion, to be for ever with the Lord. He effects
a great deliverance, and bestows an infinite wisdom. He is ‘full of grace.” 2.
From the means adopted to secure the design of His mission. The intensity
of kindness may always be measured by the sacrifices to which it leads. What
think you would be the testimony of the widow of Nain to the gracious character
of our Lord? But these miracles of mercy were but the appropriate appendages |
to His mission; they were not its objects; they were but blessings which He
scattered in His way to suffering and to death. In order that suffering on behalf of
others should indicate kindness it must be voluntary. It testifies to benevolence
of disposition, only in as much as it is a free-will offering. So strong was His
kindness, so intense His love, so determined His compassion, that He submitted to
the agonizing, the ignominious death of the cross, to accomplish the salvation
of sinners. “ This was compassion like a God.” 3. From the characters of those
whose salvation He sought. They were all sinners, but many of them were the worst
of sinners. But the grace of Hisheart was not expended by its earthly efforts ; after
He ascended to glory, He manifested in an equal degree the forbearing kindness of
His heart, the distinguishing sovereignty of His grace. Who would have thought
that the kindness and grace of our Lord would have rested upon such a man
as Saul? 4. From those supplies of grace which are afforded to the believer, from
his conversion to his reception into a world of glory. The work of grace would not
have been complete had it terminated with the renewal of our hearts. The life of the
Saviour imparts must be sustained by the same energy. 9. From the benignant
character of His religion. II. Lut us arremMpT AN IMPROVEMENT OF OUR SUBJECT.
1. The gracious character of the Saviour is an encouragement to sinners to come to
Him. 2. The gracious character of the Saviour will aggravate the punishment of


~


62 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. 1
\ a ee Se errr

finally impenitent. 3. The gracious character of the Saviour is a reason why
He fcopl should continually apply to Him. 4. Finally, it is the duty of Christians
to imitate the example of Christ. It should ever be their aim to be “ full of grace,
to cherish a kind and generous disposition to others. It is not for the Christian,
who has had so much done for him, and who constantly needs more, to be a selfish


man. (S. Summers, M.A.)


Vers. 15-18, John bare witness of Him.—The pre-eminence of Christ :—I. Curist’s
SUPERIORITY TO JOHN THE Baptist. 1. John refers to and repeats previous testi-
monies, applying them to Him whom the congregation had just seen depart. The
testimony was pointed, warm, confident, bold. 2. The substance and form of the
testimony were that, though Jesus was after John as to His birth and ministry, He
was before him as to the dignity of His person, His mediatorial office, and above all
His Deity. II. Curist’s guPERIORITY To ALL BELIEVERS. 1. All the fulness de-
manded for their wants, the entire supply for their need, is treasured up in Him.
(1) This might be asserted of the Word. (2) But it is here asserted of Him as
made flesh. 2. What has the believer that he has not received from Christ? By
nature he is empty. 3. How exalting to Christ the truth that all are and always
have been, and always will be, dependent on Him. 4. We derive from Christ, not
through merit, grace after grace, and grace corresponding in nature to that poured
on Christ. III. Carist’s superioriry To Moses. 1. Moses held a high place—
the Law was given by him. 2. Nevertheless, no comparison could be made of Moses
with Christ. He fulfilled his ministry and passed away, but Christ abides as the
eternal administrator of grace and truth. (1) The Law gives knowledge of sin and
leaves us: grace and truth come with salvation from sin. (2) The Law was the
shadow of good things to come: the grace and truth of Christ were those good
things. IV. Curist’s SUPERIORITY TO ALL CREATED INTELLIGENCES. 1. God is in-
visible and incomprehensible to all except His Son Jesus Christ. 2. Many are
sons of God, Christ alone is the only-begotten of the Father. 3. Christ has declared
the Father as no creature has done, revealing His nature, perfections, counsels, by
His teaching, example, and secret influence on the minds of His people. 4. The
eternal life of the best of His creatures consist in the knowledge of Him. (4.
Beith, D.D.) Christ pre-eminent :—I. Ir 1s CHRIST ALONE WHO SUPPLIES THE
SPIRITUAL WANTS OF ALL BELIEVERS (ver. 16). 1. The Spirit of Life is His special
gift to the Church, and conveys from Him, as from a great root, sap and vigour to
all the believing branches. 2. He isrich in mercy, wisdom, righteousness, holiness.
3. Out of His fulness believers in every age have been supplied. 4. Every saint in
glory will acknowledge that he is Christ’s debtor for all he is. II. Tue vast
SUPERIORITY oF Curist To MosEs anp THE GosPEL To THE Law (ver. 17). 1. Moses
was employed as a servant to convey the moral and ceremonial law which could not
justify. 2. Christ as a Son came with the keys of God’s treasury of grace and
truth (Heb. iii. 6), (1) Grace bringing salvation through faith. (2) Truth fulfilling
in His own Person the types of the Old Testament. III. Ir 1s Curist anonzr wHo
HAS REVEALED THE Farner TO MAN (ver. 18). 1. No man could see God and live.
2. Yet all that man is capable of knowing of God the Father is revealed to us by
God the Son. In His words, deeds, life, and death we see the wisdom, love, and
holiness of God. IV. How @reat THE HONOUR OF THE Baptist AND CHRISTIAN
MINISTERS in heralding such a Being. (Bp. Ryle.) Face to face with Jesus Christ:
—How far ahead John was of the apostles in his conception and reception of the
Saviour. Throughout the Baptist was not only a seer of the light but was drenched
by the light. I. JoHn’s EXPERIENCE AND TESTIMONY. Ver. 15 is information that
the Apostle evidently thought very valuable. Having affirmed the Incarnation he
recalls the testimony of the Baptist to that Incarnation. In this testimony lay the
power and grace of the Forerunner. His was no outside knowledge or second-hand
information, but experience, direct and personal. So now the man of permanent
power is the man who speaks, or teaches, or works out of personal and spiritual
experience. Learning, culture, travel, profoundest and most masterly thinking are
well in their several places, because sanctifiable ; but sanctity based on experience
of the witness of the Spirit in us and to us individually is the grand thing. II.
JOHN’S FULL-VOICED, ARTICULATE UTTERANCE OF THAT EXPERIENCE. Combine the two,
“beareth” and “crieth,” and you have the perfection of Christ-like witness.
Sometimes in law-courts witnesses have again and again to be instructed to speak
“out” or “up.” There is self-evident reserve, hesitancy, a wish to say as little as
possible. But John had no reserves, concealments, trickeries, and go ‘‘ cried” out,


cHaP, 1.] ST. JOHN. 63


Fitting it should have been so, Your private letter or personal explanation may be
quiet and unobtrusive ; but if your stand is in the public market, and the procla-
mation is a royal one, security must be taken that all around hear and know. If
our heart be in our utterance the voice will answer to the heart. The testimony
must not be chirped or whined, or spoken in falsetto. An unnatural twang will
spoil the best speaking, albeit roaring, violence, physical sensationalism must not be
confounded with “crying.” III. TH wru-BASED AND SELF-ABNEGATING CHARACTER
or JoHN’s TESTIMONY. It was the experience of no mere mood or frame, but the
granitic conviction and enunciation that he was only the runner before another,
1. His aim was to keep men from leaning on himself. 2. He disclaimed any
intention of founding a sect or organizing a Church. He called himself a ‘‘ Voice,”
not a foundation. 3. His great purpose was to lead men to Christ. From this he
never swerved. John’s conduct in drawing attention away from self to Christ
should be imitated by every worker for Christ. Explanation, system-making, to
say nothing of self-proclamation, is often sheer waste of that strength which can
only be profitably utilized in sending men straight to Christ. IV. Joun’s unrexac-
GERATED, almost charily worded, RECOGNITION oF CHRIST’s DIvINITy. There was no
gospel for him as there is none for us if Christ were not human. He was‘‘a Man,”
but a Man who was co-eternal with the Father. But the Baptist’s economy of
words in proclaiming that fact is noticeable. ‘‘ He was before me.’’ Simple,
ordinary-looking, superficially unremarkable, but they hold in them an absolute
statement of the pre-existence and Divinity of the Man Christ Jesus. V. Tun
SIMPLICITY AND DIRECTNESS OF JOHN’S WITNESS TO THE PERSON AND WORK OF CHRIST.
“This is Hr.’? To-day the message of the servant of Christ in relation to every
problem of life and destiny must be, ‘‘this is He.” There lies the spell, the
mission, the divinest success. Not His gospel even, but Himself. Not about Him,
but to Him. Not the Bible or the Church, but Himself. (4. B. Grosart, D.D.)
Tire effectiveness of the Baptist’s ministry :—‘‘ He who follows me preceded me.”
Here, then, is an apparent contradiction, intended to excite attention and stimulate
mental activity. The enigmatical form must have also contributed to impress this
important declaration on the memory of the hearers. (4. Godet, D.D.) Public
attention drawn to Christ :—The coming forth of the Incarnate Word among men
was not in secrecy and silence,'as a king might go forth incognito among his
subjects; but public attention was directed to Him, This was done most efficiently
by John. (J. Culross, D.D.) John’s self-effacement :—Not only is the moon
changeable, waving and waning, and its shape and light declining as it grows older,
and itself approaches nearer and nearer to the sun; but so soon as the sun arises,
though the moon should be yet in its full size and roundness, its light immediately
fades from view, and itself becomes as if it no longer existed, for the superior glory
of that incomprehensible luminary. And so both John the Baptist and the Jewish
form of worship faded and shrunk, and became as non-existent, after they had
performed their parts and offices as witnesses and schoolmasters to the great and
glorious appearing of the Son of God Himself, the Sun of righteousness, the Word
made flesh, the Godhead incarnate, the light and life of men and all creation,
embodied in shape, and planted in place, and made visible: though too bright and
dazzling to be comprehended, except by those who had opened and exercised their
eyes to see His witnesses in the hours of darkness, when others were immersed in
sleep, and so were not forced to shut them close in the daytime, in the blindness of


unbelief. (S.A. Bosanquet.)


Ver. 16. Of His fulness have all we received.—The fulness of Christ :—The word
“fulness ” is given to vessels that are brimful of liquor, and so is metaphorically
applied to Christ, who is brimful of grace. I. Take grace for LovE, so there is a
fulness of love in Christ. 1. Of pardoning love (Luke xxiii. 24). When on earth
He did not pardon once, but again and again, and that without upbraiding. 2. Of
compassionating love (Matt. v. 3-4). When poor souls could not come to Him He
went to them. 3. Of special love to His disciples (Matt. xii. 47-50). I. Take
grace for HoLiNEss, and there is a fulness of holiness in Him. Holy things, the
law, priests, temple, were only types of Him. If there were not a fulness of
holiness in Him—1. Howis it possible that God and man could be brought so near
who were so far apart? 2. How should He be anointed with the oil of gladness
above His fellows (Eph. i. 23). The saint’s fulness is only particular, His is universal
Col. i. 19). Their’s ebbs and flows and is often empty. III. Take grace for GIFTS,
and there is a fulness of excellency in Christ. 1. Kingly (Heb. i. 3, 8). 2. Pro-


64 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. L


a ea

i er. 17). 3. Priestly (chap. xvi. 7,10). 4. In general (Hagg. ii. 7; Col-
th AY. Wann IS OUR eo Hiatus FROM HENCE? If there be such a fulness
then—1. Let all men come to Him. All have wants. 2. Let us trust to Him. 3.
Let us draw forth from Him. (1) By a serious, frequent consideration of His
fulness (2 Cor. iii. 18). (2) By resting upon it in time of temptation. (3) By
giving forth of it, as the conduit receives more water by letting out. 4. Let us
labour to be like Him, full of grace. 5. Let us take heed how we do anything that
may rob Christ of the glory of His fulness. (W. Bridge, M.A.) The communica-
tion of Christ’s fulness :—There is a dealing out of His fulness. I. By THe UNION
THERE IS BETWEEN CHRIST AND A BELIEVER. Union is the cause of communion
or communication. Bread is united to a man by his eating of it. II. By THe
OVERFLOW oF His mnFiniTE GRACE Hz 1s aptE—1. To succour and supply those who
are tempted (Heb. ii.18). 2. Whatever grace Christ hath received He hath receivea
not for Himself but for others (Eph. iv. 8; John xvii. 19; Isa. Ixi. 1,2). 3. There
is an infinite willingness in Him to communicate this grace (Heb. iii. 2; Psa. xvi.
2; Job, iv. 24). 4. As He is willing nothing can hinder Him (Isa. xliii. 13 ; Titus
ii, 14), III. Way THEN ARE BELIEVERS so EMPTY oF Grace? 1. The fulness of
grace in a believer is many times hid from the world and from Himself. 2, Some-
times the avenues of grace in a believer are choked or broken. 3. This grace is
communicated in proportion. What is your want? go to Christ and get that
supplied. IV. Apprication: 1. See the transcendent excellencyof the saints. 2.
What an encouragement there is here to come to Christ and partake of His fulness.
3. Acting upon this believers are firm against all temptations, discouragements,
afflictions. 4. Then believers should labour to strengthen their assurance of union
with Christ. (Zbid.) The reception of Christ’s fulness :—Whatever grace the
saints have they have it all in the way of receiving. 1. The grace and mercy of
justification and remission of sins (Rom. v. 11). 2. Of adoption (Gal. iv. 5). 3.
Of sanctification (Gal. iii. 2). 4. Of the gifts of the Spirit (Acts x. 46, 47). 5. In
general all is by way of receiving (Col. ii. 6; 1 Cor. iv. 7). This will appear—lI.
FROM MAN’S NATURAL INABILITY—1. To overcome sin, be it never so small (1 Cor. xy.
57). 2. To rise again after falling. Pcter must have a look from Christ before he
could repent. 3. To stand and continue. 4, To prepare himself unto what is good
(Eph. ii. 1,5; John vi. 44). IL. From tHe suPERNATURALITY OF GRACE (Eph. ii. 10).
III. From THE SHORTNESS OF THE MEANS OF GRAGE. The means as it is in itself,
without God’s appointment, is utterly inefficient. IV. From THe woRK AND NATURE
or FAITH. There is no grace that the Scripture puts more upon than faith—in the
Old Testament all victories, in the New all cures, Yea, the same works that are
given to Christ are given to faith: sanctification, justification, salvation. Why?
Because faith is a receiving grace (ver. 12). So believing is nothing but receiving
the grace of God. V. FRom THE POSTURE AND TRUE BEHAVIOUR OF PRAYER. Prayer
is the soul’s begging. A beggar holds forth his hand noting his willingness to
receive (Job xi. 13). In conclusion—1l. You say that this cuts off all endeavour.
Not so (see Phil. ii. 12). 2. Why is all this? (1) That all boasting and self-
confidence may be taken away (Rom. iv.; 1 Cor. iv. 7). (2) That Christ may be
fully honoured. (3) That the children of God may live by faith. 38. This doctrine
is full of spiritual use. (1) Behold what infinite care God hath of believers. If a
mother would not let her child eat bread but of her own cutting, or drink water but
of her own drawing, what carefulness of her child that would argue. (2) What
comfortable lives believers live—even their troubles are from God who makes them
minister to their good and helps them in them. (Jbid.) The abundance of grace
the saints receive from Christ :—I. AN ABUNDANCE oF Grace. ‘Grace for grace”
like “skin for skin” (Job ii. 4), All his skins. This suits (1) the word “and” or
‘“‘even ;” (2) the attribute of Christ, ‘‘fulness ;” (3) the scope of the place where
Christ is set above Moses. (4) Other Scriptures (Rom. v. 15,17, &c.) 1. Abundance
of grace discovered. (1) It will appear if you consider the several advances grace
hath made from the beginning till now (Gen. iii. 15), the Abrahamic covenant
(Gen, xii. 3), the Mosaic, the prophecies, Christ, the preaching of the gospel. (2)
The manifestations of grace under the Old Testament were under a veil; that veil
is now removed (2 Cor. iii. 18), (3) There were many doctrines of grace com-
municated to the Jews, yet they were so tempered by the law that the very gospel
seemed law unto them. Now the lawis so tempered by the gospel as to seem gospel.
(4) Grace was manifested under the old dispensation by drops and at intervals
(Heb. i. 1), under the New Wholesale, 2. Abundance of grace exhibited and —
communicated, Is it not a great matter—1. For an ungodly man to be justified


onaP, 1] ST. JOHN. 65
For a man to be a child of God. 8. To have the image of Christ drawn on a filthy
soul, 4. Fora man to be in heaven before he comes there (chap. xvii. 3). 3. But
we do not see this abundance, objectors say. But—(1) Though little in quantity it
may be great in quality. (2) Though it be small as a possession it is great as an
earnest (Col. i.12). II. Apprication: 1. Why should any of God’s people vilify
and degrade the gift of God whereby they are enriched? 2. Behold what great
sinners inconsistent professors are! 3. What a mighty encouragement there is here
to come to Jesus Christ and be filled! (Ibid.) Whatsoever grace the saints have
they have it from Jesus Christ :—Grace is sometimes taken for—1. The favour of
God; 2. God’s assistance ; 3. Holiness; 4. Gifts; 5. An officeinthe Church, But
whichever it is it comes from Christ. This will appear if you consider—I. THE
INSUFFICIENCY OF NATURE (1 Cor. iii. 5; ver. 13), II. Tae anu-surFiciency oF
Cunist (Rey. i. 17; Rom. viii. 29; chap. xiv. 6). 1. There are three great doors
which must ordinarily be opened before converting grace can get into the soul of
man. (1) A powerful ministry (1 Cor. xvi. 9); (2) The door of the heart (Acts
xvi. 14) ; (3) The door of the ear (Job xxxiii. 16). 2. Christ has the opening of
these doors (Rev. i. 18; iii. 7). 3. The names which Christ bears witness to, His
all-sufficiency, Sun of Righteousness, Morning Star, Raiment, Bread of Life, Door,
Good Shepherd, &c., are given to Christ to show that He is all they signify to the
soul. And they are not barely given to Him; He is “‘ Good” Shepherd, Bread “ of
Life,” &c. Therefore, as the apostle says, ‘He is all in all.” (Ibid.) The
answerableness of grace in every Christian to the grace of Christ :—We have received
grace in abundance from Christ, but whatever grace there is in Him there is some-
what in the saints answerable thereunto, as the impression answers to the stamp.
1. Take grace as the favour of God: Both Christ and believers are God’s beloved
(Matt. iii. 17; 2 Sam. xii, 25). 2. For privilege: Both are called Sons of God
(Heb. xii. 6) ; Heirs (Heb. i. 2; Rom. viii. 17); Elect and precious (1 Pet. ii. 6; 1
Pet. i. 2); Light (John viii. 12; Eph. v. 8). 3. For assistance (Psa. xxii; 1 Cor.
xii. 9). 4. For sanctification (chap. xvii. 19). The reason of this—I. THe union
BETWEEN CHRIST AND His PEOPLE (Job xiv. 20). II. Tue RELATIONSHIP oF CHRIST
A8 THE SECOND ADAM A COMMON PERSON BETWEEN Gop AND us (Rom. v. 15; John
v. 26). III. Toe LovE BETWEEN CHRIST AND THE CHRISTIAN. Love loves to make
a thing loved like itself. IV. THs same spPrrit 18 IN A CHRISTIAN THAT IS IN CHRIST
(chap. xv. 26). (Ibid.) The fulness of Christ :—This fulness is shown—I. In
THE DOCTRINES OF SCRIPTURE CONCERNING Curist. 1. His perfect humanity. 2.
His supreme divinity. II. In tox porTRY aND METAPHORS WHICH DESCRIBE Him.
“ Ancient of Days,” “Alpha and Omega,” “Lion of Judah,” “Sure Foundation-
Stone,” “Sun,” ‘Desire of all Nations.” III. Toe cwaractreristics wHich His
FIRST FOLLOWERS MOST APPRECIATED WERE TRUTH AND GRACE, AND THESE WERE MANI-
FESTED IN FULNESS. 1. Truth represents—(1) Intelligence. In Christ there is a
fountain of knowledge inexhaustible. The keen Sadducee, the exact Pharisee, the
learned scribe, the eager Mary, all wonder at the gracious words which proceed out
of His mouth, The words of Jesus are a study for one’s life, and those who have
studied them most are as far as ever from exhausting their meaning. (2) Reality.
This was complete in Christ. He was the shadow of no substance, the image only
of the invisible God. 2. The grace of Christ was love in fulness. IV. Tur
EXPERIENCE OF ALL His DISCIPLES CONFIRMS THE OBSERVATION oF His FIRST FOLLOWERS.
They could say, ‘‘ We beheld”’; we ‘‘ Whom having not seen we love,” What is
this grace but grace superseding grace, grace supplanting grace—as the blossom
supplants the bud, and as the fruit supplants the blossom—as the noon supersedes
the morning, and as summer supplants spring—grace superseding and surpassing
grace. What have you received? Is Christ to you a cistern which you have
emptied? A vine stripped of fruit? Bread eaten and gone? Or is Jesus Christ
living bread? A fountain of living water? A tree of life bearing all manner of
fruit? In plain language, does grace supersede and supplant grace? Are you
rising higher and yet higher through the uplifting of the hand of this Saviour? Is
sanctification supplanting conversion, and is glorying in tribulation being built upon
patience in sorrow? If so, beware of pride, and of vanity, and of vain-glorying,
and of boasting. God forbid that we should glory save in the fulness of this Jesus
Christ, At the same time quiet your fearsand call forth your hopes. All that you
have received is from fulness, Come again. Come every hour—for everything.
Friends may depart, but friendship in fulness abides in Jesus. Helpers may become
helpless, but might exists in fulness in Jesus, Riches may leave you, but in Christ
there are riches unsearchable. Health may sink, but strength undecaying is in


66 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHap. 1.
i TEND Tn EO REISS WN PSV
Jesus. (S. Martin.)  Fulness of grace :—I have heard our Lord likened to a man
carrying a water-pot, and as he carried it upon his shoulder, the water fell dropping,
dropping, dropping, so that every one could track the water-bearer. So should all
His people be, carrying such a fulness of grace that every one should know where
they have been by that which they have left behind. He who hath lain in the beds
of spices will perfume the air through which he walks. One who, like Asher, has
dipped his foot in oil, will leave his footprints behind him. When the living and
incorruptible seed remains within, the Divine instincts of the new nature will guide
you to the wisest methods of activity. You will do the right thing under the inward
impulse rather than the written law, and your personal salvation will be your prime
qualification for seeking out others of your Master’s flock. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
All fulness in Christ :—God cannot give you anything more than He gave you 1,800
years ago. It was allin Christ. Take avery vulgar illustration, which is altogether
inadequate for a great many purposes, but which may serve. Suppose some man
tells you that there was a thousand pounds paid into your credit into a London
bank, and that you were to get the use of it, as you drew cheques against it. The
money is there, is not it; the gift is given, and yet for all that you may be half
dead, a pauper. In the very last of the Arctic expeditions, last year or the year
before, they found an ammunition chest that Commander Parry had left there fifty
years ago, safe under a pile of stones, the provisions inside being perfectly sweet
and good and eatable. There it had lain all those years, and men had died of
starvation within arm’s length of it. It was there all the same. And so, if I may
venture to vulgarise the great theme that I am trying to speak about, God has given
us His Son, and in Him all that pertains to life and all that pertains to godliness.
My brothers, take the things that are freely given to menofGod. (A. Maclaren, D.D.)
How grace is received :—Here on the one hand is the boundless ocean of the Divine
strength, unfathomable in its depth, full after all draughts, tideless and calm, in all
its movements never troubled, in all its repose never stagnating; and on the other
side is the empty avidity of our poor, weak natures. Faith opens these to the
impulse of that great sea, and “ according to our faith,” in the exact measure of
our receptivity, does it enter our hearts. (Ibid.) The fulness of Christ :—I have
found it an interesting thing to stand on the edge of a noble rolling river, and to
think, that although it has been flowing on for six thousand years, watering the
fields, and slaking the thirst of a hundred generations, it shows no signs of waste
or want; and when I have watched the rise of the sun, as he shot above the crest
of the mountain, or in a sky draped with golden curtains sprang up from his ocean
bed, I have wondered to think that he has melted the snows of so many winters,
and renewed the verdure of so many springs, and painted the flowers of so many
summers, and ripened the golden harvests of so many autumns, and yet shines as
brilliant as ever, his eye not dim, nor his natural strength abated, nor his floods of
light less full for centuries of boundless profusion, Yet what are these but images
of the fulness that is in Christ? (J. Bates.) Grace to receive grace :—The
Duchess of Gordon and a companion were visiting at a cottage in Scotland
when a pedlar came in, threw down his pack, and asked for a drink of water. The
woman of the house handed the water to him, and said, ‘‘Do you know anything
of the water of life?” ‘By the grace of God I do.” He drank the water, and
then said, ‘‘ Let us pray.” And this was his prayer: ‘Oh, Lord, give us grace to
feel our need of grace. Oh, Lord, give us grace to receive grace. Oh, Lord, give
us grace to ask for grace. Oh, Lord, give us grace to use grace when grace is given.”
He then took up his pack and went away, having preached a powerful sermon in
those few words. The fulness of Christ :—On a tradesman’s table I noticed a book
labelled ‘‘ Want Book.” What a practical suggestion for a man of prayer! He
should put down all his needs on the tablets of his heart, and then present his want
book to his God. If we knew all our need, what a large want book we should
require! How comforting to know that Jesus has a supply book, which exactly
meets our want book! Promises, providences, and Divine visitations, combine to
meet the necessities of all the faithful, The riches of Christ’s grace :—There is
a story of Rowland Hill, which I have no doubt is true, because it is so characteristic
of the man’s eccentricity and generosity. Some one or other had given him a
hundred pounds to send to an extremely poor minister, but, thinking it was too
much to send him all at once, he sent him five pounds in a letter with simply these
words inside the envelope, ‘* More to follow.” In a few days’ time, the good man
had another letter by the post, and letters by the post were rarities in those days ;
when he opened it there was five pounds again, with just these words, ‘‘ And more


OHAP. ¥.] ST. JOHN. 67


to follow.” A day or two after there came another, and still the same words, And
more to follow.” And so it continued twenty times, the good man being more and
more astounded at these letters coming thus by post with always the sentence, ‘‘ And
more to follow.” Now, every blessing that comes from God is sent in just such an
envelope, with the selfsame message, “ And more to follow.” ‘I forgive you your
sins, but there’s more to follow.” ‘I justify you in the righteousness of Christ,
but there’s more to follow.” ‘I adopt you into my family, but there’s more to
follow.” ‘‘I educate you for heaven, but there’s more to follow.”” ‘I have helped
you even to old age, but there’s still more to follow.” ‘‘I will bring you to the
brink of Jordan, and bid you sit down and sing on its black banks, on the banks of
the black stream, but there’s more to follow. In the midst of that river, as you are
passing into the world of spirits, My mercy shall still continue with you, and when
you land in the world to come there shall still be more to follow.” (C.H. Spurgeon.)
Grace obstructed :—When our spiritual supplies fail, the channel is sometimes at
fault, and not the stream; the hindrance to their coming lies with us and not
with our heavenly Father. The supply of fuel to our city in midwinter sometimes
fails, not because the coal-fields are exhausted, but because the weather has
frozen our rivers, detained our colliers in the Channel, and blocked up our railways.
The supply of water or of gas to our houses is sometimes insufficient, not because
the reservoirs are low, but because the pipes which connect our dwellings with the
main service are choked up or broken, News fail to reach us, not because our
correspondent has neglected to write, but because the means of transmission
have been imperfect. (Samuel Martin.) Grace preferred to earthly honour :—
Having rendered some service to Lord North, the Prime Minister, during the
American war, he received a polite communication from that nobleman, desiring
to know if he stood in need of anything which it was in his power to bestow.
Mr. Fletcher modestly replied:—‘‘ He was sensible of the Minister’s kindness,
but he only wanted one thing, which he could not grant him, and that was
more grace.” It is a high attainment to prefer the grace of God to earthly
honours and emoluments. None but God, the author of grace, can incline the
heart to this. (J. Cope.) A precious plentitude:—I. Tux ruuness. 1. The
fulness belongs to Christ personally. In His complex nature He possesses fulness.
(1) In Him dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. The fulness of omnipo-
tence, omnipresence, wisdom, justice, mercy. The attributes of God make up a per-
fect total. The unity, with all its uniqueness is His. The fractional parts are
ours. (2) There was also a fulness of Christ in respect to His manhood, Nothing
was lacking in Him to constitute human perfection—sinlessness, sympathy, the
virtues of both sexes, human nature in its completeness. 2. In Christ is an
acquired fulness. His perfect obedience secured an everlasting wellspring of merit;
and now risen from the dead there is a fulness of prevalence in His intercession,
of cleansing power, and of peace, when the Spirit applies the blood to the guilty
conscience. 3. A fulness of dignity, prerogative, and qualification. He is a per-
fect prophet, priest, and king. Join all the qualities involved in name or fame and
you shall find that He comprises them all in liberal, lavish fulness. 4, A fulness
of every kind of perfection. All that is virtuous, amiable, noble or illustrious. 5.
A fulness of the Spirit. The Lord gives not the Spirit by measure unto Him. 6.
An abiding fulness. All the saints of every age have drawn their supplies from
Him, but He is just as fullas ever. He is never less, He can never be more than
full. II. Taz rmine. 1 Surely, then, the saints were empty before. All alike
are empty of merit and satisfaction. 2. The filling is universal, All the saints
partake of it, 3. There must be a personal reception in every case. Grace cannot
be derived or transmitted from one individual to another. 4, It is gratuitous
‘Grace for grace”; not purchased or earned but received. All the doing to
receive it is an undoing: the soul empties itself to be filled. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
I. We are shown that we ARE ALL UTTERLY DESTITUTE AND EMPTY of spiritual bles-
sings. The abundance in Jesus Christ is intended—1, To supply our deficiency.
2. To relieve our poverty. 3. To satisfy our hunger and thirst. II. We are warned
THAT AS SOON AS WE HAVE DEPARTED FROM CHRIST IT IS VAIN TO SEEK FOR HAPPINESS,
because God hath determined that whatever is God’s shall reside in Him alone.
Accordingly we shall find angels and men to be dry, heaven to be empty, the earth
to be unproductive, and, in short, all things to be of no value, if we wish to be
partakers of the gifts of God in any other way than through Christ. III. We are
assured that WE HAVE NO REASON TO FEAR THE WANT OF ANYTHING, provided that we
draw from the fulness of Christ, which is in every respect so complete as to be in-


{ SS


68 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (omar. 1.

Sema IES DUN ee BP A EB Ee Se ete
exhaustable, (J. Calvin.) _ Christ’s fulness :—There isa fulness of atoning efficacy
in His blood, for ‘‘ the blood of Jesus Christ His son cleanseth us from all sin”; of
justifying righteousness in His life, for ‘‘ there is therefore now no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus”; of Divine prevalence in His plea, for “ He is
able to save to the uttermost them that come unto God by Him; seeing He ever
liveth to make intercession for them”; of victory in His death, for through death
He destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; of efficacy in Hia
resurrection from the dead, for by it ‘‘ We are begotten again to a lively hope”; of
triumph in His ascension, for “‘ when He ascended up on high He led captivity
captive, and received gifts for men’’; of blessings unspeakable, unknown ; grace to
pardon, regenerate, sanctify, preserve, and perfect. There is a fulness at all times ;
a fulness by day and by night; of comfort in affliction, of guidance in prosperity,
of every Divine attribute, of wisdom, of power, of love; a fulness which it were
impossible to survey, much less to explore. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The fulness of
Christ received :—I. AN APPEAL TO OUR.GRATITUDE. Glory be unto Christ for His
fulness, for of it have all the saints received—Old Testament saints and New,
martyrs, reformers, saints on earth, saints in glory, &c., &c. And they all received
all that they had. II. A piscrrmmmNaTION oF CHARACTER. Thus may we know the
people of God, for of His fulness all have received. 1. There are some who receive
their religion from their fathers and mothers; but religion is not to be inherited ;
it is a personal matter. 2. There are those who have got their religion from good
works. They do not belong to John’s company. 3. Others get their religion
partly from self and partly from Christ ; but to John’s company Christ is all in all.
The true Christian gets all from Christ. Zven Paul was the chief of sinners, less
than the least of all saints, and confessed that he was nothing. III. A sEnTENCE
OF ADMONITION TO BELIEVERS. Should they not be—1. Most humble. Pride, and
indebtedness to Christ for all, is a contradiction. 2. Most grateful. When our
friends love us we love them in return. 80 Christ deserves that we should spend
the spirit for Him. IV. A worp of SWEET ENCOURAGEMENT TO THE SINNER. You
need a new heart, repentance, a sense of sinfulness, pardon. He can give you all,
no matter how guilty you are. (Ibid.) Christ’s inexhaustible fulness :—I. THERE
Is IN CHRIST a FULNESS, the greatest abundance of blessings of every description.
It is such a fulness as is in God, for John tells us that Christ is—1. the Creator
and Preserver of all things. 2. The Author of human redemption. 3. The foun-
tain of life and light. 4. The Author and Dispenser of salvation. II. Curistians
HAVE RECEIVED OF THIS FULNESS—1. Many blessings, such as spiritual illumination,
faith, pardon, acceptance, the aids of the Spirit, sanctification, hope, and the
happiness begun in this world, and perfected in the world to come. 2. These
many blessings in great abundance, ‘‘and in everything have been enriched by
Him.” III, ‘‘Aun HAVE RECEIVED.” 1. All men if they were willing; and what
is there to hinder all men from receiving them? Even now, and at all times, may
not all receive them? All may receive to the utmost extent of their desires. 2.
All men, of every class and condition; for different men, according to the variety
of their situation and circumstances, stand in need of different blessings; and all
may have those blessings which their necessities require. “3. All men, in every age,
and in every part of the world. 4, There is a “fulness” of blessings in Christ
sufficient for the present and eternal salvation of the whole human race. 65. In
Christ there is—(1) An open fountain, to which all have access, from which all
may draw, the righteous and the wicked, the joyful and the sorrowful, the living
and the dying. (2) A copious fountain, from which all may draw in abundance.
(3) An inexhaustible fountain which never can be drained, however great be the
number of those who draw from it. 4. A perpetual fountain, flowing to all eternity,
from which all who are willing may continually draw. (C. C. Tittman, D.D.)
The fulness of Christ the treasury of the saints (ef. Col. i. 19):—I. Tuern wa
GLORIOUS FULNEAS IN JESUS. Why, then, are we so weak, unfurnished, and unhappy ?
There is that in Jesus which—1, Can enable us to rise to the highest degree of
grace, (1) If sin is to be overcome the conquering power dwells in Him in its ful-
ness. (2) If virtue is to be attained, sanctifying energy resides in Him to perfection.
(3) Without Him we can do nothing, but we can do all things through Him. There
are many barely Christians who have scarcely enough grace to float them into
heaven, their keel grating all the way; and yet their privilege is to reach the deep
waters, and have so much grace that they may sail like a gallant bark on the broad
ocean, with a glorious cargo and all colours flying, so that there may be administered
an abundant entrance, 2. Sufficient for the conquest of the world, (1) All the


Pe


ee


CHAP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 69


might for the conquest of heathenism. (2) All the strength for victory over vice
and infidelity at home. (3) Every weapon required for the fight. ulness for
teaching, convincing, converting, sanctifying. II. Tue runnrss 1s In JEsus Now.
1. The-glory ef the past depresses many Christians. Scarcely any Church realizes
that it can do what its forefathers did. A people are in an evil case when all their
heroism is historical. But the fulness upon which Paul, Luther, Whitefield drew
is unexhausted. 2. The mass of professors have their eyes on the future. Yet, if
the texts are true, all that is to be done can be done now. Want of faith in Christ's
fulness makes them dote onthe Millennium. 3. Our Churches believe that there is
fulness in Christ, and that sometimes they ought to enjoy it, But it is not the
Lord’s purpose that a fulness should reside in Jesus during revivals.. He is the
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever, and that being the case, the highest state of
revival should be the normal condition of the Church. III. Tue posirion or rus
FULNESS IS RICHLY ENCOURAGING TO US IN THE MATTER OF OBTAINING IT. In Christ:
1. Where we can receive it now. 2. In Him who loves to give it. 38. With
Him who is Himself ours. If God, had put it in an angel we should not feel
greatly drawn to Him ; but He has placed it where we love to have it, where we feel
at home, where we are glad to go often, where we would abide, IV. From Tuts ruu-
NESS MANY OF US HAVE RECEIVED. 1. This should encourage us to further exercises
of faith, 2. What restrains us from receiving. (1) I cannot be a Christian of the
highest type. Why not? If you have received life you can receive it more
abundantly. (2) I cannot hope to be as useful assome. Why not? According to’
your faith it shall be done unto you. What you have received is a pledge of what
you may receive. V. THE RECEIPTS WE HAVE ALREADY HAD ARE NoT TRIFLES, ‘ He
that spared not His own Son,” &c. He has given to all such grace as they have
capacity to receive. So on to perfection. 1. Believe in great things. 2. Expect
great things. 3. Attempt great things. 4. Don’t talk about this but set about it.
(C. H. Spurgeon.) I. The one GLorious Person concerning whom this verse is
written. 1. The Word or speech and revelation of God.  Wouldst thou have me
see thee,” said Socrates “ then speak.” Wouldst thou see God? Listen to Christ.
2. Lest Christ should be regarded as a mere utterance, John is careful to show that
He is a Divine Person. 3. Christ was alsoman. 4. Lest others should come into
comparison with Him they are all barred out. Angels, John, Moses. II. ‘The two
PRECIOUS DocTRINES. 1. That all grace is treasured up in Christ Jesus. His is an
immeasurable fulness of grace and truth. (1) Of grace—pardoning, justifying, and
sanctifying. Of this He is always full. (2) Of truth. 2. All the saints have
received all of grace out of the fulness of Christ. (1) All of them. (2) Very
abundantly. III. Turez exerrrences. 1, Our own emptiness. 2. A personal
reception of Christ Jesus. 3. The discovery that all we receive comes to us by
grace. IV. Four puis. If we have received Christ then—1. Let us praise Him.
2. Let us repair to Him again. 3. Try and obtain more. 4. Encourage others to
receive Him. (Jbid.) Grace for grace.—I. THe Exposition. 1. Some take
the phrase to have reference to the Law and the Gospel; but St. J ohn is speaking
of what takes place after Christ comes and the Law is abandoned. 2. Others to
faith in Old Testament saints and light in New Testament saints. That does not
hold, because both had faith and light. 3. Others, grace in the believer resembling
grace in the Saviour ; but that would only give us the moral qualities of Christ, and
leave us destitute of those evangelical blessings which He came especially to bestow.
4. The real sense is that of exchange; ‘for”’—instead of a new grace coming in
the place of the old, and, when that is done with, another fresh from the fulness,
and so on until grace becomes glory. II. Tae m1ustration : 1. Grace in the believer
dies, wastes away, as all living things do, and the faster they live, the faster they
die. Granite rocks might last for ever, their life and motion are s0 slow ; but the
most exquisite flowers stand in their prime rich-blossomed state only for a short
time. ‘‘ You must come to-day,” we say, ‘or you will not see the best of it.” So
with that most living thing called grace. Indestructible in its fountain and prin-
ciple, it yet comes and goes, flowing in, flowing out, blossoming, fading. In the
human soul, if there were not replenishment, grace for grace, it would soon be
empty and dead. 2. This does not mean simply a steady continuance of the same
class of gracious ministration, You stand by a river and watch the flow, the drops
of water coming and going to the ocean. But then other drops succeed them, and
others them, so evenly and incessantly that we hardly realize that the waters are
passing away. So with the supply of grace. Suppose the colour of the river
should change with the day, now black from muddy hills, now yellow as the Tiber,


a


70 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [oHar. 1.
isle NNDT Ia iyi Bde SE
ow blue as the Rhone, now crystal as the Tweed, it would be a singular pheno-
ala but grace for grace means a change like that. There is an element of
sameness in all graces, just as water is water, but in many respects one kind of
grace is not like another. 8. There is no invariable order, but in general—(1) The
grace of forgiveness is the first bestowed. This may come after much anxiety, or
quite gently ; but, come as it will, peace is a special grace. (2) But the believer
does not rest long in his peace. Next comes a totally different kind of grace—active
strength and the spirit of boldness. Not that he is deprived of his peace, but that
becomes secondary. This is very necessary, as uniform tranquility would be injurious.
To root the tree firmly rough winds are necessary. (3) The grace of patience for the
srace of active strength. Working time comes to an end, or work goes on, patience
comes to prevent discouragement. (4) The grace of victory for the grace of preservation
in battle. As thy day so shall thy strength be. Not dying grace till death. III.
Tur apprication: 1. Do not try to live in or by the past. Live in it by a grateful
memory that will help you; but not so as to get a present living nourishment out
of states, and frames, and feelings that are dead and gone. You would not get on
in June secking the withered leaves of last autumn. Let them sink into the soil.
Trust nature to get all the good that is in them, and send that good up again.
2. We ought to be afraid of stagnation, but never of new experiences or enterprises.
3. Christ offers grace for—not grace, you have none, brother sinner ; you would
never take it—but for sin and its condemnation. (A. Raleigh, D.D.) _ Grace for
grace :—I. GRACE BY DEGREES; grace upon grace ; a little grace to begin with, but
more grace afterwards. ‘He giveth more grace,” grace following in grace, and
further in superabounding grace, when grace turns into glory. II. Grack To PRE-
PARE FOR FURTHER GRAGE—the grace of a broken heart—to make room for repent-
ance; the grace of hatred of sin to make way for the grace of holy and careful walk-
ing; the grace of careful walking to make room for the grace of close communion
with Christ; the grace of close communion with the Lord Jesus Christ to make
room for the grace of full conformity to His image; perhaps the grace of con-
formity to His image to make room for the higher grace of brighter views of
Himself, and still closer incomings into the very heart of the Lord Jesus. It is grace
that helps us on in grace. When a begger asks you for a penny, and you give him
one, he does not ask you for a sixpence ; orif you give him a shilling, he would not
consider that an argument why you should give him a sovereign. But you may
deal thus with God. The grace you have expands your heart, and gives you
capacity for receiving yet more grace. You send your child to school to learn A B C,
the grace of learning his alphabet. But it is preparatory to the spelling book, a
preparation for further acquisition of knowledge. III. Grack ANSWERABLE TO GRACE.
Let God give me grace to be a preacher, and He will give me grace to discharge the
office. If you have the grace of resignation you may need the grace of patience.
Or grace received by us answerable to the grace that is in Christ. A young heir to
a large estate, though not of full age, generally gets an allowance suitable to the
position he is to occupy. If he has £100,000 a year in prospect, he would hardly
be limited to a penny a week. When I see one child of God always mourning,
another always doubting, and yet another always scheming, I see they are living
below their privileges. They do not seem to have grace in possession answerable
to the grace they have in reversion. _We always inculcate the propriety, on the
pee of all our people, of living within their incomes; but the child of God cannot
ive beyond his income in a spiritual sense. IV. Grace In ABUNDANCE. Like
the waves of the sea, where one comes there is another close behind it,
V. Grack rrom Him To PRODUCE GRACE IN Us. The grace of gratitude should
be produced in us by the grace of generosity from God. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
Christ’s fulness :—As the sea is not diminished by the treasures of rain which it
yields, and which are dispensed to the earth to fertilise and refresh it, or as
the sun is not wasted, that he has imparted light to all past generations of men; so
Christ has not been affected in His fulness, though from Him has proceeded all the
good that has ever been bestowed on every creature. That in the beginning He laid
the foundations of the earth, and that He then spread forth the heavens like a
curtain, has not diminished His strength. That He brought into being all the
families of life, in their innumerable and varied forms, has not exhausted His
resources. (A. Beith, D.D.) Christ’s fulness and our reception of it:—We all
receive of His fulness grace for grace, as all the stars in heaven are said to light
their candles at the sun’s flame. For though His Body be withdrawn from us, yet
by the lively and virtual contact of His Spirit He is always kindling, cheering,


i ST


=) =o


OHAP. f.]} ST. JOHN. 71


quickening, warming, enlivening, hearts : nay, this Divine life, begun and kindled
in any heart, wheresoever it be, is something of God in the flesh, and in a sober
and qualified sense, Divinity Incarnate, and all particular Christians, that are
possessed of it, so many mystical Christs. (R. Cudworth.) If any one is to obtain
grace, His fulness must do it: our crumbs and morsels, our tiny drops and bits,
they verily will not do it. All, whether Jews or Gentiles, if indeed they would
obtain grace and be really found before God, are required (and indeed they can do
no other) to fill their little flasks from this well—a well which flows and overflows
for ever and ever; they must drink their fill from this fountain-head of living water,
springing up into eternal life. In short, His fulness is without measure or end ;
therefore draw manfully and without fear, and drink with pleasure and joy! For
here is overflowingly enough, even into eternal Life; in this you will have enough
to praise and thank God for to all eternity. (Luther.) The plenteousness of
grace :—The philosophic Hamerton tells us the story of a woman who worked in a
cotton factory in one of the great manufacturing towns in Lancashire, and who, in
an excursion, went for the first time to the coast. When she caught the earliest
glimpse of the Irish Sea, the expanse lying out before her eyes, looking like the
limitlessness of the ocean in its rush and roll of billows, she exclaimed, as she
drew one boundless breath of freshness and glory: ‘At last, here comes something
there is enough of 1” (Dr. C, Robinson.)


Ver. 17. The Law was given by Moses.—Points of contrast between Judaism and,
Christianity :—I. IN THE PERSONS REPRESENTING JUDAISM AND CurisTiaANniTy. 1,
Moses was the servant, Christ the master. 2. Moses was a subject, dependent,
Christ was King of kings. 3. Moses was only a man, but Christ was the God-man.
4. Moses was the agent smiting the rock, Christ was the rock smitten. 5. Moses
was but the channel of communication between God and His people; Christ is the
source of all our mercy. 6. Moses was only the student; in Christ dwelt all the
fulness of wisdom. 7%. Moses was delegated; Christ spoke in His own name and
on His own authority. Il. In THE cREDENTIALS OF THE WORK OF MoSES AND THOSE
OF THE WoRK oF Curist. 1. The ten plagues were wrought for punishment. The
thirty-two miracles of Christ were performed in mercy, 2. The miracles of Moses
were a national calamity; those of Christ a national blessing. 3. The miracles of
Moses were destructive ; those of Christ remedial. 4. Those of Moses were wrought
on matter; many of those of Christ on mind or spirit. 5. Those of Moses were
wrought by power derived from God; those of Christ by Himself. III. In tux
FESTIVALS OF JUDAISM AND CuristTIANITy. 1. The former refer to temporal deliver-
ances and to carnal things; the latter commemorate spiritual deliverances, and
refer to the heavenly and the Divine. The Passover, e.g., sets forth the emancipa-
tion from Egypt; the Lord’s Supper of redemption from sin. 2. The Jewish
Sabbath, the last day of the week, commemorated the creation of the world; the
Christian Sabbath, the first of the week, is the sign of the newcreation. 3. The
Jewish Pentecost commemorated the giving of the Law on Sinai; our Pentecost,
the baptism of the Spirit. IV. Anour JupAIsM WE HAVE THE OUTWARD; ABOUT GRACE
AND TRUTH WE HAVE THF InwaRD. 1. The virtue in the Jewish sacrifices was out-
wardly derived; the virtue in the Atonement is the inward, 2. Their laws were
given amidst the external thundering and lightning of Sinai; ours amid the calmness
and quietness peculiar to Christ. 3. The Jews were separated from the world more
by outward signs; we are separated by the circumcision of the heart. V. Tu Lire
OF OBEDIENCE GoD REQUIRED FROM THE JEWS WAS EMBODIED IN A CODE OF LAWS; THAT
OF THE CHRISTIAN 18 IN THE LIFE OF Curist. (S. Jones.) The Law by Moses :—
God’s education of the world, class by class—the Law one of the most important
lessons ever taught it. Advisable to review these old lessons. I. Tus Law. Wider
and narrower meanings of the word. 1. Political, representing the theocratic idea.
2. The ceremonial, representing the sacrificial. 3. Moral, representing the inculca-
tion of holiness. A remarkable foreshadowing of the Holy Trinity. Il. By wHom
atven. Moses. Fulness of accounts concerning him. Scenes and dates of his life
easily traceable. 1. His outer life. (1) Education. (2) Energy. (3). Patriotism,
2. His inner life. (1) Meekness, disinterestedness (Exod. xxxii. 20-32). (2) Prayer-
fulness. III. To wHom atven. 1. Not to the world, but to a peculiar people ; this
contrary to human practice, and a proof of heavenly origin. 2. To a people
specially prepared from the time of Abraham in all the circumstances of their
national life and location. 3. To a people who nevertheless failed to keep it in its


73 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [oHar.

tirety for a single generation. Hence we see that, while God has always a law,
aia that law has Sree been in its great characteristics the same, man has always
failed to keep it. (W. L.) Grace and truth by Jesus Christ :—I. Grace. 1.
The Divine message. 2. The heavenly gift. 3. Thesupernatural help. Il. Trurn.
This grace, embodied in the life, working outwards from the heart—IiII. Came BY
Jusvs Curtst. 1. They could come by no other. 2. From Him they were in-
separable. The twofold nature of the Divine Man. IV. For wom. Not like the
law for a people, but for the world (Matt. xi. 28; John iii. 16; 1 Tim. ii. 4; Tit, ii.
11). (Ibid.) | Moses and Christ:—I. A comparison. 1. Both men. 2. Both
messengers from God. 3. Both bearers of a revelation. II. A conrRast. 1. Moses
only man; Christ the Son of God. 2. Moses raised up by God; Christ sent forth
from God. 3. Moses the bearer of a revelation outside of himself; Christ the
bringer of a revelation in Himself. 4. Moses a lawgiver; Christ a declarer of grace
and truth. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) The three dispensations in history and in the
soul (cf. Gal. iii. 6) :—I. The dispensation of NATURAL RELIGIOUS FEELING. 1. The
race was in childhood. It acted from impulse. It obeyed no written code of moral
regulations. The man chosen as the representative of this period was Abraham.
The record of it is the book of Genesis. That writing is the first grand chapter in
the biography of man; and its very literary structure—so dramatic in contents, so
careless of the rules of art, so like a child’s story in its sublime simplicity—answers
to the spontaneous period it pictures. ‘‘ The patriarchal age ” we call it, Through-
out the whole of this era, reaching from Adam to Joseph, there were beautiful
virtues, flowering into the light by the spontaneous energy of nature, but poisoned
in many spots by the slime of sensuality. The human stock threw out its forms of
life with a certain negligence, as the prodigal force of nature does her forests—as a
boy swings his limbs in the open air. Character needed a staunch vertebral column
to secure its uprightness. 2. Corresponding to this impulsive religious age of the
race, is the natural state of the individual. It is the condition we are born into, and
the multitudes never pass beyond it, because they are never renewed or made
Christian. Morally, they are children all their lives. Bad dispositions mix with
good. Conduct is not brought to the bar of a governmental examination, and
judged by an unbending principle. Nature, true enough, is always interesting ; and
spontaneous products may be beautiful. But man, with his free agency, beset
before and behind by evil, is not like a lily growing under God’s sun and dew, with
no sin to deform its grace or stain its colouring. He has to contend, struggle, resist.
He is tried, enticed, besieged. Natural religion might possibly answer in the woods
or in some solitary cell. But let the young man travel to the city, and the young
woman lend her ears to the flatteries of that silver-tongued sorceress, society; and
all this natural piety is like a silken thread held over a blazing furnace. 38. And ag
the first dispensation ended in a slavery in Egypt, or broods darkly over Pagan
nations still, so the lawless motions of every self-guided will end in a servitude to
some Pharaoh in the members that cries aloud for emancipation—a settled aliena-
tion from the household of the good. I. Next comes the Laat or supioraL stage.
1. The world’s religious experience is concentrated in Judea, human progress running
on through Hebrew channels. Others have wandered off into hopeless idolatries.
Now God calls Moses and appoints him the head of the second epoch. A period of
law begins. Instinct must be curbed, for it has done mischief enough. Impulse
must be controlled by principle, for it has proved itself insufficient. There must be
positive commands, ceremonies, and: ordinances, coercive restraints, and penalties.
2. So with all of us; there comes a time when we feel that we cannot act by
inclination, but must follow law. The principle of duty is that law. Babyhood is
passed, and its instincts suffice us no longer. To do as we like would still be
pleasant, but it is dangerous and false. We become stewards, and must give
account of our stewardship. Life has put its harness upon us, and we must work
in it. The beneficence as well as the rectitude of this is apparent. By obeying a
law, we acquire superiority to it. Voluntarily submitting to certain rules for a time,
our virtue is strengthened and finally becomes independent of them, so that it can
go alone. The inebriate binds himself by a pledge, and thus regains his freedom.
Let us not despise law, for every day practical proofs are scattered before us that it
is a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. III. But there is a rarrp DISPENSATION, and
at the head of it one greater than Moses. These outgrew the period of literal com-
mandment, It became a dead profession, a school of foolish questions, a shelter of
hypocrisies. The enlarging soul of the race asks a freer, more sincere, more vital
nurture, and it comes. If the simple religious instincts of Abraham had been


CHAP. 1.] ST. JOAN. 78
a
accepted for righteousness ; if the law had been given by Moses, grace and truth
enter in by Jesus Christ—grace for the heart, truth for the understanding. 1.
Christ does not abrogate law, but by His own life and sacrifice first satisfies its con-
ditions. “ Think not that I came to destroy, but to fulfil.” The Cross does not
unbind the cords of accountability, but tightens and strengthens them. Divine laws
never looked so sacred as when they took sanctity from the redemption of the
Crucified. We must still be under discipline; but the Lawgiver is lost in the
Redeemer. The drudgery of obedience is beautified into the privilege of reconcilia-
tion. Love has cast out fear. The soul is released from the bondage. 2. Neither
of these three stages, whether of the general or the personal progress, denies or cuts
off its predecessor. Nature prepares the way for law, making the heart restless by
an unsatisfying experiment without it. The Law disciplined wayward, uncultured
man, making him ready for Christ. Judaism and Moses looked forward to the
Messiah. So, in the heart of childhood, there are expectations of the responsible
second stage of manhood; it is too thoughtless yet to look beyond, to the age of
mature Christian holiness. But see, again, when that second age of stern com-
mand and strict obedience comes, it grows sober and reflective. It feels heavily
that it is not sufficient to itself. It must look forward for the consolations of the
Cross. 3. Each stage requires fidelity in the preceding. You must have been true
to the better impulses of youth, that you may be, to the best advantage, a servant
of the law of maturity. You musi be faithfully obedient to duty before you are fit
to be a subject of grace. Do not imagine you can glide over into the favour of
heaven, without first keeping the commandment. Abraham, Moses, Christ; im-
pulse, discipline, faith; nature, law, gospel; instinct, obedience, grace; Mamre,
Sinai, Calvary; this is that Divine order—not bound by rigid rules of chronological
succession, but having the free play and various intershadings of a moral growth—
to which we are to conform our lives. (Bp. Huntington.) Use of the law :—
‘“‘You never saw @ woman sewing without a needle! She would come but poor
speed, if she only sewed wi’ the thread. So, I think, when we’re dealing wi’
sinners, we maun aye put in the needle o’ the law first; for the fact is, they’re
sleepin’ sound, and they need to be awakened up wi’ something sharp. But when
we’ve got the needle o’ the law fairly in, we may draw as lang a thread as you
like o’ gospel consolation after it.” (FF. Lockhart.) The law shows us our need of
Christ:—One of the persecutors, in Queen Mary’s days, pursuing a poor Pro-
testant, and searching the house for him, charged an old woman to show him the
heretic. She points to a great chest of linen, on the top whereof lay a fair looking-
glass. He opens the chest, and asks where the heretic was. She suddenly replied,
‘‘ Do you not see one?’’ meaning that he was the heretic, and that he might easily
see himself in the glass. And thus God’s law is the glass that shows us all our
spots. Let us hold it right to our intellectual eye; not behind US, aS the wicked do,
they cast God’s word behind them; not beside us, like the rich worldling that
called to Christ—not to turn the back of the glass towards us, which is the very
trick of all hypocrites; nor, lastly, to look upon ourselves in this glass when we
are muffled, masked, or cased, for under those veils we cannot discern our own
complexions. But let us see the clear glass before our face, and our open face to
the glass, and then we shall soon perceive that the sight of our filthiness is the first
step towards cleanliness. (J. Spencer.) Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.—
I. How ruey came. 1. Let us begin with truth. Truth came by Jesus Christ.
(1) The truth of performance in distinction from engagement. You read of the
promise made unto the fathers. It was first announced in Paradise, and was
renewed from time to time. That promise has been fulfilled by Jesus Christ. (2)
The truth of reality in distinction from prefiguration. The Law was a shadow of
good things to come. We are in possession of the truth, of which the paschal lamb,
the manna, the rock, the altar, the mercy-seat, &c., were the shadows. (3) The
truth of certainty in distinction to error and falsehood. What is heathenism? An
assemblage of false gods, temples, sacrifices, hopes, fears: “turned the truth ef God
into a lie.” What is Mohammedanism? A vast improvement on heathenism.
Mohammed was a man of great talent; but that his communications from God,
that his puerile and depraved notions were Divinely inspired, is a lie. What is
Popery? Take her traditions, rites of saints, miracles, infallibility—what are these
put lying wonders? What is justification by works? What is antinomianism, but
alie? But the gospel is the truth, and we can point to its incontestible evidences.
(4) The truth of importance in distinction from all other truth. Things may be
equally true, and yet not equally valuable. There is physical, historical, and moral


~


74 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. 1


a $$$


truth; but I lay my hand on the Bible and say, “ This is life eterna .” (5) This is
truth the most honourable to God, suited to man, most influential, most beneficent ;
and we do not wonder at Paul saying, “I count all things but loss,” for the
excellency of it. 2. Grace came by Jesus Christ. (1) Because He revealed it (ver.
18), “Never man spoke as this man.” ‘Grace was poured into His lips,” there-
fore “the common people heard Him gladly.” (2) Because He is the effect of it.
“God so loved,” &c. (3) Because He is the medium of it. Everything worthy of
the name flows from His mediation—‘‘ promises which are yea and amen through
Him”; redemption, which is through His blood. (4) Because He is the exemplifier
of it. Look at His Old Testament emblems, and those in the New: a lamb is the
‘image of His Person, a dove of His Spirit. Righteousness and joy and peace is the
character of His kingdom, II. WHat ARE WE TO Do WITH THEM NOW THEY ARE COME?
We must have something to do with them, or they will have something to do with
us. Having come in contact with the gospel you cannot shake it off. It will either
be a savour of life or a savour of death. 1. We are to receive them. Not grace
without truth or truth without grace. The gospel is truth, and therefore to be
received with the firmness of conviction and assent; grace, therefore to be
received with cordiality, gratitude, and joy. 2. To exemplify them. Under the
agency of the Spirit we are softened from our natural hardness to receive Divine
impression, and fashioned into the very character of the gospel so that we realize
it, embody it, and render it visible, so that we adorn the doctrine of God our
Saviour by showing what it is. Whatever the gospel is we are required to copy it—
if light, we are to be illuminated ; if salt, we are to be seasoned ; if love, we are to be
lovely ; if holiness, we are to be holy. There are some who are all truth who are
not all that grace requires. The perfection of the Christian arises from the
harmony and proportion of these excellencies. In your zeal for orthodoxy you must
not renounce charity and candour. 3. To extend and diffuse them. Though grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ, there are millions who have never heard of the
Saviour. But are they to remain ignorant always? (W. Jay.) The purpose of
the law :—The law threatened, not helped; commanded, not healed ; showed, not
took away, our feebleness. But it made ready for the Physician, who was to come
with grace and truth. (Augustine.) Law and grace :—The Law was given, but
grace came, because the one was sent by a servant, the other was brought by the
Son. (Bp. Wordsworth.) Grace and truth one with Christ :—The words ‘‘ was
given”? imply the external and positive institution of the Law; ‘‘came’’ de-
notes grace and truth appearing historically in the very person of Him who
is their essential source (ver. 4), and becoming realized in His life and com-
municated through Him. Moses may disappear, the Law remains nevertheless;
it is only given by him. But take Jesus Christ away, and grace and truth are
gone; for these gifts have come by Him, and are closely united to His Person.
(F. Godet, D.D.) Claim and gift :—There was first, in the Law, God’s claim
of right, which man could not meet, and now, in Jesus Christ, God’s gift of salva-
tion. (J. Culross, D.D.) The one could only give the command, but the other
supplies motives and strength to keep it. The one could only show in figure, what
the other exhibits in fact, the means whereby we may obtain pardon where the com-
mand has unhappily been broken. (G. J. Brown, M.A.) Grace and truth :—
Grace in opposition to the curse of the moral law; truth in opposition to the figures
of the ceremonial law. (Bp. Reynolds.) Grace comprehends all the perfections
of the will; truth all the virtues of the understanding. (Dr. Preston.)  Truth:—
It is plain that the antithesis cannot be between the false and the true, but only
between the imperfect and the perfect, the shadowy and the substantial. So, too,
the eternal word is declared to be rd gc rd adnOwéy (chap. i. 9), not denying
thereby that the Baptist was also “a burning and a shining light” (chap. v. 35), or
that the faithful are “lights in the world” (Phil. ii. 15; Matt. v. 14); but only
claiming for a greater than all to be “the Light that lighteth every man that
cometh into the world.” Christ declares Himself 6 dprog 6 ddnOud¢ (chap. vi. 32),
not that the bread which Moses gave was not also “ bread of heaven” (Ps. ev. 40),
but it was such only in a secondary inferior degree; it was not food in the highest
sense, inasmuch as it did not nourish up into eternal life those that ate it (chap. vi.
49). Heis 7 cuedog 4 ddnOry (chap. xv. 1), not thereby denying that Israel also
was God's vine, which we know it was (Ps. Ixxx. 8; Jer. ii. 21), but affirming that
none except Himself realized this name, and all which this name implied, to the
full (Hos. x.1; Deut. xxxii. 32). The fact that in John’s writings the word adnOivde
is used two and twenty times as against five times in all the rest of the New Testa.


— eS ee


CHAP. 1.] _ S§T. JOHN. 75


ment, is one which we can scarcely dismiss as accidental. (Archbishop Trench.)
Jesus Christ :—It is at this point that the Apostle for the first’time announces the
great name so long expected. In proportion as the history of the mercies of the
Word towards humanity unfolds before his view, the spectacle inspires him with
terms even more concrete and more human. The Logos of ver. 1 appeared as
Light in ver. 5; as Son, ver. 14; and in ver. 17 He is at length called Jesus Christ,
(F. Godet, D.D.) Law and grace :—These great words have stood here in John’s
Gospel for eighteen hundred years, but I am afraid there are millions of Christian
people who have not discovered their glorious meaning. They are still under law, and
are still surrounded by the unreal shadows of darkness, About the grace and the
truth which have come through Jesus Christ, they know almost nothing. I will begin
with what is most obvious. We find ourselves living in a world in which the forces
of nature are constant, in which what we describe as natural laws are uniform and
invariable. There is aniron rigidity in the constitution of things. We have to dis-
cover that constitution. We cannot changeit. We have to take account of it in
the conduct of life. What we call Nature seems to show no mercy to those who
disregard her method. She will give us harvests, but we must pay her price, and her
full price. We can have health and strength, but only upon her conditions.
Now this relentlessness of nature forms men to think of God sometimes as relent-
less; for nature, they say, is the revelation of God. We are under law—thisis the
inference—under law throughout every province of life, and we can never escape
the natural consequences of our sins. We must exhaust the penalty in this world
or other worlds, we must pay the debt to the uttermost farthing. Christ meets us
in nature and contradicts that inference. Nature is only the partial and incom-
plete revelation of God. Christ reveals the actual truth. You believe that
there is no release from the natural consequences of ignorance, of folly, of
recklessness, of vice, and that in the full and unqualified sense of the words
“What a man soweth that shall he also reap.” But the whole story of Christ’s
life contradicts that belief. If natural laws were supreme, men born blind
would remain blind to the end of their days. Christ gave them sight. That is
not merely part of the evidence of the gospel. It is a very substantial part of the
gospel itself, and a part of the gospel exceptionally necessary in our times. If
natural laws were supreme, deaf would remain deaf, the dumb would remain
dumb. Christ gave them hearing, speech. The laws of nature are not
supreme. In Christ, the gracious power of the Eternal revealed, not to one
age only but to all ages, that nature is not supreme, but that God is supreme.
Nature may be relentless; God is not. And it was in the natural order itself that
Christ by His miracles gave us this great discovery. The universe is a great
school for the discipline ‘of the intellect and the virtue of mankind, and it could not
be an effective discipline if the natural order were not constant. But to infer that
the methods of God are bound by the methods of nature is a false inference. Let
me take another illustration of how Christ contradicts what may be called our
natural belief in law. We are conscious of fault, perhaps of something that ought
to be described by a darker name. It lies upon our conscience, and we cannot
escape from it. We say, ‘No, it is impossible that I should ever escape. The
guilt is mine, and if live for a thousand years it will be mine still.” Grace came
by Jesus Christ. You think that by an eternal law you must suffer for your sins.
The Christian gospel declares that Christ suffered forthem. His relations to us—
you will discover this, I hope, some day if you have.not discovered it yet—are of a
kind which made it possible for Him, as it was possible for no one els¢é, But does
He deliver from the external and natural consequences of wrong-doing? Not
obviously. Perhaps not frequently. If He delivered men from these obviously and
frequently, the moral discipline which we are to derive from the constancy of the
order of nature would be imperilled. Sometimes, indeed—and far more often than
we even suppose—I am inclined to believe that Christ does really deliver us even
from the natural consequences of wrong-doing. But even when these remain their
whole character is changed. As sins they are forgiven. Then they become simply
the nattiral consequences of what we have done, not the penal consequences. We
do not see behind them a God that is punishing us for having done wrong, but a
God who has pardoned us, and who is standing by us to discipline us by certain
hard conditions of life to a higher perfection. Consequences which were penal as
long as we were unforgiven, become simply natural and disciplinary as soon as sin
has been remitted. Do you say thatif the consequences remain it makes no differ-
ence whether they are penal or whether they are natural and disciplinary? You


hen


76 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cnar. 1.
ogee ee naan on CNEL ORT UL USDA ARTES

ould hardly say that if you knew the difference from experience. But even apart
Roni SeeTteayron At get some glimpse of the truth. Here is @ man who, as
the result of his recklessness and his gross vices, is suffering disease for which there
isno cure. He is miserably weak, sometimes he is in great pain. His condition is
the natural result of his evil life, and since he brought it on himself by his vices, he
feels that it is the penal result of his evil life. Here is another man, suffering from
weakness equally prostrating, from pain equally severe, but his weakness and pain
came upon him from no fault of his own. They are the result of exposure to damp
air acting on some original defect of the constitution, or the result of overwork for
the sake of his wife and children, or of accident, or they came upon him on the
battlefield when fighting for his country. They are natural consequences of certain
past events in the man’s history ; they are not the penal results of the man’s vices.
Would not the first man give a great deal to exchange the weakness and the suffer-
ing which are penal for the weakness and the suffering which are merely natural ?
That is what Christ reveals. Law came by Moses, grace came by Jesus Christ.
Let me take another illustration. Law, moral law, law as we know it—and
I am using the word in its popular sense—begins by imposing duty. The
law of consequence begins by imposing duty. The law given to the Jewish
people so far forth as it was Jaw begins by imposing duty, and it makes the
fulfilment of duty the condition of peace with God and of larger power to do well
and of eternal blessedness. All this is of the very essence of what we call law.
Grace came by Jesus Christ. He begins in altogether a different way. He does not
say ‘‘ Live righteously, and God will be at peace with you,” but ‘God is at peace
with you, therefore live righteously.”” He finds us in our sin. Whenever He really
finds us we are conscious of our sin, and so we are ready in our strong belief in that
form of law which is familiar to us to say, ‘‘ God can be no friend of mineas yet; I
must amend my ways, I must break off my evil habits, I must master my evil passions,
I must become pure, devout, earnest about religion, and then God will be at peace
with me.” Thatis law. What Christ says is, ‘‘God is already at peace with you,
is already your Friend. He will not wait till you have amended your ways before
He dismisses the remembrance of your sin. He dismisses it at once, and willhelp
you to mend your ways, will help you to break off evil habits, will help you to
master evil passions, will help you to become pure, devout, and earnest about
religion.” Thatis grace. People do not see the glory of it, do not see what it
means, They think that Christ only came to make some things plainer to the world
than they were before. It never occurred to them that it would not have been worth
while for the eternal Word of God to become flesh in order to do that. Truth—
there is an infinite suggestiveness in the way John puts the contrast between what
Moses did and what Christ has done. He does not merely Say, ‘‘ The law was given
by Moses, grace came by Jesus Christ.” What he says is, ‘‘ The law was given by
Moses, grace came—grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.” Judaism wasevidently
wanting in grace ; it was wanting in reality too. Allits institutions were elementary,
visible, material illustrations of the spiritual realities, the very truth of things,
which are ours in Christ. Not only grace and truth, reality came by Jesus Christ.
And wherever the grace is obscured, the truth, the very reality and substance of the
Christian revelation loses its place, and the mere shadows of heavenly things re-
main. It was so among the Judaising opponents fof Paul. You remember how
they insisted on the necessity of circumcision if men were to be saved. But, said
Paul, circumoision is nothing. Itis a shadow, it produces no real change in a man.
We Christians have the true thing, of which circumcision is but the shadow, the
circumcision of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of man
but of God. I entreat you to dismiss shadows, all shadows. Recognize the truth,
the reality that has come by Jesus Christ, and in the truth you will find grace.
There is a real sacrifice for sin, the eternal Son of God. There is a real Priest.
While we deal with the shadows of sin, the shadows of sacrifices and the shadows
of priests may avail for us; but when the sin comes home to us in its reality,
be sure of this, that only the sacrifice that is real and the Priest that is real will
give us courage and peace. And the glory of what Christ has achieved, and the
revelation of grace which has come by Christ, is this, that while Christ has can-
celled the old and infirm form of law, Christ creates a righteousness transcending all
that law had demanded. Grace comes, grants us to begin with more than man had
ever hoped for by perfect obedience, and grace tells man that, by an obedience he
would never have been capable of before, he is to retain this great wealth and con-
stantly to augment it, And so in a higher region grace and law blend. The law


ees


OnAP. 1.] _ ST. JOHN. Fir


ieee ceabhe sae is pede ek a righteousness that iaw demands grace
renders possible ; and so man is glorified for ever in th
W. Dale M4) ; gl in the eternal glory of God. (R.


Ver. 18. No man hatn seen God.—The limitations of human vision :—Some men
have seen much, for all have not the same power of vision. Some have seen much
more than others with—I. Tum naturaL EYE. They have travelled far and near;
seen wonders upon the deep and on the mountains, and the marvels of creation
living and lifeless—but no man hath seen God. II. Tae mnTELLEcTUAL Eyez. 1.
The eye of science. They can invade worlds of truth which are veiled and shut to
souls of lesser power; ascend into the heavens and see the harmony which rules all
the movements of those gleaming worlds, descend into the deeps of the earth and
of the ages which have measured cut its history, and read the records which are
there inscribed. They can see something of the unity which pervades the whole
universe ; that all sciences are but chapters in one great illuminated book, or are
but notes in one sublime and never-ceasing song—but they have not seen God. 2.
Some men have the poet’s eye which can glance from heaven to earth, from earth
to heaven, and detect behind what is natural and changeful the truths which are
typified, and which abide for ever—but even they have not seen God. III. Tue
MORAL EYE. Patriarchs, prophets, apostles beheld wonderful visions. Some of
them were favoured with glimpses and manifestations and tokens of His presence,
and so impressive and overpowering were these that they felt as if they had seen
God, but even they were no exception to the rule that “‘no man hath seen God at
any time.” (EH. Mellor, D.D.) The invisible and revealed God:—I. Tue
INVISIBLE Gop. 1. We are invisible to each another; nay, to ourselves. There is
a veil between our spirit and another that, while our words and looks may serve to
indicate what is passing within, they cannot unveil the indwelling soul. And so
utterly can the soul tyrannize over the house in which it dwells, that it can compel it
to illuminate its windows with festive joy when all is woe within, or compel it to
darken them when all within is mirth and revelry. And if we cannot see man, much
less can we see God. 2. There is no law that God has impressed on nature that
we can see. Form and colour we can see, and that things move, but not the per-
vading life nor the gravitation which holds them together in their orbits. 3. The
material universe is but a faint indication of God’s greatness, nor does it seem
possible for even omnipotence to embody itself in matter. We might imagine the
gun robbed of its beams, and heaven, earth, and sea combining to surrender what-
ever of beauty or grandeur they contain, still the result would be miserably
insufficient to portray the glory of the invisible God. 4. The mind is baffled in its
attempt to grasp the fundamental mystery. The loftiest conception we have is that
of infinity. And yet this is a mere negation, and must be affirmed of each separate
attribute as well as the totality of God’s being. 5. Without the guidance of revela-
tion no one has ever reached any fair conception of the unity, spirituality, and moral
character of God. Though day unto day has been uttering speech, and night unto
night showing knowledge, the mass of the rude and unlearned have everywhere,
divided the empire of the universe among gods many and lords many. And as to
the philosophers, such of them as have been able to emancipate themselves from
gross polytheism, have either guessed at the truth that there is one God, and have
contented themselves with a cold deduction of reason, or they have merged God and
nature in one, thus destroying His personality in Pantheism. The world never
by wisdom knew God. And were we to close the Book of Revelation in a few
generations we should relapse into a heathenism as absolute as that of Greece and
Rome. 6. And as for the supposed teachings of natural religion, they are but
flashes from the revealed Word. We are astonished that any eye can miss the
Divine monogram written large in the heavens, small in the flower. But we do not
search nature for the invisible, we take the ideawith us. II. TazpEcLAREDGop. Christ
has revealed the Father in three ways which meet and satisfy these corresponding
necessities in man. 1, The incarnation, e.g., of the spiritual in the bodily meets
that necessity which feels how impossible it is to grasp the purely spiritual. We do
not feel happy at the thought of what is both infinite and invisible. Who has not
felt at times the all but intolerable oppression that comes upon the spirit when one
has stood in the shadow of Alpine mountains! We are bewildered by the un-
manageable vastness of the conception of an all-prevailing God. We long for
something that we can more effectually compass. We wish to pray; are heavy


a


78 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (CHAP. 1
Ne ee eee
laden and sad; but infinitude is too grand for us in such hours, and we long for a
friend who can take our hand andsay, “ Fear not I am with thee.” But God, the
great and glorious mystery, has been manifest in the flesh. As He had to reveal
Himself to man, He found no better medium than man, the form with which we
were most familiar, and of which we should be least afraid. 2. By His character
and life Christ declares to us the moral character of God. There is much in God
which humanity, even in its highest and purest type, is inadequate to represent.
The medium is tarnished and dimmed so that the heavenly light cannot shine
through it, or only brokenly. Once only has humanity formed a medium through
which, in its unmingled brightness and beauty, the moral character of God might
pour its beams. To learn the moral character of God we must learn it in Christ;
its holiness, its tenderness, its mercy for the sinful. 3. Christ has declared to us
the Fatherly character of God. God we are told is love. This He is in Himself,
and this He has been pre-eminently to us. We need more than words, and then,
when we receive but words from those who might give us more real help, we learn
bitterly that all friends are not true. Now there is no better test of love than the
test of endurance and suffering, but Divine love has made for us the highest sacri-
fice, “for God so loved the world,” &c. (Ibid.) Invisible things :—There are
even material agents in existence around us so subtle as to elude the cognisance of
the senses, There are powers in nature whose ever-present influence we perceive,
yet which themselves are never directly discerned. The varied forms and colours
of material objects around us the eye can detect, but not the latent electricity that
pervades them. The masses and motions of the planetary bodies are appreciable
by the sight; but the keenest organs of sense cannot see gravitation, cannot detect
that mysterious power, as it flies through space, binding orb to orb. And if thus
on the confines, so to speak, of the material and spiritual worlds, there are agents
impalpable to sense, much more, when we pass those limits, do we enter into a
region where bodily organs fail us, and a vision and faculty far more divine is
needed, Who has seen thought? What eye has ever rested on that mysterious
essence which we designate mind, soul, spirit? If it be that spiritual intelligences
surround us, if millions of spiritual beings walk the earth both when we wake and
sleep, yet, as they pass hither and thither on their heavenly ministries, does the
faintest sign of the presence of these glorious beings ever flash on the dull sense of
man? Nay, are we not dwellers in a world of embodied spirits, holding continual
intercourse with them, witnessing constantly the proofs of their existence and the
effects of their activity : yet has one human spirit ever become visible to another?
No! it is but the forms of spirit that are visible to sense. We see in the busy
world around us the mere houses of souls. In this sense, then, God is now and
ever must be invisible. If even a finite spirit cannot be seen by the bodily eye,
how much less the infinite spirit? (J. Caird, D.D.) The invisibility of God :—
We are much in the condition of children for whom their father has built a mag-
nificent house, and stored it with all needful provisions, and ornamented it with the
most exquisite decorations, a house which the more it is examined the more it
reveals forethought and arrangement, startling its inmates constantly with unexpected
anticipation for their comfort and happiness. But their father, for some reason
or other, is concealed from their view. ‘* Now every house is builded by some man,
but He that built all things is God.” We dwell in His house. Its roof declares
His handiwork. Its chambers are garnished with a wondrous glory. Its table is
supplied day by day with food convenient for us. The house is renewed year by
year. But the Hand which accomplishes it all is unseen. We sometimes long to
get behind the intercepting veil. We would fain see the Great Worker at His work
see the arm of power, gaze on the fountain of light, rise above and through all
phenomena, leave the fleeting behind us, and stand in the presence of the change-
less. But no man hath seen God at any time, and what is more, ‘‘no man can see
God and live.” (EH. Mellor, D.D.) God invisible to sense :—Could we entertain
for a moment the supposition of God condescending to contrive some resplendent
form, some radiant shape of superhuman majesty and loveliness, by which to con-
vey to man a conception of His spiritual glory, we might conceive the universe to be
searched in vain for the materials of such a production. We might give the rein to
fancy, and imagine the sun robbed of its glory and the stars of their splendours
and heaven, earth, sea, skies, all the myriad worlds in space, . combining to
surrender whatever of beauty or grandeur they contain; still would the result be
miserably insufficient to portray the unapproachable glory of the invisible Being of
God. ‘ These are but parts of His ways; how little a portion is heard of Him!


OHAP. 1.) 8T. JOHN. 79


ee ee ee ne Oe


but the thunder of His power who can understand?” (J. Caird, D.D.) The
incomprehensibility of God :—In the Greek legend she who desired to see the deity
in his splendour is instantly reduced to ashes. In the Hindoo mythology when
Brahma, the supreme, shoots down a pillar of light between the two contending
deities, Siva and Vishnti, one deity wings his way upwards for a thousand years
with the speed of lightning, but cannot reach its summit; the other wings his
way downwards with the speed of lightning for a thousand years yet cannot find
its base. Christian theology has felt this no less clearly that God in His own
Being is incomprehensible. ‘here is a picture of the vision of St. Augustine, who,
when he was writing a treatise on the Trinity, saw a child trying to empty the
ocean with a shell into a little hole in the sand. ‘* What art thou doing?” asked
the saint. ‘I am trying to empty the sea with this shell into this hole,” answered
the child. ‘But that is impossible,” said Augustine.”’ ‘Not more impossible, O
Augustine, than for thee in thy treatise to explain the mystery of the Trinity.”
(Archdeacon Farrar.) As regards God, our soundest knowledge is to know
that we know Him, and our safest eloquence concerning Him is silence,
when we confess without confession that His glory is inexplicable, His
greatness above our capacity or reach. (Hooker.) The only-begotten Son.—
The only-begotten Son:—This “only-begotten Son” is the same Person who,
in the previous portion of the chapter, is designated the Word, and of whom
it is said in language of which it is impossible for us to mistake the reference,
‘He was made flesh and dwelt among us,” and so dwelling among men there
was beheld in Him “the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth.” The Person, then, who is thus named is none other than He who
was more familiarly known as the Lord Jesus Christ. I. Briefly, then, let me try
to unfold to you THE ImpoRT OF THIS GREAT NAME—the Son, the only-begotten Son of
God. There is a previous inquiry to which I may, in a very few words, refer. What
is the reference of the text—it being ascertained that it refers to the Lord Jesus
Christ? Does it refer to Him as Divine, or simply as Mediator between God and
man? It is evident to my own mind that the Scriptures give the name Son to the
second Person of the Godhead, as a Person of the Godhead, and that it belongs to
Him as Divine, and that, apart altogether from His becoming incarnate and doing
work for the salvation of sinners, He is the only-begotten Son in the bosom of the
Father. Further, there is nothing in the name itself that makes it inapplicable to
the Divine Person. It is quite true that, as applied to man, it does include those
ideas of derivation of beings, which are totally inconsistent with the notion of
aternal existence ; but when we find figures of any sort applied to God, we must
strain them no further than is consistent with a notion of His Divinity. Yet
farther: if this name be not descriptive of a Divine relation, then the name
‘“‘ Father ” also is not descriptive of a Divine relation. And if you take it away,
then have we no manifestation of the first Person of the Godhead by any personally
distinctive name whatever. As, therefore, yousay the ‘‘ Father” isa name belong-
ing to the first Person of the Godhead as Divine, so is the Son.” We must take
notice, in an introductory way, of the expression ‘‘ only.” This name, whatever be
its import, belongs to Christ as it belongs to no one else. There is but one Son of
God in the sense of my text. You do not need to go far back into the previous con-
text to find that there are others who in a certain sense are the sons of God. II.
We now proceed to notice SOME OF THE THOUGHTS SUGGESTED BY THIS INCOMMUNICABLE
rituE. 1. I think that instead of suggesting to us, when wisely interpreted, some-
thing inconsistent with Divinity, this title in its sole and incommunicable pre-
eminence suggests the very idea of Divinity. Indeed that is the very first thought
I find in it—sameness of nature with the Father. The Sonof man is not angelic;
the Son of man is man. And so when you speak of Him in the full and true and
proper sense, the Son of God is God. Nay, so farmay you carry this principle that
you cannot describe a creature as the son or child of God without his being, as far
as a creature may be, partaker of the Divine nature. It was because there was
something of it in him that Adam was called the son of God, Butin the full sense,
in which it belongs to no other, it is true only of Jesus Christ that He is God. 2.
Then there is second thought. There is resemblance in character. ‘The Son of
God resembles the Father, and the resemblance in this Divine nature is so perfect
as to come to identity. ‘‘ He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father.” 3. Then,
thirdly, these words Father and Son suggest intimacy of fellowship. ‘ The Father
showeth the Son all things that He Himself doeth 1” 4. But perhaps the most
prominent of all ideas connected with the title is intensity of mutual Divine affeo-


er af


80 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [orar. 1
ee
tion. The Father loveth the Son. 5. There is another idea which is brought out
also in Scripture, namely, community of interests. All that belongs to the Father
belongs to the Son. 6. But I should be omitting one thought of great importance
if I did not say that the title ‘‘ Son,” as applied to the second Person in the Trinity,
does, after all, indicate a certain distinction. The Father is not personally the Son,
nor the Son the Father. And now for one or two particular inferences from what
I have been unfolding in this somewhat dry and formal manner. And first—if
these things be so—oh, what love is that of the Father towards sinfulmen? The
second inference is this—I wish I could bring it out as it presents itself, in its
attractive phase, to my own mind, If the Saviour be God’s beloved Son—His only
Son—the object of infinite, unfathomable, everlasting delight—what an argument
the sinner has when he goes to God for pardon, love, and all spiritual blessings!
What a plea does God put in the sinner’s mouth, when He says to the sinner, ‘ Ask
of Me for My Son’s sake.” But there is another side to this argument. If the
Saviour be God’s only Son, what becomes of those that will not know Him—of those
who dishonour and reject Him? (J. Hdmund, D.D.) He hath declared Him.—
Christ the revelation of the invisible God :—The obvious import of these words is,
not that Jesus Christ has told or taught us verbally who and what God is, but that
in His own person and life He is the silent inarticulate manifestation of God to the
world. A child may declare or describe to you the appearance and character of his
father; a pupil may tell you of his teacher; an author may give an account of
himself in his book; but there may be in each of these cases an involuntary and
indirect description, much more clear and emphatic than the direct one. For in
his writings, the author, especially if he be an earnest writer, unconsciously portrays
himself, so that we may know as much of the heart and soul of a favourite author
by familiarity with his books as if we had lived for years in personal intercourse
with him. So the pupil has caught the revered master’s manner; or the child
bears, not only in his person, but in his temper, habits, sentiments, prevailing tone
of thought and feeling, a strong family-likeness to the parent; and though there
may be much in the father which, from inferiority of talents or attainments, the
character of the child may be inadequate to represent, yet, according to his
measure, he may convey to us a better idea of what the fatheris than by any express
and formal description of him we could attain. Now, so it is in the case before us.
Jesus manifests the Father by His person, by His life and character, and especially
by His sufferings and death. (J. Caird, D.D.) The unseen God made visible
in Christ :—In looking at the sun through a telescope, if we use unstained glass
the eye will be burned to the socket, and we shall see nothing; but if we employ a
coloured medium, we can examine it with safety. So no man can see God and live.
But if we contemplate Him through Christ, that is, if we come to Him through the
medium of humanity, we behold Him without being destroyed, nay, the sight of
Him thus imparts salvation to us; for we behold His glory as that of the only-
begotten, and lo! it is full of grace and truth. (W. M. Taylor, D.D.) Christ's
relation to the Great Father :—I. He is the NrarEstT RELATION to the Great Father.
The phrase “ only-begotten” which occurs only here and John i. 14; iii. 16, 18;
1 John iv. 9, implies an essential relation perfectly unique as appears.—1. From the
interpretation which the Jews put upon it (chap. v. 18). 2. From the extraordinary
manifestation of Divine love which the sacred writers saw in His mission. 3. From
several events of His history—(1) His miraculous conception; (2) His persistent
self-assertion ; (3) His wondrous miracles; (4) His atoning death ; (5) His resurrec-
tion and ascension. II. He is TENDEREST IN AFFECTION to the Great Father. 1. In
His preincarnate life (Prov. viii. 30). 2. In prophecy (Isa. xlii. 1). 3. At His
baptism. 4. At His transfiguration (2 Pet. i. 17,18). 5. In the Epistles (Col. i. 13).
From this we learn—(1) That God loves; He is not mere infinite Intellectuality ;
He is infinite Sensibility too; (2) Christ is the highest object of His love. That
love is not the love of pity, of gratitude, but of infinite complacency. III. He is the
MOST ACCURATE IN THE KNOWLEDGE oF the Great Father. 1. He alone is intellectually
qualified to know God. The highest created being only knows God in some of His
aspects; Christ knows Him in all, in His being. 2. He alone is morally qualified
to know God. He alone is—(1) Sufficiently pure: only the pure in heart can see
God; (2) Sufficiently powerful: Moses, Isaiah, John could not stand a slight
manifestation. IV. He is THE MOST COMPLETE REVELATION of the Great Father
(Matt. xi, 27). He is the Logos, the only word which can express the Divine heart.
He has revealed.—l. God’s Being: a Spirit, &c. 2. His relation: a Father. If
Christ is the correct revelation of God—(1) All other revelations must be tested by


— ee Le ee


\


CHAP, I.] ST. JOHN. 81


His. (2) Much that is prevalent in religious society must be repudiated as un-
Christ-like. (3) Christ alone must be held as the Master of souls. (D. Thomas,
D.D.) A Blessed Evangel :—Concerning—I. Tae CHaracrer oF Gov, Who is—
1. Not an abstraction, but a Person. 2. Nota Supreme Intelligence merely, but an
infinite Heart. 3. Nota Divinity enthroned in the serene altitudes of His measure-
less perfections, but a Father interested in the affairs and providing help for the
necessities of His children, yea, coming near them in the person of His Son. II. Ta
DESTINY OF MAN. 1. By establishing the inherent dignity of human nature, since it
was capable of union with Divine. 2. By revealing its lofty possibilities when so
allied, 3. And so discovering that man must have a future not bounded by time.
The first prediction of this was man’s creation (Lev. i. 27), the second the Incarnator
(Heb. ii. 14). III. Tae sussrance or THE cosren which is announced to be grace
and truth, without which the nature of God could not be revealed nor the destiny of
man attained. Lessons: 1. Do we believe in the Incarnation? Our answer dis-
closes the inner quality of our souls (1 John iv. 2,3). 2. Have we accepted the
gospel it brings? This also is heart searching, character revealing, destiny fixing
inquiry (John iii. 33, 36; 1 John v.10). 3. Can we confirm from personal experi-
ence these truths? If so our faith will be invincible against modern doubt.
(L. Whitelaw, D.D.) The Revealer of God :—Jesus Christ declared—I, Tue
unity or Gop. By this we do not understand that this truth was absolutely un-
known before His advent, but that it received new importance and fresh vitality in
the religion He established. 1. There is but one God—a very vital truth. Whence
came it? From nature? Let us ask the pupils of nature, the numerous nations of
antiquity. How many gods are there? ‘There are gods many,” not that nature
taught polytheism, but her pupils learnt it in her school. The mildest departure
from the monotheistic faith was that of Persia and the adjoining countries. Their
populations looked around, and beheld, as we behold, the presence of light and
darkness, of good and evil. These two powers were in perpetual antagonism. How
did they account for them? By the adoption of a creed in whicn there were two
gods, Ormuzd and Ahriman, a god of good and a god of evil. 2. Turn from nature
to philosophy. Philosophy and idolatry were attached twins. The capital of the
one was the centre of the other (Acts. xvii. 16). There were a few there who dared
to ridicule the graven images; but what had they to offer instead? Nothing. The
alternative lay between polytheism and atheism. One here and there gave utterancé
to lofty truths about God. But to their thinking the existence of inferior deities
was not inconsistent with that of the Lord of all. Socrates on his deathbed ordered
a fowl to be sacrificed on his behalf to the god Aisculapius. Besides, the idea of
one God, supreme among the many, was counteracted in its influence by the absurd
notion that in proportion to His greatness was He removed from the ordinary
affairs of mankind. 3, This truth, absent from every other, is prominent in the
literature of the Hebrews. The Jewish creed teaches it, but its Author is God. 4.
This Old Testament truth Christ appropriated, and made it the cardinal doctrine of
the new réligion. He amplified it and gave it a vitality it never had before. Its
novelty on Christ’s lips consist in its representation that God is near man and
interested in his concerns, Judaism showed men a great God, but he was distant.
Paganism showed them a near god, but he was small. In Christianity, however,
we see the great God of the Jews without being far, and the near god of the Greek
without being small. II. Tue sprnirvaniry or Gop. Not that this was totally
unknown to the ancient leaders of thought, but that it received from Christ a new
impulse, power, and application. 1. That God is a Spirit is a thought than which
there is none more familiar to the modern mind. Whence came it? From nature?
Decidedly not. Matter does not give theidea of spirit; it cannot give an idea
which is not in it. 2. Whence then came it? We are conscious of mind, a sub-
stance essentially different from matter; but the most influential modern school
denies that mind is different from matter, being only the natural result of the happy
organisation of matter. And this was practically the doctrine of ancient stoicism,
whose God was refined matter. 3. Let us turn to the Hebrew Scriptures, where
we find very Spiritual views of God; but the ideas in the Jewish mind were low
and carnal. Hence the proneness of the nation to idolatry, which is materialism of
the grossest kind. 4. At this crisis Jesus Christ makes His appearance on the
arena of history, and proclaims, with an emphasis and a fulness of meaning before
unknown, “God is a Spirit,” &e. This declaration overwhelms us with its
simplicity, purity, and grandeur. III. Tux eoopness or Gop. 1. The prominent
idea of the god of nature is power. But the idea of bare power would create dismay


82 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [oHar. Ie


OO eee
rather than trust. God is mighty, but I have offended Him. | Will He forgive ?
Nature cannot say? 2. The main excellence of the god of philosophy is wisdom ;
but such a god can make no appeal to the heart of humanity. 3. Christ declares
that “God is love:” His love and His essence are so interwoven that the cessation
of the one would be the destruction of the other. Being always in His bosom, the
Lord Jesus knows perfectly the contents of God’s heart ; and in His life, death,
and ministry that heart is unfolded to the world. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.)
God unfolding Himself to man (Children’s Sermon) :—The ancients tell a story of

‘one who tried to storm the heavens, but was defeated, and had to bear the heavens
as a punishment on his shoulders. He was called Atlas, from which we get the
name for a collection of maps. Our religion rests upon the one great doctrine of
God. How are we to know Him? We can’t see Him. But seeing the Queen would
not make her known to us; but—1. If the Queen were to send us a picture painted
by herself we should know her knowledge, skill, and love of beauty. 2. Ifshe were
to send a kind letter we should know her better. 3. If she sent a daughter exactly
like herself we should know her best. In these three ways God has revealed Him-
self to us. 1. The world is a great picture painted by God. Visit a factory and
you see order everywhere, which shows that the man who built and arranged such a
place had an orderly mind. So there is order; and wisdom, power, beauty and
goodness as well, which tells us something of God. 2. The Bible is God’s letter
which tells us of God’s heart, which nature does not ; and what He thinks of us and
would have us be and do. 38. Jesus Christ is God’s Son, and if we want to know
exactly what God is like we must study Jesus. If we want to know how He treats
sinners and little children, we must find out how Jesus treated them. (Joseph
Dawson.) Christ the declarer of the Father :—I. Curist’s PERSONAL MINISTRY.
1. Its contents—(1) God’s nature, perfections, authority, and government;
(2) The eternal councils of His will for the salvation of lost sinners; (3) The
wonders of His love insending His only-begotten Son into the world. 2. Its manner—
(1) Unique and authoritative; (2) Gentle and tender; (3) Complete; (4) Zealous ;
(5) Courageous ; (6) Unanswerable ; (7) Commanding. 3. Its credentials—(1) The
fulfilment of types and prophecies; (2) His life; (3) The purity of His doctrine;
(4) His miracles. II. His propHeric orrice more extensively considered—1l. Before
the Incarnation, 2. During His earthly life. 3. After His ascension—(1) By the
ministry of inspired man; (2) By the ministry of uninspired men, pastors, teachers,
officers of the Church; calling them, inclining their hearts to the work, giving them
opportunities for engaging in it; (3) By internal illumination, removing the veil
from men’s heart, and quickening their apprehensions by His Spirit. III. Tue
usE. 1. To show the excellence and necessity of Christ’s teachings. 2. To warn
against the danger of refusing to hear the Divine Teacher. 3. To encourage us to
attend to His teachings. (Dr. Guyse.) Christ the perfect revelation of God :—
Perfections that are set before us in mere epithets have no significance but that
which we give them by thinking them out. But perfections lived, embodied
physically, and acted before the senses, under social conditions, have quite another
grade of meaning. How much, then, does it signify when God comes out from
nature, out of all abstraction and abstractive epithets, to be acted personally in just
those glorious and Divine passivities that we have least discerned in Him and
scarcely dare impute to Him. By what other method can He meet us, then, so entirely
new and superior to all past revelations, as to come into our world history in the
human form ; that organ most eloquent in its passivity, begause it is at once most
expressive and closest to our feeling? (H. Bushnell, D.D.) God only to be scen
in Christ Jesus :—A man cannot behold the sun in the eclipse, it so dazzleth his
eyes. What doth he then? He sets down a basin of water, and seeth the image of
the sun shadowed in the water. So, seeing we cannot behold the infinite God, nor
comprehend Him, we must, then, cast the eyes of our faith upon His image, Christ
Jesus. When we look into a clear glass, it casteth no shadow to us; but put steel
upon the back, then it casteth a reflex, and showeth the face in the glass. So,
when we cannot see God Himself, we must put the manhood of our Lord Jesua
Christ as it were a back to His Godhead, and then we shall have a comfortable
reflex of His glory. (J. Spencer.) God revealed in Christ :—We use many words
to declare our minds, thereby showing the incoherency of our thoughts and
the faultiness of the vehicle in which we convey them. ‘The more powerful the
mind, the fewer and clearer the words it uses to disclose itself; and the higher and
more inspirational the mood, the more condensed and significant the language.
Every extraordinary genius reveals itself, not by the multiplicity of its sentences, but


- ee


OHAP. 1.} ST. JOHN. 83
ee eer ee ge ee ee ee
by one or two words struck off the anvil at the moment of white heat. Every
illustrious man is characterised by one or two sentences. ‘“‘ Know thyself!” therein
you see the whole mind and philosophy of Socrates. God revealed Himself once
in Christ the Word. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) Christianity says with
simplicity, ‘‘ No man hath seen God, except God.” That is a saying of profound
meaning. (Napoleon Buonaparte.)


Vers. 19-28. The record of John—I. AN INSTRUCTIVE EXAMPLE OF TRUE
HUMILITY. 1. John was an eminent saint of God (Matt. xi. 11; John v. 35), yet
we see him lowly and self-abased. (1) He refuses the honour which the Jews were
ready to pay him; (2) He declines all flattering titles; (3) He asserts that he is
only a voice and a baptizer with water; (4) He exalts Christ alone. 2. The
greatest saints in every age have been men of the Baptist’s spirit. (1) They have
differed widely in gifts; (2) They have been all alike in humility ; seeking not their
own honour, thinking little of themselves, giving Christ the pre-eminence. This is
the secret of the honour Christ has put upon them (Luke xiv. 11). 3. Let us
cultivate this spirit; (1) This is the initial saving grace; (2) We have no religion
without it; (3) All saints may have it; (4) It will appear most beautiful in death
and at the Judgment. II. A MouRNFUL EXAMPLE OF THE BLINDNESS OF UNCONVERTED
MEN. 1. The Jews professed to be waiting for the Messiah, and yet at the moment
of the manifestation of Christ they were utterly dark (ver. 26). And, worse than
this, the vast majority would never know Him. 2.John’s words apply to thousands
now. Christ stands among those who know Him not. Money and pleasure they
know. They are asleep with salvation within reach. Application: 1. Do we know
the extent of our religious privileges? 2: Do we know that Christ rejected will be
soon Christ withdrawn. (Bp. Ryle.) The confession of John:—I. As 1T
RESPECTED HIMSELF. 1. He confessed [am not the Christ. This is a hard saying
for human nature. Though death is working in every part, it will be its own
saviour if it can. Man may be willing to take the reform of John wherewith to
gild his own pretensions, but he is offended with the idea that he needs salvation at
the hands of another. But there is no hope for him until he confesses it. 2. He
confessed that he was not Elias nor any of the prophets. He came, indeed, in the
spirit and power of Elias (Matt. xi. 14), and was “‘ more than a prophet”: but not
in their sense. Ah! the deceitfulness of the human heart! To have such popular
preachers, to be united to such a mighty Church—this pleases the natural man.
But John’s example teaches us to renounce all prophets, save only as they set Christ
forth. 3. He confessed he was not worthy to perform the most menial offices for
Christ. The greatest of men sink into nothing before the glory of Christ. And if
such was John’s unworthiness, considering who he was, what is ours, considering
who we are? II. Asirresprcts THE Curist. 1. He bore witness to Christ’s pre-
existence, and therefore to His divinity. 2. To His coming after him, and therefore to
His humanity. 3. To His real presence, and any one searching for Him can find Him
now in His Word and sacraments; and He is present now as then, as the Messiah,
with all His Messianic blessings. 4. To his atonement (ver. 29). III. As rr respects
OUR RECEPTION oF Curist. 1. We are to give heed to the testimony of Christ’s
heralds. (1) Those who speak to us in the Scriptures; (2) Those who minister in
sacred things; 2. We must set ourselves to work in Christ’s way; (1) By repen-
tance (ver. 23); (2) By faith (ver. 29). (J. A. Seiss, D.D.) The Forerunner’s
confession :—I. By wHom mapg. John: on the testimony of the Evangelist (ver. 19)
and his own (ver. 23). 1. The Evangelist’s estimate of John was high (ver. 6, 7).
The dignity of his person, the nobility of his character, the elevation of his calling
(comp. Prov. xxxii. 2). 2. His estimate of himself was low (ver. 23) ; an obscure
desert preacher, an echo sounding through moral wastes, an insignificant
forerunner, a water baptizer who could not touch the impure heart. This language
revealed the essential humility of his nature (chap. iii. 20; cf. Phil. ii. 3), the felt
loneliness of his position (chap. iii. 26; ¢f. Kings xix. 10), his feebleness (chap. ili.
27; cf. 2 Cor. xii. 9, 10), the fruitlessness of his mission (ver. 25). II. WHEN
DELIVERED. On the occasion of the Embassy and after the Baptism. It was—l.
Timely: given at the moment required (1 Peter iii. 15). 2. Prompt: without
hesitation or reluctance, knowing that he had nothing to conceal or to be
ashamed of (2 Tim. i. 8.) 3. Consistent: the same to the legates and to the popu-
lace (Matt. v. 37; Cor. i, 8.) 4. Final (Heb. x. 2; John iii. 6). UI. To woom
appressep. The deputation from Jerusalem (ver. 19). 1. Composed of Priests
and Levites, who would keep each other in countenance, and perhaps overawe


84 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHar, 1


the desert prophet by their combined importance. 2. Prompted by growing excite-
ment in the Teniele Lataoriies at John’s popularity. Perhaps hastened by report
of Christ’s baptism. Those who enter on evil courses are easily alarmed (Job xviii.
7-11.) Rulers governing by force or fraud are afraid of democraticcommotions. 3.
Instructed to ask who the Baptist was. Public men must expect to be criticized and
questioned out of jealousy, fear, and even hate. IV. Or wHaT composED. Of his
testimony concerning himself. 1. Negatively: (1) Not the Christ concerning whom
he volunteers no information (Pro. xxix. 11; Eccles. iii. 7); (2) Not Elias, i.e., in
the sense they meant; although he was Elias in the sense of Malachi (ver. 5), and
Christ (Matt. xi. 14) ; (3) Not the prophet: neither Moses nor J eremiah (Job x. 21;
Zech, i. 5.) 2. Positively: (1) A voice in the wilderness; (2) A herald of Jehovah.
(3) A baptizer; (4) A servant of Christ. Learn: 1. The best qualifications for a
witness of Christ—humility and courage. 2. The secret of success in life—
to know who oneself is not as well as who oneself is. 3. The inferiority of
all Christ’s servants to himself. (TZ. Whitelaw, D.D.) The Forerunner and his
Lord :—I. A @xEat question. 1. there was something in the man that called it
forth. Speaking generally, every man is an enigma. Many men, however, go
through life without being challenged. Men of the regulation type, whose irrdi-
viduality never strikes you—such mem have an easy time of it and give others
no trouble. There are others whose strong and striking individuality is an in-
tolerable nuisance to a slumbering, self-complacent society—heroes, reformers,
martyrs. Such wasJohn. No one could mistake him for any one else. Hence he
was put on his defence and cross-examined. 2. There was something in the times
that called forth this question. The world was throbbing with expectation. Heathen
religion and philosophy ended in a query. The lost deity of Athens was a note of
interrogation. The Jews had grown weary of the stereotyped platitudes of the
Rabbis. Men could not help contrasting these days with those of the prophet.
And now John came with words of living fire, and thousands exclaimed, ‘ thisis the
Prophet.” The phylactured class looked profound and shook their heads. Others
responded, ‘* No amount of head shaking will account for this miracle of a man:
While you shake your head he is shaking multitudes.” It was natural that the
spirit of inquiry awakened by him should be first exercised upon him. II. A Great
ANSWER. It is not difficult to give our estimate of other men, but very difficult for
aman of delicate feeling to estimate himself, and most difficult to a man of John’s
popularity. If there be any littleness in him it will show itself now. John had
summed up other people; what about his estimate of himself! An exaggerated
estimate had been formed of him. Will he have genius and modesty enough
to correct it? Yes. 1. He answers negatively, and brushes away all exaggerations.
2. He answers in the affirmative (1) concerning himself. Isaiah had only noticed
the voice and message. John would not do otherwise (2) concerning Him for
whom he had been mistaken. Every true preacher finds his way from every question
to Christ. (a) He is near; (b) He stands. Not one who hurries through like a
passing stranger; (c) He is unrecognized; (d) He is the Lamb of God. (David
Davies.) Lhe mission of John the Baptist :—It was no affair of his to determine
his own latitude and longitude in the chart of the world’s history. That was for his
cotemporaries to do, not forhim, That was their responsibility, not his. It was for
him not to be thinking about himself and what he might possibly be, but to do his
work, to fulfil his mission, to bear his testimony. 1. You cannot have forgotten
how our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, being tempted in the wilderness, took up, in
opposition to the tempter, not any special or exceptional ground such as He might
claim as Messiah and Son of God, but common human ground, such as any poor
tempted, suffering mortal may stand on and be safe. The language of the evan-
gelist reveals his profound sense of the difficulty of the situation and of the noble-
ness of the Baptist’s demeanour in it: ‘He confessed, and denied not: but
confessed, I am not the Christ.” It was so easy to equivocate, to give an ambiguous
answer; so hard to return a decisive, resolute, unhesitating ‘“‘no.” The false
prophet would have returned a very different answer. The true prophet must take
up common human ground, and go be help and strength to his sinful, suffering,
tempted fellow-men. ‘Is the way of the Lord straight, or not? Is every obstacle
removed out of his path, every offence out of His kingdom? If not, then it is my
duty, and yours, to help to make it straight. This is all that I profess or claim to
do, Necessity is laid upon me, and do it I must.” 2, But again—there is a
shadow of loneliness and isolation in the reply, ‘I am the voice of one crying in
the wilderness.” And so it must always be when the circumstances are at all


eo


Cee ee Ty eee


+


oHAP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 85
ene ea eae Se meena cg eee SS ee are eee ee ee ee
similar, John the Baptist was far in advance of his cotemporaries; was at a far
higher spiritual level than they. There was only One who could thoroughly under-
stand, appreciate, and sympathize with him—his Master and ours, Jesus Christ.


' If your work is the fruit of real conviction, if it is inspired by true ideas, the work


will live, the ideas will triumph, will spread and propagate themselves and mould
other minds—on a small scale it may be, and in a very humble way—until it shall
be a surprise even to yourself to witness it. John’s work lives even to this


day. His thoughts still mould us. 38. And, once more, there is a feeling of hope


and joy in the reply, as well as a shadow of loneliness and isolation. John the
Baptist could not forget, any more than we can, that the words which he selected
to describe his work are imbedded in a passage of which this is the opening strain:
“Comfort ye, comfort ye, My people, saith your God.’ True prophet and earnest
worker for God that he was, he could not but find joy in his work, for the work’s
own sake, as well as sorrow. For it is the very nature of such work to bring both
joy and sorrow. It is so still. Whatever be the work which is given us to do,
whatever be the path of duty for us, if we will but throw ourselves heartily into the
one, and tread the other firmly and diligently, hope and interest and joy are sure
to spring up around us. In some way or other the work is sure to bring a
multitude of wholesome human interests along with it. (D. J. Vaughan, M.A.)
The mission from Jerusalem :—The work of John and its results would seem
to have come up formally before the Sanhedrim, and this mission was born of
their professional dealing with the matter. They had suffered him to goon forsome
time without taking any public notice of him, Gamaliel-like thinking. If this be of
man, it will come to nought; if of God, it will prove itself. And so the resolution
probably was: Wait and take the winning side. Isuppose they looked upon the Fore-
runner as one who was going up like a rocket and would eome down asastick. They do
not send a deputation till they must. They did not like this interloper, but comforted
themselves with the thought that the worst would soon blow over, and that the
enthusiasm, too fierce to last, would soon cool down. Atlength, when they found
that it was not to be pooh-poohed, they said, ‘“‘ We must see to the bottom of this.”
But it would not have been dignified to come to examine into matters themselves, so
they sent a deputation to obtain an account of who John was and what he was about.
(A. B. Grosart, D.D.) The Sanhedrim, though of considerable antiquity, was not of
Mosaic origin, nor was it called by that name until the days of Antipater and Herod.
In the time of Christ it was composed of seventy-one members, chosen from—l. The
chief priests and their families, the officiating high priest being president; 2. The
elders, including both priests and laymen, and 3. The scribes, professional jurists,
or experts inlaw. The court resembled that of Jehoshaphat’s time (2 Chron. xix,
8-11), and possessed the power of judging a tribe, a false prophet, and a chief priest.
It was not so much a theological court, to whose jurisdiction belonged all offences
against the theocratical principles of the State, as the supreme native tribunal of
Judea, to which all matters were referred that could not be dealt with in inferior
courts, or that were not reserved by the Procurator. In the exercise of its judicial
capacity, therefore (Deut. xviii. 12), these emissaries were sent to inquire into John’s
credentials as a prophet. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) The Baptist’s temptation :—This
may be regarded as a temptation of John corresponding to the simultaneous temp-
tation of Christ. John refused the titles in which the hierarchical party expressed
their false views, even as Christ refused to satisfy their expectations by the assump-
tion of external power. (Canon Westcott.) Is it a little thing to have a deputa-
tion waiting upon you from the capital, in whose heart there is evidently a very
special expectation, and to hear them say, “‘ Who art thou?” in a tone which
seems to imply ‘‘ We shall not be surprised if thou dost reveal thyself as the very
light we have been expecting.” This temptation often seizes a man, and, extending
himself beyond his proper function and calling by flattering persuasions, the result
is self-mortification and ignominy ; and he who might have done something really
good goes out of the world having mis-spent his little day. When a man says, “ I
claim infallibility,” and, whether at Rome or in London, he commits the most
grievous sins, though he wear the holiest of names. Look at J ohn, see how the great
men crowd round him. It never occurred to him that he was some great one.
Hence the subtlety of these tempting flatteries. But he baffled them, and kept them
at arm’s length. He would have'no compliments, and declined the illustrious titles
that were offered him one by one. But this was not enough. John did not stop at
the half truth. A man may resist a temptation to lie, and yet conceal the whole of
the truth he has been commissioned to tell, If John was not the Christ, but knew


86 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (car. 1.


ne ee eee
who the Christ was, it was not enough for him to decline the Messiahship. He
must declare the Christ. This he did with a promptness, clearness, and fulness
that puts many a so-called evangelical ministry to the blush. Hence John came
out unscathed, and was rewarded by one of the greatest eulogies ever pronounced by
Christ on man. (J. Parker, D.D.) Levites.—It was by no accident that these
were mentioned. John was of the national priesthood, and thus descended from the
Levites. It is just possible therefore that relatives or family friends being turned
for the nonce into deputies, he might be more easily persuaded to fall in harmony
with that foregone conclusion to which they would guide him, Thus a disturbing
element of personal relaticnship would enter into the temptation to assert himself,
and to surcease his lowly subordination of himself to that ‘ other” Christ who
could by no possibility be accepted by these temporal Messiah-expecting Jews. (A.
B. Grosart, D.D.) | Who art thou?—The botanist, in his rambles along the lanes
and among the hedgerows, passes by hundreds of flowers without pausing to look at
them. A momentary glance is enough. He has seen so many of the same kind
before. But now and then he sees a flower which invites his curiosity. He takes
his pocket lens, and, with many a keen, scrutinizing, gaze heasks, ‘‘ What art thou?
What sayest thou of thyself.” This was the principle in which these religious
scientists came to John. He did not belong to their schools, and had not been
classified in their catalogue of men and professions. In what niche could he be
placed? Such a man is anawkward one for classification. He is a class in himself.
He cannot be bracketed with others. (David Davies.) I am not the Christ.—
A gentleman heard two distinguished ministers one Sunday. Recording his ex-
perience, he said: ‘‘In the morning I could not see the Master for the man; inthe
evening I could not see the man for the Master.” (Ibid.) Ministers must send
men to Christ :—A member of Ebenezer Erskine’s congregation recorded that
having gone once to that godly man to express his admiration and gratitude for a
particular sermon, Mr. Erskine accepted gratefully the latter but dismissed the
former peremptorily, and asked with kindling eye, “Did the sermon lead you to
Christ? If never before did you then and there give yourself to Jesus Christ?”
The preacher’s fidelity was painful at the moment, and was resented; but after
reflection led the visitor to acknowledge that, but for the preacher’s turning away
the conversation from praise of the sermon to Jesus Christ, he would have been
little or nothing the better for it. As it was he was sent to Christ. The pointed
question set him thinking and praying, and he never rested until he had given
himself to the Lord Jesus, (A.B. Grosart, D.D.)


Ver. 20. He confessed and denied not.—John and Jesus:—I, Tue pIGNniTy
or TRuTH. 1. It seems easy for John to have confessed and denied not. But here
is 2 people ripe for Christ. They had been expecting Him for four hundred years.
Moreover, no sooner did John appear than there was a tendency in the whole nation
to recognize him as the Christ. They ask expecting an affirmative. For in John
they recognize a born leader, a man which met the traditional conception of what
the Messiah was to be. The ball was at his feet; the sceptre within his grasp ; the
hermit of the desert may to-morrow be aking. One word decides the future, but
the hardest temptation—that to power—is resisted. 2. It was not easy for John to
resist; is if easy forus? How many are content to appear just as and what they
are? There are very few who are not ready to appear more learned, clever, innocent,
and better off than we really are, if our fellows will only give us credit for it. How
much need there is for absolute truth telling in social life! When a man hates
another he generally says what he means; but to speak truth at all times, in the
ordinary dealings of life, even though admiring deputations leave us and in spite of
neglect and pain, this‘is difficult. 3. This reality was the secret of John’s power.
(1) He was trained for it in the desert. He had been face to face with God and had
learned to pray, think, act for himself without “ consulting any but his conscience
and his God.” He had accustomed himself, too, to self-denial and to do without
enervating Inxuries and dissipating eompanionships. The desert enters too little
into the curriculum of our education. (2) The evidence of John’s reality was his
popularity. This position may seem doubtful, because we often find that a man’s
popularity is in inverse proportion to his sincerity. Yet men love reality. John’s
preaching was direct, personal, frank, hard hitting; and yet the crowd was always
there: the homely citizen, the publican, the warrior, the Pharisee, all swept into
the vortex of this man’s influence, and the reason was John’s reality. Atheart the
world hates humbug ; and it is this religious manliness that we want to-day. The


a


CHAP. 1.) ST. JOHN. 87


Church has grown afraid of plain speaking, and her apologetic ‘“hope I don’t
intrude ” the world listens to with disguised contempt and dismisses with easy
scorn. II. THE GRANDEUR OF SELF REPRESSION. 1. This a rare gift in the great
scramble of life, where every man sets his heart upon a common prize. Here is a
great, powerful, popular man swaying a nation, and yet at the very crisis of victory
obliterates himself in favour of another. 2. Thus early in history we are taught
that Christ must be all in all. They called John “the Baptist”; but John dis-
nuissed the title. He said, “ No, there is another baptism in comparison with which
mine is nothing.” We are not Wesleyans, Baptists, Churchmen—these are
ephemeral distinctions which men set up. When the Master comes, all such dis-
tinctions die. We are Christians only. And when we begin to decrease into
nothingness, when our poor getting on, our thirst for power, is swept out of us and
there is left nothing but the desire that Christ shall shine—then there is increase
for the Church. 3. Christ and John—how near they stand together ; yet how far
apart! Christ like John could be stern. It was to John’s murderer that Christ
uttered the one purely contemptuous expression that ever passed His lips. J ohn
like Christ could be gentle. The most beautiful thing ever said of Christ was said
by this stern ascetic. But John was not Jesus; and heconfessed it. (W.J. Dawson.)


Vers. 22, 23. What sayest thou of thyself?—I. TH criRCUMSTANCES WHICH
MADE THE MAN. John was the transition point between the oldand the new. The
old religion was breaking up as was evident in the multiplication of sects, like the
multiplication of the sects before the Reformation showed that it was near. Four
divisions of society: 1. The Pharisees. The formalists of their day they endea-
youred to keep religion alive by retaining the past. It is an evidence of something
gone when antiquarians collect and prize relics. Pharisaism is the religion of
habit. 2. The Sadducees: Rationalists, cold of heart and clear in intellect.
Sadduceeism is a reaction against Phariseeism in every age. Rationalism is a dry,
critical, negative spirit which protests against all that cannot be proved. The re-
ligion of the intellect merely. 3.'The Hssenes: They could bear neitber formalism
nor scepticism. Mystics who went out into the wilderness to find God in contem-
plation, Their creed ‘God must be felt,” their religion one of feeling. 4. The
Herodians: A political party who turned aside from religious questions to those
which concerned man’s social and political existence. II. Taz man Jonn. 1. It was
impossible for John to join the Pharisees. How, with his impatience of all that was
unreal and his iron earnestness, could he belong to those whose life was droned away
in litanies and genuflexions? 2. Nor can we conceive him resting in mere Sadducaic
negations ; satisfied with their cold intellectualisms and protests against supersti-
tion? 3. Nor could that iron man dream life away with the Essenes. 4. As
for the Herodians—surely for one whose life was so real, a patriot’s life offered
what was wanted. But John yearned not for civil liberty, but a kingdom of God.
He loved humanity more than men, and could find no career in mere politics. It is
only in the consideration of such circumstances that John’s peculiar life becomes
intelligible. III. H1s mtsston. 1. The preparation. Thirty years’ preparation for
one year’s work. (1) Consider the testimony of such a life to the existence of
another world; (2) In the wilderness he measured the worth of society, with its
conventionalities and parties. No one sees how the battle goes while he is in it; no
one ever understood the world except by getting out of it; (3) The Spirit of God
passed into life and action in Him, and made Him intensely real. Only real men
can deal with real questions, and the real questions of to-day are not the frivolous
ones discussed in religious journals, but what is God and where. What is human
life? Whither are we tending? 2. The mode in which John prepared the way for
Christ. (1) He calls himself a voice: an articulate expression. Four centuries had
passed and no one could speak the word “ Repent,” if the kingdom of God is to
come. Regenerated society comes not from regenerated institutions ; but
regenerated hearts produce both. But none till John had found the tongue
to express this. He spoke out what the world wanted. Distinguish between elo-
quence and fluency. Fluency John had not: short, sharp, decisive words were
his. No ornament or trick of oratory there. Let us not covet fluency ‘but
eloquence, the gift of speaking the right thing, at the right time, in the
right way. 2. He was a voice crying “Prepare,” &c. He was a leveller. (1)
The mountain of caste stood in the King’s way. John said, “Itell you God is
able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham,” and the mountain fell.
(2) The mountain of religious sectarianism, ‘O generation of Vipers,"’ levelled


88 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. oe et


a ee


that. (3) The mountain which gave impunity to wrong doing. John’s rebuke of |


Herod brought that down. Notice the wondrous way in which all fell together at
that mighty voice. (F. W. Robertson, M.A.) The answer of the Baptist :—He
had come—I. To announce THAT GoD WAS ABOUT TO coME AS HE NEVER CAME
BEFORE. 1, This was Isaiah’s belief, and when John accentuated it he knew that
the Divine visitation was near. Had the prophet suspected the delay he would have
wondered, and knowing it, doubtless John wondered. Do we? Let us then re-
member that God always takes His time. If He wants to make a weed, that does
not take Him long: if He wants to make an oak, that is more tedious business et
He wants to save a world it takes Him longer still. 2. The Baptist did not imply
that God was absent, but that He was about to be manifested. Hitherto it had
been winter; the Sun of righteousness had been comparatively hidden, Now He
was to arise with healing in His wings. 3. Christ came for—(1) The world’s en-
lightenment; (2) The subjugation of men; (3) The saving of the world. II. To
BID MEN GUT READY FoR Him. ‘Make straight the way.” That was man’s work.
If God had compelled men to prepare that would have ensured the frustration of
His purposes, God’s willis that men should do His will willingly. Three great
barriers. 1. Thoughtlessness : It was troublesome to think about Christ sufficiently
to see the validity of His claims; so now. 2. Pride: The Jews could not bring
themselves to confess their need of a Saviour. 3. Worldliness. (H. W. Burgoyne,
M.A.) The voice crying in the wilderness :—I. WHERE THE VOICE CRIED. In the
wilderness. 1. Locally: (1) Generally, the wilderness of Judwa (Matt. iii. 1); (2)
Particularly, Bethany beyond Jordan. 2. Metaphorically: in the moral desert
of Judea Israel was a wilderness, and Zion a desolation. The Hope of Israel sur-
vived only in the breasts of a few (Luke i. 25). The deepest corruption and the
basest hypocrisy reigned among the priesthood (Matt. xxiii. 13, 39). The people
were sunk in social and moral degradation (Matt. iii. 8; Luke vii. 7-14). The in-
tellectual classes were ostentatiously sceptical (Matt, xxii. 23; Acts xxiii. 8). II.
THE PROPHETIC VOICE IS SUITABLE FOR AND DEMANDED BY THE SPIRITUAL WASTES OF
society. There the prophet should cry aloud and spare not (Isa. lviii. 1). III. Tu:
QUALITY OF THE voicH, 1. Lonely. 2. Authoritative. 3. Directive. 4. Arrestive.
(1. Whitelaw, M.A.) Only a voice :—Christ was a surprise to the world. God
prepared the world for this by the ministry of the Baptist. The world has now be-
come accustomed to the story of redemption. But the proclamation of the coming
of the King in His glory is still a surprise. It runs counter to all human plans of
development, is contradictory to the pride and self-confidence of men, and stands
in the same relation to our ministry as did the coming of Christ as a Redeemer to
that of the Baptist. That we may rightly fulfil this most responsible office, let us
look at the outline of his work. These parallel and coincident offices are—I. An
ORDINANCE, NOT AN OUTGROWTH. Its origin is traced to mystery. It is not in har-
mony with the other voices of the world, but introduces a discord with other utter-
ance, as students of history criticise the record. Heaven, not earth, is its source.
It came by Divine ordinance, not through human development. The law of its
appointment was such in John the Baptist, and is to be such in our living. 1, The
motive of its fulfilment is of God. 2. The reward of fidelity is equally of Divine
ordinance—does not come by natural outgrowth, The herald’s work will have little
accumulation of visible results. ‘The reward is beyond. Soon shall we forget the
ingratitude of earth. II. Ir 1s THe INSTRUMENTALITY OF ANOTHER’S INDIVIDUALITY.
As if he had said, ‘*I am the mouthpiece of one proclaiming.” 1. The breath of God
is the power by which our work is accomplished. Said Paul, ‘I live, yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me.” 2, The words are of God, though ours be the voice. And
may I add to this thought, the very tone of such a voice is of God. III. Finally,
ALL THIS IS COMBINED IN TESTIMONY. There was the simplicity of sincerity in this
man, Christian workers, make it true in your own experience that ye are for Christ
without qualification ; and let man be helped by the testimony that springs from
this deep sincerity. 1. Self-forgetful living is the first element in such testimony.
2. In such testimony there must be detaching influence. John the Baptist did
not attach disciples to himself. He pointed to the Lamb of God, and his disciples
left him and followed Jesus, 3, There must be plainest teaching. John the Baptist
preached a single sermon, twice the same day; but while he had that sermon he
needed no newone. ‘ Behold the Lamb of God,” &c. It was blessed to his hearers
because it was emphasized by sincerity and consecration. Peter and Andrew knew
his meaning, and comprehended that there was more in his utterance than even
the words had phrased, Let us enter into this harmony of service, so that our


*


omap, 1.} ST. JOHN. 89


speech shall be sustained by our silence; our conscious influence be in harmony
with that which is unconscious and undesigned among our fellow-men. Conclusion :
I speak to—1. Christians that they may bear their testimony to the manifested and
coming King. 2. Those who are not Christians. The voice of Christ speaks to
you to-day. What answer will you give? (S. H. Tyng, D.D.) Self out of sight
in the preacher :—Rey. Dr. Andrew A. Bonar in ‘“ Christian Growth,” an address to
Christians at Glasgow, said: ‘Some years ago, a zealous and devoted elder, now
gone to glory, was pushing his way one evening to be in time for a workers’meeting.
Taking his place in the meeting, he noticed how the conversation was going on, and
rose to give a word. He said, ‘In coming along I saw a crowd at a shop door in
Argyle Street. I pressed in among the crowd to see what was attracting the atten-
tion. There was a large picture in the hands of the auctioneer ; and he, with great
skill, was holding it up to view; and, standing behind his picture so as to be com-
pletely hid, was inviting the attention of the company to every remarkable point in
the painting. All the while I never got a glimpse of the man himself. That is the
way to preach Christ. Selffout of sight—Christ held forth.’” An uncouth mes-
senger, but a glorious message :—A lady, who was in Richmond at the time of the
siege, tells of the delight with which she received a note torn from a soldier’s pocket-
book, and grimed all over with gunpowder; but which assured of the safety of the
town. The medium was nothing; the message was everything. (H. O. Mackey.)
A minister’s work :—My barque is but a little fishing boat, whose business it is to
fish for the souls of men; my gifts fit me only to be such a coasting vessel as may
carry corn from port to port to feed those who hunger for satisfying bread. (C. H.
Spurgeon.) The Baptist and the Bible :—I. JoHN HAD LEARNED 10 READ HIS BibiE.
It is a good thing to be able to quote from Scripture. To buy a Bible and treasure it
as an ornament is good as farasit goes ; but the book must be read so as to be remem-
bered if itis to be of service. It is just possible that had we been in the Baptist’s place
we should have had some difficulty in making our memory of Scripture serve us. The
Bible is crowded out by the multiplication of books, the very best of which is not
to be named beside it. II. Jonn BELIEVED INPROPHECY. The question arose, doubt-
less, as to whether the New Teacher was orthodox. His testimony, however other-
wise disagreeable, showed that he was loyal to the traditions of his religion and
country. It is a great trouble to some people to believe in the Jewish prophets.
IlI, John believing in prophecy REGARDED HIMSELF AS THE FULFILMENT OF IT.
It is not every man who, being asked who and what he is, can turn to
the Scripture and find the answer there. The remembrance that God
was working according to a great plan, and that he was part of that plen,
must have given him a noble self-consciousness. In this the Baptist was not
wholly singular. Although our names may not be in the Bible, we are as much a
part of God’s plan as John was. Believe, then, that as truly as God sent the
Baptist He sent you. (H. W. Burgoyne, B.A.) John in the wilderness :-—
Losing the solaces of an earthly home, he found in God an everlasting portion.
Like a single trunk of an Alpine tree rising solitary from between the interstices
of some lonely rock and throwing its branches over the cataract. You look
for soil, there is scarcely any to be seen; and yet that gnarled root has fastened
its tenacious grasp on the bare stone, and tossed its green branches in the air, as if
it needed nothing but the breath of heaven for its support. So this soul flourished
where less hardy spirits would have starved, and breathed freely the atmosphere
of heaven while yet upon earth. (F. W. Robertson, M.A.) Make the paths
straight :—This is what the sun says. He comes to us every morning, and stays
with us all day long, but if it were not for the preparation and reception in
the way of opening shutters and raising blinds, we should lose very much of his
blessing. All the world over, before a blessing can be enjoyed there must be a
fitness to receive it. If you take a blind man into a picture-gallery, what good do
youdo? The beauty of the pictures is there, but the man is unaffected by it; its
way into the man’s soul has not been made straight. You may play all manner of
beautiful music, but if your audience is deaf, you play only for yourself ; the way of
the music is not made straight except into your heart. And the result will be just
the same if the blindness and deafness are not natural but assumed. If the man in
the picture-gallery is only covering his eyes with his hands, he is as good as blind ;
and if the people in the concert-room are only putting their fingers into their ears,
they are as good as deaf. So it was, alas! so it is, with the people and Jesus. (H.


W. Burgoyne.)


90 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP. B.
ee

Vers. 24-27. They which were sent were of the Pharisees.—The question of the
Pharisees :—1. It is an evidence of a sick and corrupt Church when corrupt men are
entrusted with most grave and weighty employments in it ; for so was it with the
Church of the Jews when “they which were sent were of the Pharisees.” 2.
Corrupt men are more ready to jangle and lie at wait for advantages than to
embrace the truth of God delivered by His servants; for these Pharisees take no
notice of what He had said from Isaiah, nor seek to be further cleared in it, but
think they have an advantage of him, that he should presume to baptize. “ Why
baptizest thou, then, if thou be not that Christ?” &c. 3. It was an uncontroverted
truth, both among friends and foes, in the Jewish Church, that at the coming of the
Messiah there should be some changes in the way of religion and an institution of
new ordinances ; for the Pharisees have nothing to say against his baptism if he
were Christ, or Elias, or the prophet: their only objection is, ‘‘ Why baptizest thou,
then, if thou be not?” And John’s answer, “I baptize, but there standeth One
among you,” &c., importeth that he being Christ’s forerunner, who was now come
into the world, it was lawful for him to administer this sacrament. 4. Ministers
ought to arrogate no more unto themselves than to be ministers and dispensers of
the external means of word and sacraments, leaving the glory and efficacy thereof
unto Christ entirely ; and people ought so to be affected in coming to these ordi-
nances. Therefore saith John, “I baptize with water,” not denying that Christ
also baptized with water, nor yet denying that baptism administered by him was
accompanied with grace and the Spirit of God; but he only compareth his person
and office with Christ’s, and showeth that whatever grace came by the sacrament
administered by him, yet he was not the giver of it, but Christ only, who had
appointed him to dispense the outward seal. 5. Christ may be among a people, and
yet they who reckon themselves very high in the Church neither see Him nor know
Him ; for saith John, ‘“‘ there standeth One whom ye know not.” 6, It is the duty
of ministers, and will be the care of such as are faithful and zealous, to exalt and
commend Christ at all occasions, that men may fall in love with Him. Therefore
doth John again repeat his doctrine, “‘ He it is,” &. 7. The more high employ-
ment and the eminent gifts men have, and the more ready men are to esteem of them,
the more will they abase themselves, if they be truly gracious, and be affected with
the excellency of Christ; for it is John, the greatest among them that are born of
women, and so much esteemed among the Jews, and the forerunner of Christ, who
thus abaseth himself. ‘He is preferred before me, whose shoe’s latchet I am not
worthy to unloose.” 8. Albeit Christ, of free grace,do honour men with eminent
employments under Him, and particularly ministers of the gospel. Yet such as
know Christ and themselves well will not only see that they are unworthy of the
high employments they have, but even to do the basest service to Him; for John
saith not, I am unworthy to be His forerunner, though employed in that service, but
‘whose shoe’s latchet Iam not worthy to unloose,” which was a mean and base
office. (G. Hutcheson.) The Pharisees represented the Judaism of the Post-
Exilian era, Originally purists as well as legalists, they strove to carry out in
practice the ideal of legal life set up by the scribes. Hence they were denominated
Perushim, Pharisees or Separatists. First mentioned by Josephus under Jonathan
and Hyrcanus, high priests about B.c. 145-150. In the time of Christ they had so
far degenerated from their primitive piety as to make the essence of religion consist
in ceremonial observance—an apostacy which drew down upon them the exposures,
rebukes, and denunciations of Jesus, They were ultra-conservatives in Israel, the
champions of orthodox literalism, and who accordingly watched everywhere with
inquisitorial severity to see that the theocratic order was preserved intact, not
merely as to ritual, but also with respect to the competence of office and doctrine
(chap. ix. 13; vii. 47, 48; xii. 42). (I. Whitelaw, D.D.)


Ver. 26. I baptize with water.—The baptism of John:—If the rite, which the
Forerunner of our Lord administered, is not to be considered as a Christian institute,
to what dispensation are we to assign it, since it is manifestly no part of the economy
of Moses? The reply is that it was the symbol of a peculiar dispensation, which
was neither entirely legal nor Evangelical, but occupied an intermediate station,
possessing something of the character and attributes of both; a kind of twilight,
equally removed from the obscurity of the first, and the splendour of the last and
perfect economy of religion. The light which he emitted, though it greatly sur-
passed every preceding illumination, was of short duration, being soon eclipsed and
extinguished by that ineffable effulgence, before which nothing can retain its


a


~—


CHAP. 1.]} ST. JOHN. 91


splendour. (Robert Hall). One among you.—Christ among us:—1. As to His
human nature, as one of yourselves, as He took upon Him the form of man and
became the servant of men, and is among you as once He sat in the midst of the
doctors in the Temple. 2. As to the Divine nature He is amongst you, for He filleth
all in all, and is very nigh to every one. 3. He is among you as the Light which
lighteth every man, and as the Word of Wisdom in the heart of all His people.
4. Among you as the Mediator between man and God, and seeking to draw all men
to God. 5. Not as the Baptist in the desert, but in the midst of the cities of men.
6. Among you all, for the benefit of all, as the true tree of life in the midst of the
garden of this world for the life and for the healing of all. (IW. Denton, M.A.)
The unknown presence :—We can imagine the Master visiting various spheres in the
modern world with the same result. JI. Bustness. II. Purasurz. III. Tur
Cuurce. IV. Arriicrion. (H. J. W. Buxton, M.A.) Christ near yet unper-
ceived :—I. TuE woRp’s CREATOR A STRANGER IN His own Dominions. 1. In part
arising from the intentional obscurity that veiled His appearanceamong man. For
purposes of their own earthly sovereigns often travel in disguise; but the world has
never witnessed so strange an incognito as this. The King of Glory laid aside His
robes of light, and in the simple garb of a suffering man, “ hid’? Himself from the
wise and prudent that He might reveal Himself to the lowly and the meek. From
His own disciples at times He purposely veiled His identity (John xx. 14; xxi. 4;
Luke xxiv. 16, 31). 2. Too largely owing to the blinding effect of sin. The other
and gentler John affirms the same mysterious but humbling fact, and enumerates
the accumulating evidence of its truth. For ages the true Light shined in promise,
prophecy, holy law and inward conscience, yet the darkness discovered it not
(ver. 5). In the fulness of time the Creator came to visit this province of His
empire, and was unrecognized upon His own estate (ver. 10). More humbling still,
when He came to His own possessions His own people received Him not (ver. 11).
Even those to whom He made Himself known were but imperfectly acquainted with
Him. II. Tot 1GNoRANCE OF MAN CONCERNING THAT WHICH THEY MOST NEED TO
KNow. Ignorance baneful, knowledge beneficial; yet vast numbers are strangers to
the source, centre and sum of all wisdom. 1. With some the knowledge of Christ
is only indirect; the evidence of vague rumours or the acceptance of testimony ; a
secondhand knowledge. 2. Personal knowledge exists in varying degrees. Some
are only on terms of distant acquaintance; others have occasional communications;
others have intimate friendship; with the most loyal and loving Christ sustains
confidential relations. 3. To be ignorant of Him is the worst privation man can
suffer (2 Cor iv. 3, 4). 4. When He is known He is admired, loved, trusted and
obeyed (chap. iv. 10). III. Tue Saviour’s KINDNESS AND COMPASSION IN REVEALING
HimseLF To THEM THAT sEEK Him. 1. He has no wish to be unrecognized. He
stands, waits, knocks (Rev. iii. 20). 2. He awaits our entreaty to remove His disguise
(Jer. xiv. 5). 3. Once admitted to His friendship we shall grow in intimacy with
Him. 4. In His own home hereafter He will show us more and more of His
hidden glory. (R. Lewis.) Christ unrecognized :—I. A STARTLING WONDER.
Christ unknown. 1. Not from want of evidence then or previously. (1) The
world manifested its Maker; (2) Conscience reflected His light; (8) Prophecy and
type shadowed His person and ministry. Abraham saw His day. Moses spoke of
Him. To Him gave all the prophets witness. (4) John proclaimed Him. 2. Not
from want of evidence now. In addition to all the above, (1) The Holy Spirit
testifies of Him. (2) The Christian consciousness of eighteen centuries fulfils the
promise of His perpetual presence. (3) His ambassadors declare Him. (4) His
sacraments embody Him. How strange that He should be amongst the children of
His people, the hearers of His gospel, and yet not be known! II. A steRN NECESSITY.
In the knowledge of Him, and in that alone standeth our eternal life. That know-
ledge is the beginning, the middle and the end of Christianity. 1. The beginning.
Christ’s first invitation echoed by His first convert was ‘Come and see.” Isaiah
saw His glory, and was cleansed for service. When Paul saw Christ he became a
new man. 2. The continuance. The development of Christian life depends on
growing knowledge of Him (2 Pet. iii. 18; Philip iii. 10; Heb. xii. 2; ef. ili. 1).
3. Its consummation is in heaven, where we shall see His face, and be like Him,
because we shall see Him as He is. III. A piussep opportunity. ‘There stundeth.”
1. How? (1) Stationary—not shifting, coming and going. (2) Patient—not wearied
by procrastination, but waiting to be gracious. (3) Accessible. ‘‘ Lo, Tam with you
alway.” “Now is’the accepted time.” 2. What as? (1) A sympathizer. (2) A
Saviour. (3) A personal friend, IV. A rzanrun aurernavive. 1. To know Christ


SN,


92 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR [cHaP.
pis: eT TCT Gs A ante
is to be known of Him. Christ knows His sheep. He recognizes us when our
friends have ceased to do so; when it is difficult to do so; in poverty and obloquy ;
at the last day. 2. Not to know Christ is to be disowned by Him. “I never knew
you.” (J. W. Burn.) He it is, who, coming after me, is preferred before me.—
The magnanimity of the Baptist :—The world recognizes jealousy as the chief
weakness of popular leaders and preachers. Such men are spiritual athletes, who
cannot bear a rival. The greatest of popular preachers, the darling of Antioch and
Constantinople, admits that he who can overcome this is almost like the disembodied
spirits, whose lives, pure as the crystal stream, can never be darkened by any
shadow of envy or vainglory. But the leader of a great party in nation; the
founder of a sect, which has vitality enough to live on for years; who was regarded
by some as probably the Messiah—that he should have bowed down in prostrate
humiliation before a younger successor, this is original indeed. (Bp. Alexander.)
The best servant the most Rumble :—As the lark that soars the highest, builds her
nest the lowest; the nightingale that sings the sweetest, sings in the shade when all
things rest; the branches that are most laden with ripe fruit, bend lowest ; the
valleys are fruitful in their lowliness ; and the ship most laden sinks deepest in the
water, so the holiest Christians are the humblest. (J. Mason.) Humility not
contemptible :—Humility did not make John the Baptist contemptible; but when
he refused the name of a prophet, Christ said that he was more than a prophet.
Humility did not make Moses contemptible; but as he was the mildest man upon
earth, so he was the greatest upon earth. Humility did not make David con-
temptible ; but when he humbled himself, he said unto Michal, “I will be more
humble yet, and lowly in mine own sight, yet thou and thy maids shall honour
me.” As Christ ceased not to be a king because He was like a servant, nor to be a
lion because He was a lamb, nor to be a judge because He was judged ; so man doth
not lose his honour by humility ; but he shall be honoured for his humility, as the
son was honoured when he was humbled (Luke xv. 18-25). Thus humility hath
found that which pride sought ; like little David, which was least accounted of, and
yet got the victory, yea, when no man durst encounter with the giant (1 Sam.
xvii. 28). (Henry Smith.)


Ver. 29. Behold the Lamb of God !—The work of Christ, and of His disciples :—
I. Tue Savrour’s WORK IN THE SALVATION OF MEN. 1. He taketh away the sin of
the world. The father says, ‘‘ Save the family ”; the citizen, ‘‘Save the town”;
the patriot, ‘‘ Save the country”; Christ, ‘‘ Save the world””—and not merely says,
but accomplishes, 2. His qualification for the work; the “Lamb of God,” inno-
cent, pure, spotless; the ‘‘Son of Man”; the “Son of God.” The head of
humanity and the heart of God were in the great sacrifice. 3, His constant watch-
ing. Christ asks men to follow what they seek. Not one follower is unnoticed.
4. His ready welcome. The noble gathering up of the Gospel is in the golden
word “Come.” It is not the mere sentimental emotion roused by a Sunday service
that He seeks, but the coming and believing in Him. 5. His intimate knowledge
of the character of any that may come, Christ reveals to men‘their ideals. Peter.
Nathaniel. II. Tam prscrenes’ WORK IN THE SALVATION OF MEN. 1. Manifestation
of humility in the presence of Christ. “Iam not worthy.” 2. Manifest persever-
ance. Men scarcely listen; but John repeats his direction. The humble man is
not changeful, not persistent. 3. Exquisite naturalness. Andrew thought of his
brother: a rather obscure man brings Peter to Christ. (U. R. Thomas.) The
Baptist’s message :—I. Tom TRUE MESSENGER. 1. One who sees Jesus for himself
(ver. 33). The true herald of Jesus is like John. (1) He is on the look-out for
his Lord’s appearing. (2) He rejoices to preach Jesus, as One whom he has seen
and known, and still hopes to see. (3) He preaches Him as come, and as coming.
2. He calls upon men to see Jesus. (1) Plainly and confidently. (2) Continually
and solely (ver 35). (3) Harnestlyand emphatically. 8. He leads his own followers
to Jesus (ver. 37). (1) He had enough force to induce men to be his followers.
(2) Enough humility to induce his followers to leave him for Jesus. (3) Enough
grace to make him rejoice that it was so (2 Cor. iv. 5). 4. He loses himself in
Jesus. (1) He sees the necessity of this (chap. iii. 43). (2) The propriety of this
yee: iil. 29). IL, Tam trvz message. John’s word was brief, but emphatic. He

eclared Jesus to be—1. Sent and ordained “ of God.” 2. The one real, Divinely-
appointed sacrifice for sin—‘ the Lamb of God.” 3. The only remover of human
guilt—* which taketh away the sin of the world.” 4. Set forth as the object
of faith—“ Behold the Lamb.” He exhorted his hearers to look at him with


owap. 1.] ‘ ST. JOHN. 93
gk ape Sec ee eee ea ra ee

that look which saves, The end of all ministries and ordinances is to bring men
to look to Jesus. Both John, who ran before, and we, who run after, must point in
the same direction. III. Tae rruz receprion of THAT MESSAGE. The conduct of
John’s disciples shows that our true wisdom concerning gospel testimony is—1. To
believe it, and so to acknowledge Jesus as our sin-removing sacrifice. 2. To follow
Jesus (ver. 37). 3. To follow Jesus, even if we be alone. These were the vanguard
of the vast hosts who have since followed Jesus. They knew not what suffering it
might involve, but went first and foremost. 4. To abide with Jesus (ver 39). 5. To
go forth and tell others of Jesus (vers. 40, 41). Conclusion: Here is—1. A lesson
for those who preach. John’s sermon was short, but full of Jesus, and effectual for
soul-winning. Imitate him. 2. An example for those who have believed. 3. A
gospel for those who hitherto have not known the Saviour. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
The great message :—John’s prior life was Divinely ordered for this evangelical
apprehension of Jesus. Born of the lineage of Levi, he renounced all priestly
heritage and claim, and even attendance at the Temple; and thus was lifted above
the class interests and sordid motives which might have swayed him toward the
worldly and temporal expectations of the Messiah, and disentangled himself from
the meshes of rabbinical tradition. By his seclusion, the direct reading of the Oid
Testament, and his communion with God, his perception would be farther cleerad
to discern the spiritual nature of the kingdom of Christ and the innermost case and
necessity of that kingdom—redemption by sacrifice. Notice—I. The tenpERNESS
of the message. 1. A Lamb—symbol of sweetness, innocence, harmlessness, patience ;
an idea peculiarly grateful to hearts pierced with sin and worn weak by the anguish
of self-accusation. 2. An idea the opposite of the “‘ wolf” element in man—oppres-
sion, injustice, self-seeking, revenge. 3. The first death was a murder. Lamb-like
virtues have never been admired. II. The preparation of the message. ‘The all
but universal hope of the Jews was of a warring, conquering King. How fitting
that the disappointment should be broken by the proclamation of a Lamb! By
His very peacefulness and harmlessness many would be prepared to surrender their
misconceptions. III. The sienuricance of the message. 1. The Divine appoint-
ment of the Lamb. 2. His atoning character, as foreshadowed by the prophets.
3. The redemption through His blood. IV. The prrmuirensss of the message.
The ‘“‘sin”’ of the world taken away from every one who will accept Him for a
Saviour. V. The pecunmnrity of the message. What an antithesis to other kings,
whose path has been reddened with blood, and who have come and gone without
the slightest benefit to the race. Christ comes to deliver and bless. VI. The
BREADTH of the message. ‘The world,” not Jews merely. (A.B. Grosart, D.D.)
I. THE PECULIAR NAME WHICH THE Baprist eives To Curist. The Lamb of God.
Let us serve Him faithfully as our Master. Let us obey Him loyally as our King.
Let us study His teaching as our Prophet. Let us walk diligently after Him as our
Example. Let us look anxiously for Him as our coming Redeemer of body as well
as soul. But above all, let us prize Him as our Sacrifice, and rest our whole weight
on His death as an atonement for sin. Let His blood be more precious in our eyes
every year we live. II. Tue PECULIAR WORK WHICH THE Bartist DESCRIBES JESUS
as pone. 1. Christ is a Saviour; not a conqueror, a philosopher, a moralist.
2. A complete Saviour; not merely makes vague proclamations of pardon and
mercy, but takes away sin. 3. An almighty and universal Saviour. He died not
for Jews only, or a few persons, but all mankind. (1) His work on the cross was
more than enough to make satisfaction for the sins of all. (2) His blood was pre-
cious enough to wash away all guilt. (3) But the efficiency of Christ’s atonement
is for those only who believe. 4. A perpetual and unwearied Saviour “ taketh.”
He is daily doing this. III. Tou prcuniaR OFFICE WHICH THE Barrist ATTRIBUTES
ro Cunist. 1. This baptism is not the baptism of water. ~(1) Tt does not consist
either of dipping or sprinkling. (2) It does not belong exclusively to infants or
adults, (3) It cannot be given to any minister or layman of whatever church.
(4) It is a baptism which the Head of the Church keeps wholly in His own hands.
It consists of the implanting of grace into the inward man. It is the same thing
with the new birth. It is a baptism, not of the body, but of the heart. It is a
baptism which the penitent thief received, though neither dipped nor sprinkled by
the hand of man. It isa baptism which Ananias and Sapphira did not receive,
though admitted into church-communion by apostolic men. (Bishop Kyle.)
Isracl’s Messiah:—I. JouNn’s PROCLAMATION OF THE Mrsstan. 1. His person iden-
tified (ver. 30). 2. His calling declared (ver. 20). (1) Divine in its appointment.
The Lamb chosen, provided, sent by, and consecrated and belonging to God.


94 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. L
ji sR SOS Se
(2) Saving in its character: to realize and fulfil all that had been foreshadowed by
the paschal lamb, the lamb for burnt-offering, and the suffering Servant of Jehovah.
(3) World-wide in its destination: not for Israel alone, or believers simply, but for
humanity at large (John iii. 16; xii. 32; 1 John ii. 2; 1 Tim.:1s oWisglV¥en dO) e
Upon the ground of Christ’s expiation, a bond fide offer of forgiveness is made to
the world (Eph. i. 7). 3. His dignity announced. (1) His higher being (ver. 15).
(2) His loftier calling. (3) His nobler name. II. Joun’s KNOWLEDGE OF MEssIAg.
1. When it originated. At the Baptism (ver. 33). Prior to this John may have
had surmises, hopes, expectations, but not certain knowledge; neither have we
_ without the Father’s testimony, to which also Christ (John v. 37), John (1 John, v.
9,11), and Peter (2 John, i. 16) appeal. 2. Whence it proceeded. From the Spirit.
It was no deduction or conclusion of His own. From the same source proceeds all
spiritual understanding of Christ or His truth (John xiv. 26, xvi. 13-15; 1 John
ii. 20, 27, v. 20; ¢.f. 1 Cor. ii. 14), 3. On what it rested. (1) An open heaven.
As in ancient times, to Jacob (Gen. xxviii. 12), Isaiah (vi. 1), Ezekiel (i. 1),
Daniel (x. 5-6), and afterwards to Stephen (Acts vii. 5, 6), Paul (2 Cor, xii. 4),
John (Rev. iv. 1). This a symbolic representation. The heavens had opened,
that God’s Son might come forth, and that Christ’s brethren might enter in: for
the outflow of grace to men, and for the entrance of men to glory. (2) A descended
Spirit. Of this the dove anemblem. The permanent endowment of Jesus with
the fulness of the Spirit convinced the Baptist. Lessons: 1. The twofold character
of Christ’s salvation. (1) The removal of sin. (2) The implantation of a new life
by the Spirit. 2. The twofold condition of receiving Christ’s salvation. (1) Re-
pentance, symbolized by baptism. (2) Faith upheld in beholding the Lamb of
God. 38. The twofold qualification for preaching Christ’s salvation. (1) A know-
ledge of Christ. (2) An acquaintance with self. 4. The twofold evidence thai
Christ is the Son of God. (1) He can open heaven by removing sin. (2) He can
qualify for heaven by imparting the Spirit. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) The Lamb of
God:—I. Tue opynct oF savina FartH. The Lamb of God was the original and
universal sacrifice. The early worshippers were instructed to offer a lamb. A
lamb was the morning and evening sacrifice. Isa. liii; has reference to it. John
pointed to the substance, of which these were shadows: Jesus in all His humilia-
tion, down to the moment of His expiring cry. To this believers of previous dis-
pensations looked forward. John would have the faith of his hearers to
coincide with that of Abel, Abraham, and the Old Testament saints. The way of
life has never varied. Never has a soul been saved, never will a soul be saved, but
by the Lamb of God. IL. Tue pury To wach JoHN SUMMONED HIS HEARERS, 1. To
receive the tidings he conveyed to them. No event had ever occurred like this.
Man’s attention in every age is imperatively called to this. It is the great central
truth on which all history hangs. If rightly received, the message must tell on the
entire character. 2. To banish from them whatever might oppose the reception of
the message, The Jews had much to do in this way. The natural operation of
the heart is to establish a righteousness of its own. Men depend on good character
station in the Church, the use of means. But we must be made to lose confidenee
in any such hope, 3. To rest positively on Christ. III. Tue parrms caLLEp ro
Tris Duty. 1. Generally all men, in every condition, of every character, 2. Those
who thirst, and are conscious that they need a resting-place, an object on which to
bestow their affections, to satisfy their hearts. 3, Those who are pierced by God’s
arrows of conviction. (J. Beith, D.D.) The Lamb of God:—I. Tue arrrisutes
oF THE vicTIM, Gentleness and innocence are suggested by lambs generally. Besides
this, the lamb selected for sacrifice was to be without blemish. And Jesus was
gentle. ‘‘He did not cry,” &c. This was not the gentleness of weakness, for He
calmed the storm and raised thedead. He was ‘*without spot””—“‘holy, harmless
undefiled.” II, Tum pears or Tue victim. The lamb was slain in sacrifice. So
the death of Christ was the chief feature of His life—predicted, prominent in His
own mind, the chief feature of the gospels and epistles. III. Sanvarron 18 con-
NECTED WITH THE DEATH OF THE victim. Ancient prophecy spoke of Him as
‘* wounded for our transgressions.” He Himself said, ‘‘As Moses lifted up,” &e
The apostles proclaimed salvation through His death. IV. Consmper WHAT, as
Saviour, Hu pons. 1. He takes away the guilt and penalty of sin. It was ‘not
the guilt of separate sins that the Lamb of God expiated. It was sin itself. 2. He
takes away the power of sin. He destroys sin itself. V. Tuis He poms ror at
MANKIND. ‘The whole world needed salvation, and we may infer that the supply is
eo-exteusive with the want. As He commands the gospel to be preached to every


7! oe |


al


oHAP, I.] ST. JOHN. 95
eer ee a Ee or ree tS
creature, there must be a gospel for every creature; and those who do not actually
obtain salvation fail only “because of unbelief.” (Newman Hall, LL.B.) The
Lamb of God :—I. Tue Saviour pesienatep “ The Lamb of God.” II, His work
DESCRIBED. ‘“‘ Taketh away the sin of the world.” III, Farra ensornep. ‘‘ Behold
the Lamb of God.” IV. Dury urcrp. 1. Let the careless and impenitent behold
Him. 2. Let those who are trusting in their own merits behold Him. 3. Let
penitent sinners behold Him, 4. Let Christians, for their habitual comfort and
strength, behold Him. (Ibid.) The Lamb of God :—We must admit two postu-
lates. 1. That the world and all its inhabitants are sinners. 2. That there is a
Saviour who takes away the sin of the world. Let me direct your attention to—
I, Tae Brine HERE MENTIONED. The Israelites found that the forgiveness of
their sins was connected in some way with the sacrificial offerings, and therefore
came too generally to suppose that there was some inherent virtue in the victims.
They were pleased with the shadow instead of looking to the substance, The
Baptist broke in upon this lifeless form of things, and, pointing to Christ, said,
‘*Behold,” &c. All types are now to merge in the Antitype. The communion
bears something of the same relation as the morning and evening and passover
lambs bore to Christ. Beware, then, of the mistake of the Jews. 1. In pointing
to the Lamb of God, John conveys an important lesson to us. Men expect forgive-
ness either from the goodness of God or their own good works. Look not on these
refuges of lies. Behold the only Being who taketh away sins. 2. Christ is called
the Lamb.of God, because appointed by God and accepted by God. II. Tue nature
AND EXTENT oF His Functions. 1. He endured the Cross, not to raise the Jewish
nation to.a temporal sovereignty, nor to enrich mankind with wealth and pleasure,
nor to acquaint the minds of the inquisitive with philosophy and science. Had
that been so, He had been acceptable to Jews, politicians, and philosophers. But
by taking away sin, the very ends sought for are most thoroughly achieved. Take
away that, and you take away the world’s darkness and the world’s misery.
2. There are two great evils which sin has entailed. (1) It has brought us under con-
demnation, taken away our title to heaven, and left us outcasts. (2) It has sub-
jected us so to its ascendency and power, that every affection and appetite is the
minister of sin, and we are disqualified for the joys of heaven. To save us, there-
fore, Christ takes away the guilt and condemnation, and also the power and
pollution of sin. 3, The salvation is universally offered, on the condition of faith.
III. THE mMPORTANCE OF THE WORDS “ BreHOLD,” &c. We may suppose the Baptist
addressing himself to—1. Angels. As ye wing your flight on errands of mercy, ye
do behold Him; for into these things the angels desire to look. 2. Fallen angels.
Behold the issue of your evil efforts, the promised bruiser of the serpent’s head!
3. Sinners. Turn from trusting in your useless efforts. Why will yedie! 4. Ye
people of God, behold the author of that joy and peace with which your hearts
are filled. (J. Cumming, D.D.-) The Lamb of God:—I. A porntine To Curist.
We can imagine these words spoken in heaven, and angels desiring to look into
them. We can imagine them spoken in hell, and devils ‘ beholding Him, but not
nigh.” But, alas! on earth how few point or look. The rich man points to his
wealth, the young man to his pleasures, the Pharisee to himself; but those who
belong to Christ point to Him. II. A name or Curisr. 1. Open your Bibles,
and you will see this name above every other. View Him—(1) In the patriarchal
days; in the sacrifice of Abel. (2) Under the law, as the Paschal Lamb. (3) In
Psalm xxiii. (4) In Isaiah liii. (5) In the gospels. (6) In the epistles (1 Pet. i.
19). (7) Inthe Apocalypse. 2. He was God’s Lamb because—(1) God’s property
was in Him. He was God’s Son, Servant, Angel, Prophet, Messenger. (2) God’s
Name was in Him. (3) God’s love was in Him. (4) God’s power was in Him.
III. A work or Curist. He takes our sins away. 1. From the sinner’s heart,
2. From God’s Book. 3. From God’s bar. 4. From God’s sight. 5. To His
cross. 6. To His grave. (R. S. Brooke, M.A.) The Lamb of God:—1. John
had urged the duty of repentance. Now when Jesus made His appearance, John
discloses the great object to be accomplished by Him—viz., the pardon of sin.
For this mere repentance is insufficient, for it can never remove the penalty of a
broken law. It only prepares the penitent to avoid transgression in the future by
inspiring a sorrow for and a hatred of sin; so John did not tell the Jews that they
would be forgiven because of their repentance; but urged it as an indispensable
condition of securing Christ’s blessing. When he had done this, he bade them
behold the Saviour. 2. The term “ Lamb”—(1) Has respect to disposition and
character, and is significant of innocence, meekness, and unresisting submission


i a
“4
96 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHaP. 1.
Oe eee
(Isa. liii. 7). But there were, doubtless, many others to whom the term could be
applied besides Christ. But this did not make them saviours from sin. Had
Jesus been only a lamb in this sense, He might have been thus qualified for a
teacher. But would not John have added something indicative of his Teacher’s
office? To choose a lamb for illustration, and to mean by “‘ taking away the sin
of the world” the influence of sagacious instruction, is utterly confusing and unin-
telligible; and then, if Christ saves by His instruction, why was not Paul called a
saviour of men? (2) But the term has respect to an atoning sacrifice, by which
pardon of sin is secured. And it would be very natural for John, as a Jew, familiar
with the Mosaic offerings, and with their application in Isaiah liii., to use the term
in this sense. The same idea was familiar to Paul (1 Cor. v. 7), Peter (1 Pet. i.
18-19; cf. Exod. xii. 5), and John (Rev. v. 8-14). 3. Jesus is the Lamb of God.
This cannot be a mere term of excellence, like ‘‘ mountains of God,’’ but either the
Lamb who belongs to, or ig provided by, God. The former would make an inept
and frigid meaning ; for John is showing the relation in which Christ stands to
man, The latter, therefore, is the meaning. Every Jew had to provide and present
as a sin-offering a lamb without spotor blemish. What each had done for himself,
God now does for all men, (1) Christtakes away sin. The Hebrews employed the
phrase as meaning to bear the punishment or consequences of sin, or to expiate sin,
or to forgive it, Hither of the first two meanings will answer well here (1 Pet. ii. 24;
Gal. iii. 13; 2 Cor. v. 29). So Christ takes away sin by removing its condemning
and soul-destroying power. The Greek verb means first to lift up and then to raise
up and remove, as one lifts a burden and conveys it away. And so Christ took
the burden of our sins, and this load He carried away. (2) He takes away the sin
of the world. Other conditions are required besides His expiatory death. The
sinner must be penitent, and behold the Lamb with the eye of faith. This done,
salvation is as wide as the world of men; and so the proffer is universal. (Moses
Stuart.) The Lamb of God :—I. THE OBJECT WHICH WAS TO BE ACCOMPLISHED.
The abolition of the world’s sin: a most desirable object. Were any one to offer to
take away the world’s sorrow, or its toil and trouble, or its care, what a benefactor
he would be. But how much more when the Son of God comes from heaven and
suffers to take away its sin. Because the sting and bitterness is nothing but that.
But we are led aside from the truth by the consideration of second causes and
immediate results, and so forget the nature of sin and disregard the Baptist’s
invitation. And yet sin is the universal curse, and those who are unacquainted with
sorrow are sinful; and sin unrepented of will bring the bitterest sorrow. The
need, then, of the abolition of sin is—1. Universal. 2. The greatest of our needs.
Other needs man can remedy ; but no man can help his brother here. 38. The most
pressing. 4, In proportion we do not feel this, our sin is the greater. II. Tus
MEANS ORDAINED FOR ITS ACCOMPLISHMENT. Such a need in God’s universe could
not be without a remedy. This was provided in the Lamb of God, which expression
looks back to Isa. lili, and Gen. xxii. Christ was the Lamb of God in being God’s
appointed sacrifice, and the sacrifice offered by God. He was the federal head of
our race, the one Being in whom our race was gathered up, who took upon Himself
the penalty of sin. His great qualification for this was his sinlessness. Two con-
clusions—l. That if Christ was the Lamb of God He must have been an
adequate provision for dealing with the world’s sin. 2. That He must have been
the exclusive sacrifice for sin. There was no other means appointed by God; there
can be no other means devised by man. III. THz mernop or APPhyING THESE
MEANS. 1. Christ takes away the punishment of sin—sin with all its accidents and
qualities, 2. Christ destroys the power of sin in the heart. 3. You cannot get
rid of sin by resolutions or efforts, but only by faith in Him. There is in usa
sinful will which prompts to sin. We canndt get rid of that by thwarting or
discipling our sinful will. We can only do it by taking cognizance of a higher will
in Christ. And as we believe in Him we submit to His will, and become inspired
with a fresh will which prompts to good and not to evil. (Stanley Leathes, B.D.)
The Lamb of God:—1, How long our first parents remained innocent is not
revealed ; but we scarcely read of their fall before we read also of their restoration.
The gates of Paradise are hardly closed before the altar of atonement is erected at
the entrance. The flame of the Cherubie sword is blended with the flame of the
consuming sacrifice. The promise of salvation was sealed by blood, not of bears
and lions, but of oxen, sheep, and lambs. Blood being put for life, the lesson
taught was (1) that man was a sinner, and that sin must be punished ; (2) that sin
might be forgiven and the sinner saved. The offerer placed his hands upon the


a


CHAP. 1.] ST. JOHN. oF
an Sr a ed ee ee
victim and confessed his sin, thereby symbolically transferring his guilt. 2. But
how can sin be transferred to a dumb animal (Heb. x.4)? And yet the voice of the
whole dispensation cries ‘* Without shedding of blood there is no remission.” How
shall these discordant sounds be tempered into unison? Only by looking beyond
the sacrifice to another which it represents. In Christ these seeming contradictions
are reconciled. That which was pleasing in the sight of God for His sake, was
abhorrent when considered apart from Him. The faith of old believers, therefore,
was the same as ours, only darkened by the symbols which the Antitype has now
abolished. 8. We cannot tell how far the doctrine of atonement was maintained
without corruption in the age immediately preceding the Advent. The great mass
of the people had undoubtedly lost sight of it; but others certainly felt their lost and
wretched state, and looked with a prospective faith to the coming and dying of the
Lamb of God. Their hopes were naturally stimulated by the Baptist. But he did
satisfy them being a preacher of righteousness—not a sacrifice for sin. But having
strengthened their sense of guilt and need of expiation by the preaching of the law,
John led them to the altar and pointed to the Lamb of God. 4. Two to whom
these words were addressed followed Jesus—a sufficient proof that they were waiting
for Him, and prepared for His reception. But in what did their preparation con-
sist? Not in personal merit; they were sinners. Not in superior wisdom ; they
were fishermen, In one point, it is true, they were peculiarly enlightened, and in
that consisted their peculiar preparation to receive the Saviour. They knew that they
were lost, and that He alone could save them; so that when their former master said, '
‘Behold the Lamb of God,” they followed Him at once. And so it has been ever since.
In all cases the same preparation is necessary, a sense of need and a conviction of
the Saviour’s being able to supply it. 5. This doctrine lies at the basis of all efforts
for the reformation (1) of the individual, (2) of the community. (J. A. Alexander,
D.D.) Forgiveness of sins through the atoning sacrifice of Christ is a blessing
which it is the glory of God to reveal, and the privilege of Christians to experience :—
I. SIN, WHICH Is THE TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW, JUSTLY EXPOSES THE OFFENDER TO
THE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH. God created man upright; made him subject to law;
encouraged his obedience by promises, and threatened disobedience with the penalty
of death. Man transgressed: all men have transgressed; so the condemnation
rests upon all. Il. Tu gracious Gop, THOUGH JUSTLY OFFENDED BY THE SINS OF
MEN, HAS IN MERCY MADE PROVISION FOR THE RESTORATION OF ALL WHO REPENT AND
BELIEVE. That death may be abolished, sin must be removed. Sin has been
atoned for, and therefore can be removed by the sacrifice of Christ. It is removed
by a penitent trust in that sacrifice. III. To THe Farry oF BELIEVERS THE DIvINE
PROVISION WAS EXHIBITED IN THE TYPE AND PROPHECIES OF THE OLD TESTAMENT
(Levit. xvi. ; Isa. liii.), In the former one victim was slain to represent the death
of Christ; the other went away alive to represent Christ as living again after having
borne our sins. IV. ALL THESE TYPES AND PROPHECIES WERE FULFILLED BY THE
ATONING DEATH AND TRIUMPHANT RESURRECTION OF OUR Lorp. V. THROUGH THE
SACRIFICE AND RESURRECTION OF CHRIST, SINNERS OF ALL CONDITIONS ARE ENTITLED
TO THE BLESSINGS OF REDEMPTION. Consider—l. The influence of these truths upon
the mind (Rom. v. 1-5). 2. The encouragement hereby given to the returning
sinner. 3. The madness of expecting salvation in any other way. (TZ. Slatterie.)
The Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world :—I. Wuo 18 Tu1s Lams
or Gop. Christ Jesus typified by the paschal lamb; which was—1, Without spot
(Heb. ix. 14). 2. Separated the tenth day. 3. Killed, 4. The blood sprinkled on
the post so that the destroying angel might pass over (1 Pet. i. 2; Heb. x. 22). 5.
Roasted with fire. 6. It expiated sin typically, Christ really (1 Johnii. 2), 7. It
was meek and patient in all its sufferings: so Christ (Isa. lili. 7). II. Waar sin
potu He Take away? 1. Originial (Rom. v. 19). 2. Actual (Eph. i. 7). 3.
Habitual (Acts iii. 26). I1I. How por Curist Take away SIN? 1. He became man
(John i. 14), 2. In the human nature He assumed He suffered death (Phil. ii. 8).
8. The human nature in Him dying, by that death He expiated the sins of human
persons (Isa, liii. 5-6). 4. By this means He took our sins away from us, Himself
becoming our sin-offering (2 Cor. v. 21). 5. And so He takes away whatever in sin
is prejudicial to us; as—(1) The guilt. (2) The curse (Gal. ili, 13). (3) The
strength of sin. Usz. Behold this Lamb of God. 1, In the manger.’ 2. In
the temple. 3. In the garden, 4, In the judgment-hall. 5. Upon the cross. 6.
Ascending. 7. Now at the right hand of God. (Bp. Beveridge.) The great work
of Christ, and the great work of the preacher :—I, Tue Great work or Cunist,
Sin always implies the existence of law, knowledge of law, capability of obeying


98 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP, f
ON ee eee
law, and actual departure from law. Christ came to take sin away. 1. This work
is of all works most difficult. In some respects it is impossible. Its fact cannot
be taken away, nor its memory, nor its influence ; but its painful consciousness, its
controlling power, its polluting influences, and its dawning consequences can. But
this transcends all human power. Senators, sages, poets, priests have tried and
failed. Christ alone can do it, and has done it. 2. This work is of all works the
most indispensable, Sin is the foundation of all man’s suffering, physical, political,
social, religious. The work required is to dry up this fountain. Sin must be taken
away from our literature, governments, institutions, hearts, before the world can ba
saved. This is the great work of Christ. Il, THe GREAT WORK OF THE PREACHER.
To point to the Lamb of God. This designation suggests—l. Sinlessness. 2.
Sacrifice. Christ’s was voluntary, all-sufficient, exemplary. 3. Divinity, Christ
was God’s messenger and atoner. The preacher’s work, therefore, is not to
deal in controversies or, speculations. The world wants a Saviour, not a
system or a creed, (D. Thomas, D.D.) The excellency of the Christian
Atonement :—I. Christ excels in the NaTURE oF THE victim. 1. The faultlessness
of the Saviour. According to Judaism the lamb of sacrifice must be a year
old, and without a blemish. Thus Jesus went through the four seasons—the
spring, summer, autumn, winter of existence, without receiving or inflicting injury.
Without blemish in the inward life, without spot in the outward character.
Many are without spot to men, but are conscious of being full of spots unto God,
Jesus was without spot to God. 2. His Divine appointment. According to
Judaism, the lamb of sacrifice was separated from the flock days before it was slain.
And Jesus was marked out from the foundation of the world. (1) This verse
teaches us that a Lamb slain is the central idea of creation and that in this light
the universe was planned. The idea of sacrifice is the scarlet thread that stretches
trom eternity to eternity. God sprinkled the door posts of creation with blood
when He framed them. (2) The Lamb slain is also the centre of the Divine nature.
Sacrifice is the deepest principle of God Himself. Christ was fore-ordained before
the foundation of the world. In eternity the Father anointed the Son to be a
priest and a sacrifice with the consecrating oil of the Holy Ghost. The Gospel does
not create this principle, it only reveals it. God purchased His Church with His
own blood. 38. HisDivine nature. The Lamb of God is partaker of the nature of
God. According to Judaism, the sacrificial lamb was to be brought up on the farm
of the offerer: for this reason that if must cost some thought and pains, and con-
sequently be something united to him by a tie of affection. And Jesus was a Lamb
which God reared upon His own farm. ‘I was by Him as one brought up with
Him”; according to the Chaldee paraphrase. ‘‘I was nursed at His side.” But
He was not only ‘‘of God.” He was God. This it was that imparted efficacy to
His sufferings. II. It excels in THE EFFICACY OF THE WoRK. The Jewish sacrifices
brought sin to remembrance ; Christ’s sacrifice took it away. 1. Look at Christ as
bearing the sin of the world. But to bear it He must go underit. In the Old
Testament to forgive means literally to carry. ‘‘ Who is a God like unto Thee that
pardoneth (lit. beareth) iniquity?” Other Gods pardoned. Jehovah carried sin;
under the Old Testament in respect of covenant, under the New through Incarnation
and imputation, 2. Christ bore sin away. ‘Christ hath wholly purchased us
from the curse of the law” (Welsh translation). How? By fully paying. 3.
Christ bore it away once for ever. The Jewish sacrifices had to be repeated; but
Christ cancelled it once for all, III. It excels in the arma oF ITS INFLUENCE, The
Jewish sacrifices availed for one nation only. Christ’s sacrifice is intended for the
benefit of the world. 1. Sin, not sins; sin in its root, its deepest, bitterest nature.
2. The sin of the world. When the Great Western Railway was first made in
South Wales, it was constructed on the broad-gauge principle; but the directors
years afterwards judged it expedient to convert it from the broad gauge into the
narrow gauge. In the history of the way of salvation, however, the contrary
process was observed,—the narrow gauge under the Old Testament, and the broad
gauge under the New, 38. All the sin of all the world. According to Judaism, a
sacrifice was not left for all sins, such as adultery, murder, Sabbath desecration—
sins committed with a high hand. Whoever was found guilty of these was to be
“cut off from among his people.” But the sacrifice of Christ covers all, not a
single sin excepted. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) Objections met :—It has been
said that the view of Christ’s work here put into the Baptist’s mouth could not have
been entertained by him because—I. The pre-Christian times were not acquainted
with the idea of a suffering Saviour. But this idea is not foreign to the Old


ousP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 99
ee
Testament, with which the Baptist may be presumed to have had some acquaint-
ance. II. The disciples of Jesus were incapable of understanding this idea (Matt.
xvi. 22). But though not understood by, the idea cannot be shown to have been
strange to them ; while, even if it was, that would not prove it to have been strange
to John, who was reared as a prophet. III. The idea which was only at a later
period in the Christian Church fully developed could hardly have been anticipated
by individual reflection. But the Baptist refers to Diyine inspiration as the source
of his knowledge (ver. 23). IV. The Baptist expected a theocratic and not a suffer-
ing Messiah (Matt. xi. 3). But John’s doubts were occasioned, not by Christ’s
sufferings, but by His delay in asserting His Messianic dignity. Besides, it is not
safe to argue from the thoughts of a prisoner to the views of the same individual
at liberty. (I. Whitelaw, D.D.) John’s call for attention:—In that simple
“Behold,” we have the highest and crowning direction for the right reception
of the Christ. It was a look that betrayed the whole world into sin and condem-
nation, and it is a look that again unites men with their proper Lord, and recovers
them from their guilt and misery. But it must be an earnest look—a look of faith,
—a look of appreciative confidence—a look which transfers the whole trust and
affection of the heart to the object on which it rests,—a look which draws after it
the-entire wish and desire of the soul. Such a look Andrew had, when he rushed
in search of his brother Simon, saying, ‘‘ We have found the Messias!”» Such a
look Philip had, when he went to Nathanael exclaiming, ‘We have found Him, of
whom Moses in the Law, and the prophets, did write!” (vers, 41-45), And such a
look, my brethren, is in the power of every one of us this day. Oh the blessedness
of our privileges! (J. A. Seiss, D.D.) Christ the Passover Lamb:—The Passover
was close at hand (ii. 13). We know its significance, and what a fundamental
importance the deliverance from Egypt had for the history of Israel as well as for
its knowledge of salvation. This fact stands so alone that only the day of the new
salvation is to be compared with it, and the latter again has such a fitting type in
no fact of the Old Testament history as it has in the former, Now the Baptist knew
that the time of the final closing salvation had dawned, and that Jesus was the one
bringing it. Why should he not, above all, compare this salvation and Him who
brought it with that first typical redemption of Israel? Then, however, that Lamb
was the means of sparing the nation. For its sake destruction passed over the
people. Thus now will Jesus be thé means of sparing. (C. E. Luthardt, D.D.)
Christ the Lamb and the Lion :—Doth not St. John call Christ ‘a Lion”? (Rev.
v. 5). Why then doth the Baptist call Him a Lamb? The lion and the lamb, the
prophet Isaiah tells us, shall both “ dwell together” in the days of Christ: but may
they both be together in the Person of Christ? not only in one place together, but
also in one case together? Different respects may tie discordant titles unto one
subject. His courage against Satan, whom He conquered, His patience among
men, whom He suffered, declared there was met in one Messias the stoutness of a
lion, and the meekness of a lamb. St. Bernard’s distinction so determines it;
He rose like a lion, but he suffered like a lamb. (R. Clerke, D.D. Christ
bearing the sins of the world :—The other day I saw a contrivance to judge a man’s
strength by the power of his breath—you breathe into the machine, and by the
weight you lift will be accurately estimated the power of your lungs. _And Jesus
Christ keeps the stars floating by the power of His breath just as children keep
bubbles on a summer eve; He breathes and the planets swim as feathers in a
breeze; but He who upholds the stars with His word, who bears with ease the
burden of ten thousand worlds, bends and staggers under the weight of your sins.
‘The Lord hath made the iniquity of us all to meet on Him.” Sin came from all
directions; a multitude of sins from our own neighbourhood went that day on a
pilgrimage to Mount Calvary; iniquity poured in from all quarters, and fell in
terrible cataracts on the devoted head of the patient victim. ‘‘ He was wounded for
our transgressions,” &c. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) Praise to Christ
the Lamb of God:—A gentleman travelling in Norway went to see the church
in a certain town. Looking up at its tower he was surprised to see the carved
figure of a lamb near the top. He inquired why it was placed in that position,
and was told that when the church was being built a workman fell from the
high scaffold. His fellows saw him fall, and horror-stricken rushed down
expecting to find him dashed to pieces. But to their surprise and joy he was
almost unhurt. How had he escaped? A flock of sheep was passing by the
church at the moment of his fall, and he fell amongst them and right on the top of
alamb, The lamb was crushed to death, but the man was saved. And the lamb


100 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, — [ouar, 1


was carved on the tower at the height from which he fell to commemorate his
escape. Shall we then not give the highest place of honour to the Lamb of God
who was crushed beneath our load. (EF. E. Turner.) The value of Christ's sacri-
fice :—How can one atone for thousands? asked the North American Indians of the
‘missionary Brainerd. The missionary solved their difficulty by showing that one
sovereign is worth two hundred and forty pence—one gold coin being equal in value
to many copper ones, the difference in the metal making a difference in the value.
Similarly the sufferings of one God-man are a sufficient propitiation for the sins of
millions of mere men, the difference in the rank constituting a difference in the
worth. (J. GC. Jones, D.D.) How weighty must be the blood of the Lamb, by
whom the world was made, to turn the scale when weighed against the world!
(Augustine.) Christ’s work not frustrated by His rejection:—I am_ aware the
objection is often made, that “if Christ taketh away the sin of the world, and yet
the vast majority of men die in their sins and are lost, Christ’s work for many was
wrought in vain.” I see no force in this. I think we might as well argue, that
because sin came into the world and marred creation, creation was in vain. We
are not talking of the works of men, but of the eternal Word, and we
must be content to see much in His works that we do not entirely
understand. Though multitudes are lost, I have no doubt the last day
will prove that nothing that Christ did for them was in vain. (Bp. Ryle.)
The sacrificial lamb of the Mohammedans :—It is noticeable that although modern
Islém rejects the idea of the sacrifice of Christ, the custom of sacrifice is still
commanded; as, for instance, for certain offences during the Pilgrimage. Some-
thing approaching to the Jewish Day of Atonement is thus described by an American
missionary in India: ‘‘On a great day with the Mohammedans of Calcutta they
offered their yearly sacrifice, the atonement for sin, A lamb or a kid without spot
or blemish is taken to the priest or moulvie; the person who presents the offering
lays his hands on the animal’s head, saying: ‘For my head I give thine.’ Then
he touches the ears, the mouth, the eyes, &ce., of the sacrifice, still repeating: ‘ For
my ears, thy ears; for my mouth, thy mouth; for my eyes, thy eyes;’ and so on
till he has mentioned all that he has to say. Then he exclaims: ‘ For my life, thy
life;’ and as he pronounces these words the priest plunges a knife into the kid’s
heart, and pronounces an absolution for the sinner, Is not this a strange custom,
showing that the Mohammedan also acknowledges the necessity of an atonement,
and without the shedding of blood there is no remission for sin?” (S. S. Times.)
The death of Christ the preacher’s theme :—In one of the old-fashioned mansions
in the United States there is still to be seen a brass-bound clock upon the staircase-
landing with the hands fixed at the minute and hour when Washington died. The
gran@ather of the present owner was a pall-bearer at the funeral of the great
republican, and set the hands where they have ever since remained. Even so the
preacher’s finger must ever point the multitude to Jesus Christ and Him crucified.
(H. O. Mackey.) Christ the preacher’s theme :—Among those who visited Dr,

Jarey, the great Baptist missionary, in his last illness was Alexander Duff, the
Scotch missionary. On one occasion he spent some time talking chiefly about
Carey’s missionary life, until the dying man whispered ‘‘ Pray.” Duff knelt down
and prayed, and then said “ good-bye.” As he passed from the room, he thought
he heard a feeble voice pronouncing his name, and turning, found that he was
recalled. He stepped back accordingly, and this is what he heard, spoken with a
gracious solemnity: ‘Mr. Duff, you have been speaking about Dr. Carey, Dr.
Carey: when I am gone say nothing about Dr. Carey—speak about Dr. Carey’s
Saviour.” Duff went away rebuked and awed, with a lesson in his heart that he
never forgot. (Ibid.) We must look to Christ :—When I was in Belfast I knew a
doctor who had a friend, a leading surgeon there, and he told me that the surgeon’s
custom was, before performing any operation, to say to the patient, “Take a good
look at the wound, and then fix your eyes on me, and don’t take them off till I get
through.” I thought at the time that was a good illustration. Sinner, take a good
look at the wound to-night, and then fix your eyes on Christ, and do not take them
off. It is better to look at the remedy than at the wound. See what a poor
wretched sinner you are, and then look at the Lamb of God that taketh away the
sin of the world. He died for the ungodly and the sinner. Say “I’ll take Him,”
and may God help you to lift your eye to the Man on Calvary. And as the Israelites
looked upon the serpent and were healed, so may you look and live to-night. (D
L. Mcody). Jesus the propitiation for sin :—When our Lord was thus set forth by
John, it is well to note the special character under which He was declared. John


is Se


oa 4


0 0 uh ml at aii


CHAP. 1,] ST. JOHN. 101


knew much of the Lord Jesus, and could have pictured Him in many lights and
characters. He might especially have pointed Him out as the great moral example,
the founder of a higher form of life, the great teacher of holiness and love; yet
this did not strike the Baptist as the head and front of our Lord’s character, but he
proclaimed Him as one who had come into the world to be the great sacrifice for sin.
Lifting up his hand and pointing to Jesus, he cried, “Behold the Lamb of God,
which taketh away the sin of the world.” He did not say, “Behold the great
Exemplar ;” no doubt he would have said that in due season. He did not even
say, ‘ Behold the king and leader of a new dispensation; ” that fact he would by
no means have denied, but would have gloried in it. Still, the first point that he
dwells upon, and that which wins his enthusiasm is, ‘Behold the Lamb of God.”


John the Baptist views Him as the propitiation for sin, and so he cries, ‘‘ Behold


the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world!” (C. H. Spurgeon.)
A saving message :—It is told of the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, that when about to preach
in the Crystal Palace, Sydenham, in 1857, he went down a short time before the
service to arrange where the platform should be placed, and whilst trying the
various positions he cried aloud, ‘‘ Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the
sin of the world!” A man was at that time at work in the Palace, who heard
the text spoken under such unusual circumstances. It went with power to his
heart, convinced him of sin, and led him to the sin-atoning Lamb, in whom he
found forgiveness, peace, and joy. The atonement and the Scriptures :—A Socinian
preacher once said to Mr. Newton, ‘Sir, I have collated every word in the Hebrew
Scriptures seventeen times; and it is very strange if the doctrine of atonement
which you hold should not have been found by me.” Mr. Newton replied, ‘I am
not surprised at this; I once went to light my candle with the extinguisher on it.
Prejudices from education, learning, &c., often form an extinguisher. It is not
enough that you bring the candle; you must remove the extinguisher.” The
great remedy :—Hannah More relates that Dr. Johnson, on his death-bed, was in
great distress of mind. Not being comforted by ordinary conversation, he desired
to see a minister. Mr. Winstanley was named, and the doctor requested him to be
sent for. Mr. Winstanley did not come, but wrote to the doctor as follows :—* Sir,
—I beg to acknowledge the honour of your note, and am very sorry that the state
of my health prevents my compliance with your request. I can easily conceive
what would be the subject of your inquiry. I can conceive that on the near
approach of death what you once considered mere peccadilloes have risen into
mountains of guilt, on whichsoever side you look you see only positive transgression,
defective obedience ; and hence in self-despair are eagerly inquiring, ‘ What must I
do to be saved?’ I say to you in the language of the Baptist, ‘ Behold, the Lamb
of God, that taketh away the sin of the world!’’’ When this was read to the
doctor he anxiously asked, *‘ Does he say so?” The consequence was that he was
brought to the renunciation of himself and a simple reliance on Jesus as his
Saviour. Free trade with heaven established by Christ :—Under the Old Testa-
ment no free trade was carried on between heaven and earth, no unrestricted
commerce, for the duty was so high—a lamb being taken from one farm, a bullock
from another, a heifer from the third, a goat from the fourth, and fowls from the
poor, to pay the imposed duty; but the sacrifice once offered on Calvary for the sin
of the world has, I am glad to tell you, established Free Trade for ever. (J. C.
Jones, D.D.) The message for sinners :—John Wesley, preaching to an audience
of scholars and noblemen, used the “‘ generation of vipers’’ text, and flung denun-
ciation right and left. ‘‘ That sermon should have been preached at Newgate,”
said a displeased courtier. ‘‘ No,” said the fearless apostle, my text there would
have been, *‘ Behold the Lamb of God,” &c. (C. H. Spurgeon.) A young
telegraph operator was anxious about his soul. After a sleepless night he went to
his duties; while restless and absorbed in the thought of being a sinner he heard
the click of his instrument, and with great astonishment and emotion spelt out this
message :—‘‘ From H , Windermere, to J B—, Warkworth. ‘Behold
the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world’; in whom we have
redemption through His blood, even the forgiveness of sins.” ‘This was sent as
an answer to a letter from a young man who also was seeking peace. It acted as a
double blessing, showing to both operator and receiver the way of salvation. (Zbid.)
The sin of the world :—I think John the Baptist in this text speaks about sin as we
think of a terrible epidemic from which individual men suffer, and which we are
accustomed to speak of as that by which we are all affected. The symptoms may vary
in individual cases; the course of the disease may sometimes be more or less rapid ;


i


102 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. L
hide Ie RARE EI ie Sui ee
and there may be great differences in the pain which it inflicts on different men. When
we speak of the cholera or some maliguant fever, we regard those who suffer from
it as smitten down by some terrible power which travels from house to house, and
involves all its victims in one common peril; that some poison is in the blood of
those who suffer; that they are all wrestling with the same ghastly enemy; and
that they are all in danger of the same doom. Nowit is thus that John the Baptist
thought of sin. What we describe as the accidental lapses of individual men were
to him the symptoms and the result of something vaster and more dreadful ; the
sins of individual men were to him only the revelations of an evil energy which
had taken possession of the race. ‘lhere was a great confederacy into which all
men had entered, consciously or unconsciously —a confederacy against the authority
of God, and against the eternal law of righteousness. Different men break different
commandments; their individual transgressions vary according to their circum-
stances, their training, or their temper. But no man stands apart—no man refuses
to share in the great revolt against the majesty of heaven. Where there is not a
profligate, reckless disobedience, there is indifference to the Divine authority—an
indifference which is just as fatal, and involves a separation from God as positive
as if he had been an active antagonist toit. Thisisacommonsin. This is asin
in which we are all sharers, and in which we still share if we are not redeemed,
and constitutes an essential moral element and characteristic spirit of the world,
but it finds expression in infinitely various ways. Now, I can imagine some of you
saying—Did He take away the sin of the world? What signs are there that He has
done it? Sin is here still. There is no solitary country the world over that is
redeemed from it. It stains this century, as it has stained every century that has
gone by. Will you consider it as guilt—guilt which one does recognize, and which
fills the heart with terror, with dark and gloomy anticipations of the just penalty
with which it must be visited. Well, millions upon millions who have appealed
to Christ will tell you that its guilt has been taken away. Or will you consider sin
as involving the terrible necessity of the separation of the soul from God. This is
one of its worst and most malignant effects. We see, as the result of our sin, that
we are driven away from that Divine presence—that our sin comes between us and
the favour of Heaven—and we find that we cannot break through it, and speak to
God face to face. God is holy, and by the necessity of His nature shrinks fror
contact with sin. Well, Christ has taken sin away even in that sense. If sin is
no longer a dominant power in this world, there is something here that is stronger
than it; there is the liberty into which we can enter through Christ Jesus our Lord.
He has taken it away as the authority by which we were controlled, and through
Him we are able to enter into the fullest freedom, and to keep God’s command-
ments. I admit that sin has not disappeared from the world, but God has done
His part towards causing it to disappear. He can give eternal life, but He cannot
reccive it for us; we must receive it. AJl He could do to take away our sin He has
actually done; and we ought to rejoice with great exulting joy in the redemption that
is wrought for us through Christ Jesus our Lord. Now there are two or three con-
siderations I wish to impress upon you before I close, suggested by this subject.
1. In the first place, in this work of the Lord we are all deeply concerned. 2.
Again, that which He has done excludes altogether the plea that you are helplessly
under the power of sin. 3. Again this takes away the excuse for persisting in sin.
4. If you remain under the power of sin, it is by your own choice. ll sin is, no
doubt, the result of choice. 5. Finally, the truth that we have been considering
excludes all hope that if we fail to receive the Lord Jesus Christ as our Saviour
that we shall ever obtain God’s mercy and eternal life. (R. W. Dale, M.A.)


Vers, 30-34. This is He.—The Redeemer’s identification :—I. In His work as the
Lamb of God. 1. The object offered in sacrifice. The Lamb of God applies to
Christ (1) in His personal character. (2) In His sacrificial character. 2. The
object or effect of the sacrifice “ taketh away,” &c.! 3. The burden removed by the
sacrifice: the world’s sin. II. In His pxynson (ver. 80). These words meet us for
the third time. The human and Divine natures are exhibited in one sentence.
How profoundly the Baptist believed in the pre-existence of Christ. III. Tur mopr
OF IDENTIFICATION. 1, I knew Him not. He did indeed know Him, and hence
hesitated about baptizing Him (Matt. iii. 14). The son of Elizabeth must have
known the Sonof Mary. ‘he Baptist means that he did not know Him as Messiah.
2. Jesus was revealed to John by the descent of the Holy Ghost. (1) The sign.
The Dove emblematized the consecration of the Redeemer to His Divine work. (2)


CHAP. I.J ST. JOHN. 103


The two baptisms—the one in water, the other in the Holy Ghost—the one that
Christ might be made manifest unto Israel, and unto repentance for the remission
of sins; the other not a sacrament that Christ was to institute for the Church, nor
which any priest or minister could give; it was a baptism of regenerating grace—
such a baptism as Simon Magus never had although baptized with water; such a
baptism as the dying thief enjoyed although not baptized with water. (Prof.
Croskery.) Notice—1. The evidences of Christ’s excellency and Godhead when
He came into the world are not cunningly devised fables, but most certain and
infallible truths, for John bare record, saying, ‘I saw,” &. 2. Christ in His
solemn entry to His offices was sealed from heaven, that so the Church may learn
to embrace Him with all respect. Therefore doth the Spirit descend upon Him in
this visible way, and the Father bear witness to Him (Matt. 3), all the persons of
the Trinity manifesting themselves on Jordan’s bank. 3. Christ is endowed with
the Spirit from on high for executing of His offices, and it is made manifest that
the Spirit is to be found on Him and sought from Him; for “I saw the Spirit
descending from heaven upon Him,” where the Spirit, who filleth heaven and earth,
is said to descend in respect of that visible manifestation and sign of His presence.
4, The Spirit’s descending like a dove, a meek, harmless and atfectionate creature,
pointed out what Christ is in His own nature to them that come to Him, even meek,
harmless, loving, and not dreadful; what He is in the execution of His office, even
He in whom the Father is well pleased and pacified, and He who bringeth the good
news of assuaging the deluge of wrath, as Noah’s dove of the drying up of the
flood ; and what He is in the operations of His Spirit upon His people, that they
are made meek, harmless, and lowly as doves, not like birds of prey. 5. Albeit all
Christ’s members do receive of the Spirit in their measure, yet it is Christ’s pre-
rogative to have the Spirit resting on Him; not only as God is the Spirit of one
essence with Him, proceeding from the Father and Him, and so is ever present with
Him. But even as man by virtue of the personal union, the Spirit floweth and
resteth on Christ, and efficaciously worketh in Him all Divine graces and virtues
without measure, and immutably, so that none can come wrong to Him at any time
for receiving of His Spirit: Therefore, it is said, ‘‘it abode upon Him” (Isa. xi. 2,
3). 6. Christ, in taking on our nature, did so cover His glory with the veil of our
flesh and common infirmities that He could not be known by bodily sight from
another man without Divine revelation and evidences from God; for, without this,
John saith, “I knew Him not” (Matt. xvi.17). 7. The Lord is very tender and
careful of His servants, to encourage and confirm them in their calling and message ;
and will not fail to perform what He hath promised for that effect when He sendeth
them out; for, John saith, he saw this sign in a peculiar way, as being to him an
accomplishment of that promise given to him; for God had said to him, “ upon
whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending,” &c., and now it was accomplished, 8.
The Spirit resteth upon Christ, and was manifested to be on Him by a visible sign,
not only for Himself and to point out His excellency, but for the Church’s good, and
to certify them that He received the Spirit to communicate unto His people. (G.
Hutcheson.) The Dove of God:—We have here—I. THE GoRONATION OF THE
Kina. 1. The actual descent of the Spirit. It is unnecessary to ask what was the
objective material reality here. It is enough that this was no fancy, born ina man’s
brain, but an actual manifestation, whether through sense or apart from sense, to
consciousness of a Divine outpouring and communication. 2. The purpose of this
descent. The anointing of the Monarch. But a man is king before he is crowned.
Coronation is the consequence and not the cause of royalty. And so the first
purpose of this great fact is distinctly stated as having been the solemn pointing
out of Messiah for the Baptist first, but in order that he might bear witness of Him
to others. But this was not the beginning of His Messianic consciousness, nor of
His Sonship. Before His baptism, and ere the heavens opened, or the dove fluttered
down, He from everlasting was Son in the bosom of the Father. Christ’s baptism
was an epoch in His human development inasmuch as it was His first public
assumption of His Messianic office, and inasmuch as an advance was made in the
communication to his manhood of the sustaining Spirit as fully equipped Him for
new calls. His manhood needed the continual communication of the Spirit, and
because it was sinless it was capable of a complete reception of that Spirit. So we
see in Christ the realized ideal of manhood. 3. The meaning of this symbol. To
John the coming of the King was first and chiefly a coming to judgment. Jobn
gees two wonders: the Messiah in his Carpenter Cousin and the Spirit, which he
thought of as searching and consuming, like a dove. The same as in Gen. i. 2,


oe :
104 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR.  [onar. 1
i
where the word employed describes accurately the action of the mother bird with
her soft breast and outstretched wings quickening the life that lies beneath. What
then does it proclaim as to the character of the King. (1) Purity, as the very
foundation of His royalty. (2) Meekness and gentleness, as the weapons of His
conquest and the sceptre of His rule, The dove will outfly all Rome’s eagles, and
all rapacious unclean feeders with their strong wings, talons and beaks. II. THE
girts or THE Kine to His sussects. 1. Christ has nothing that He keeps to
Himself. He received the Spirit that He might diffuse Him through the whole
world. Salvation is more than escape from wrath, more than pardon. We must
rise higher and feel if we would understand the “ unspeakable gift” which is the
totality of the gifts of His indwelling Spirit. 2, Therefore Christian men are spoken
of in the same language which is used in reference to their Master. ‘‘ Sons
of God,” “Priests,” ‘Lights of the World,” “Anointed.” 3. How full of re-
buke and instruction is the symbol in reference to ourselves. The dove-like Spirit
is offered to us. (1) Our hearts are like the wild chaos; but He will come, if we will
let Him, and brood over our nature and recreate the whole. (2) The dove again was
pure and fit for sacrifice: the heavenly dove comes as the Spirit of holiness, and
then there is purity in the receiver and -self-sacrifice. (3) The Dove that erowned
the King dwells in the subjects and makes them, too, meek and gentle, and imparts
the true force of Christian character. (4) Noah’s dove came back with one leaf in
his beak—the prophecy of a whole world of beauty and verdure. The Dove that
comes to us, bearing some leaf plucked from the tree of life, is the earnest of our
inheritance until the day of redemption. All the gifts of that Divine Spirit—gifts
of holiness, gentleness, wisdom, truth—are forecasts of heavenly perfectness. To
us sailing over a dismal sea, He comes bearing with Him a message that tells of the
far-off land and the fair garden of God in which the blessed shall walk. (A. Maclaren,
D.D.) As a dove did at that time bring tidings of the abating of the water, so
doth it now of the abating of the wrath of God upon the preaching of the gospel.
(Augustine.) |The Holy Spirit manifested Himself here as a Dove; and at the day
of Pentecost in tongues of fire; in order that we may learn to unite fervour with
simplicity, and to seek for them both from Him. (Ibid.) |The dove, the symbol of
innocence and purity (Matt. x. 16), the abiding and the tranquil hovering over Christ,
expressed thetranquil and equable movement of the power of the Spirit in Him, in con-
trast with the detached impulses given to the prophets (Isa. xi. 2). (Tholuck.) The
Great Atoner the Great Baptizer :—The work of Christ, according to the Baptist, was to
take away the sin of the world and to baptize with the Holy Ghost. It is not pos-
sible for believers to think too much of the first part; but it is quite possible for
them to think too little of the second. These are the two pillars of our faith. The
atoning sacrifice was offered and completed on Calvary once for all; but the baptism
of the Holy Ghost is ever going on. Our Saviour died to be the Atoner; He lives
to be the Baptizer. And our Saviour lives and reigns to baptize us not occasionally,
but permanently; not fitfully and uncertainly, but surely. Were this baptism
fully realized, there would be a vast increase of holiness, power, and success in
ministers and churches: of Christian unity and charity. What encouragement
have we for expecting this baptism? The announcement that Christ is as much
Baptizer as Atoner, not the one without the other, or He would have laid the foun-
dation and built nothing upon it. The atonement is the rock: the baptism builds
the Church. So the gospels run up to the atonement, but the Acts start from the
baptism, And so as the sinner seeks the one for salvation, so should the saint seek
the other for service and testimony. (C.Clemance,D.D.) The four baptisms :—
There are four baptisms mentioned in the Bible, The baptism of water, of repen-
tance, of the Holy Ghost, and of fire. The baptism of water is the emblem of all
but that would be nothing without the baptism of repentance which it was intended
to express; and the baptism of repentance will be unavailing for peace, holiness
heaven, unless it is accompanied by the baptism of the Holy Ghost, and that is
never far reparated from the baptism of fire. The four make one complete whole
and are the basis of the Christian life. (J. Vaughan.) ;


Ver. 35-51. The next day.—The first utterances of the Word :—1. A searching
question, 2. A gracious invitation. 3, An encouraging promise. 4. A Divine
command. 5. A heart revelation. 6. An assurance of a present and an everlasting
heaven. (J. W. Burn.) Three ways to the Lord :—There is only one way to heaven
“Tam the way ;” but there are many ways to Christ. One soul is led earlier.
another later; one gradually, another by storm ; one by sorrow, another through joy :


OHAP, 1.] ST. JOHN. \ 105


one by inner impulse, another by external influence. Here we learn—1. To adore
the wisdom of God. Like a prudent gardener He deals with each of His plants
according to its kind. One needs the sun, another the shade; one must be kept
moist, another dry; one requires rich soil, another poor; one must be pruned,
another supported; one needs tender handling, another will grow in any wind or
weather. 2. To regard God’s world with such big-hearted, patient love, that we no
longer measure our neighbour by our own standard, 3, To learn to know ourselves.
The lives of other children of God ought to be a mirror to us, and from them we can
choose to suit our own particular aspiration, some favourite character by whose
example we may be strengthened and edified: Here we have three ways to God.
I. Tae WAY THROUGH THE PREACHED Worp. 1. “Behold the Lamb,” &e., is the
heart of the Christian sermon. That is the aim of the whole Bible: Moses, the
prophets, John, and the apostles. No matter the particular subject, this is the true
end, (1) If we preach on the holiness and love of God, behold them here. (2) It
about your duty, behold here meekness, gentleness, innocence, and obedience. (3) If
reproof for sin, behold here the effect of sin and what is necessary for its removal.
(4) If consolation, behold here its source. (5) If heaven, behold here its central
glory. 2. The two disciples heard. (1) We often come short in the listening—work,
and pleasure are preferred. (2) Those who listen, do they really hear? (3) Those
who hear, do they “follow?” Following Jesus is the true end of hearing.
For this purpose the Baptist willingly let them depart. You are to become con.
verts, not to any human preacher, but to Christ. II. Tae way THRouGH EXAMPLE
which Peter took. Andrew cannot keep the blessed discovery to himself, and he
could not have performed for his brother a nobler service, nor presented to Christ
a nobler tribute of his love. What a lesson for—1. Preachers. 2. Parents. 3.
Brothers. JJI. Tue way or experience. They all took this way, but it was in a
special sense the way Nathanael took. 1. It is necessary that you come to the Lord
personally and become acquainted with Him through your own experience to put
to the proof what you have heard or read. Practice makes perfect; experience
makes the Christian. 2. Whom will you find? A soul friend rich in love, who
looks on your soul as a thing of value; one who has a profound insight into your
heart; one who can supply all yourneed. 3, Receive Him—(1) for His own sake,
(2) For the sake of the revelations He makes and for the rewards He bestows. (K.
Gerok, D.D.) The soul sought by Christ, and seeking Him :—I, Joun stoop, anp
TWO OF HIS DISCIPLES LOOKED ON Jesus AS HE waLKED, Was it by accident that
Christ was walking there? No; He was walking to find them, They had not
brought Him, persuaded Him, or arranged for His arrival. No needy heart has to
furnish its Christ. Before it begins to seek He is near and waiting. Immanuel
may be unseen, as our best possessions always are, but heaven has brought Him
near. II. How po men treat Him? ‘* They followed Jesus.” Now begins man’s
part in the great reconciliation. Not every one, like Andrew, is called to be an
apostle, but all are called to be disciples. But both must “follow.” Will you look
on a little while from curiosity, or momentary impulse, or will you thankfully and
steadily take up His cross and go after Him? III. Iris nor curTAIN WHETHER THE
FIRST IMPULSE TO FOLLOW WILL PROVE A CONSTANT RELIGIOUS PRINCIPLE. ‘ What seek
ye?” Rather a chilling question as it stands. He saw that the motives of these
ardent disciples must be laid bare to themselves, What do you really seek? Is it
for His sake or your own? God applies many touchstones. Time, spiritual dis-
appointment, &c. Christ wants loyal, disinterested love, and there is therefore no
lack of tenderness in His question. IV. Now, THEN, COMES THE PLACE FOR A
DEEPER EXERCISE OF FAITH, AND THE RISING BY IT INTO A HIGHER LIFE. Will the dis-
ciple bear the proof? Will he evade the question and simply follow along on the
level of the old decency, saying all the old prayers, &c.? Notice the spiritual beauty
of the answer. ‘‘ Master (with a new and tenderer meaning), where dwellest
Thou?” This is the least ostentatious, yet directest confession of a desire for
closer communion. It is a confession of ignorance, a prayer for a hiding place. V.
WoULD IT BE GRANTED ONLY FOR THE ASKING? ‘‘He saith unto them, come and
see.” Let that stand for the dispelling of all your doubt. ‘There is no description
of the house beforehand to excite wrong anticipation. Find out what the Christian
life is by living it. ‘‘ Eye hath not seen,” &. VI. “THEY caME AND ABODE WITH
Him.” If they had been like some they would have stumbled at their own un-
worthiness, as if God’s favours were ever granted to merit. Faith takes God at Hig
word. VII, AND NOW SEE PLAYING OUTWARD THE POWER WHICH HAS BEEN WORKING
INWARDLY. It begins to testify for Christ. No sooner is the heart in actual fellow-


oes ‘


106 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. %


eS


ship with Christ than it begins to ask what it can do for Him. There are two sorts
of people : those that go and do the thing, and those that stand and wonder why it
was not done after some other fashion. Andrew begins at the nearest point. ‘ His
own brother.” There is no postponement for a complete plan, for times, for be-
coming “ good enough.” His heart is full, and he does what he can. How soon
this spirit in the followers of Christ would bring the world to His feet. Conclusion :
1. What the one brother says to the other is a joyful recognition of the fulfilment
of prophecy. 2. The message relating to ‘‘the Lamb of God” is the message that
brings sinners to the Saviour. (Bp. Huntington.) The first disciple:—I. WE
HAVE HERE THE FIRST BEGINNINGS OF THE CurisT1aN Cuurcy. The beginning of any-
thing great and good always wins for us a special regard. The tree grown from an
acorn; the Amazon from the spring in the Andes. ‘The interest is heightened in
the case of moral movements. The Mayflower; the lonely monk who afterwards
wrought the Reformation. Still deeper is our interest in the beginning of the
kingdom of Christ. And it begins here with the Divine quietness which is charac-
teristic of God’s mightiest works. II. THe BEGINNING AND FIRST MOVEMENTS OF
PERSONAL RELIGION. That begins when a personcomes toChrist. 1. This doesnot
imply that there is no value in what precedes. These men had heard the Baptist,
were penitent, prepared, expectant. But as soon as opportunity was given they
came, and so showed the sincerity of their repentance. 2. The first coming may
be real and true, and yet not at once entire and decisive. They went back to Beth-
saida, but. an invisible Presence went back with them, and in alittle while it became
visible, and said, ‘“‘ Follow Me.” So some time may elapse before the full surrender.
But a faith in Jesus held long in secrecy is a perilous thing. II. Tae Divine
METHOD OF EXTENDING RELIGION AND OF MULTIPLYING THE NUMBER OF DISCIPLES.
There is a beautiful exemplification here of the law of personal influence. The
great preacher points to Jesus, and it. takes effect. But how small that effect would
be if it reached the hearers only. It led to Jesus first, and then the power of per-
sonal influence makes itself felt. In this way, in little more than a day, Jesus has
five disciples. Surely this shows us what a sphere opens at once to every believer.
He has found the pearl of great price, and without losing it himself he can offer it
to his friend. This privilege is neglected or timorously used. There never was so
much preaching, and for this reason we abate quieter and more personal efforts.
But whatever one attains in spiritual things he is bound by the very law of the life
he has received to try to communicate it to others. Because unwise speaking is
worse than silence it does not follow that we are to keep silent always. There are
some whom plain dealing suits ; or you may have to watch, use gentle suggestion,
&e. Conclusion : 1. If you have borne witness conscientiously, but without success,
try silence, watch, pray, put booksin the way. 2. If you have been long silent, afraid of
wounding susceptibilities, of making religion repellant, and trying to reach in
quiet ways without success, break silence for once. (A. Raleigh, D.D.)
The first five disciples :—Order is heaven’s first law, but variety is the second. We
see this—1. In creation. 2. In providence. 38. In the work of grace. The opera-
tion is ever the same in kind, but different in manner. Here are four different
methods of conversion. I. THE FIRST TWO DISCIPLES WERE THE FRUITS OF PREACHING.
1. The preacher—(1) Was divinely illuminated, as all gospel preachers must be.
(2) Was unsuccessful at first, but tried the same message again and succeeded, (3)
His subject was the only effective one—Christ the sin-bearer. 2. The process of
conversion, (1) A spirit of inquiry was stirred up. They followed Christ as
searchers, at His back. Christ turns round and facesthem, He looks upon them,
and then puts the modest question, the first words He spoke. It was a comprehen-
sive question, too: ‘‘ What seek ye?” Pardon, peace, purity, truth? ‘Come and
see,” and you shall have them all. The best way to be convinced of the power of
the gospel is to try it. II, Tum rarrp pIscrPLE WAS BROUGHT IN BY PRIVATE INSTRU

MENTALITY. 1. The agent, Andrew. (1) As soon as a man is found by Christ, he
begins to find others. (2) “First” implies that he did not give it up afterwards.
(3) Relationship has a stern demand on our individual effort. Our first business is
at home. (4) Simon was worth ten Andrews. We may be very deficient in talent,
and yet be the means of bringing a great man to Christ. (5) Andrew’s testimony
was modest. ‘* We.’ He gives the other disciple his share of the discovery. But
it was positive also, Not ‘‘I think,” or “ trust,” but “we have.” 2. The process,
(1) Christ describes Simon’s present state—‘ the son of the timid dove ” _explain-
ing what he was. (2) He gave him a new name, indicative of the nature His grace
would give. This is the general plan of conversion. Nature is discovered and


—_—


HAP. 1.) ST. JOHN. 107
oe SES A ee ee eee

grace imparted ; the old name supplanted by the new. III. Tar rourTH DISCIPLE
WAS CALLED DIRECTLY BY THE VOICE OF JESUS. So are all men, for the voice of John
or the voice of Andrew is the voice of Christ speaking through them ; but in some
cases there is no apparent instrumentality. Colonel Gardner was about to perpetrate
a crime but was stopped on the brink of it by sovereign grace without any apparent
instrumentality. 1. Christ spoke but two words. 2. To follow Christ is the picture
of Christian discipleship in every form. Follow Christ—(1) In doctrine. (2) In
faith, (3) In action. (4) In ordinances, IV. Tue FirTH DISCIPLE WAS A COMPOSITE
casE. There was—1. Preparation of heart ‘‘under the fig tree.” 2. Philip’s
instrumentality. 3. Christ’s Divine word which convinced Nathanael and led him
to put his trust in the Messiah. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The first five disciples :—
I. A LITTLE REAL KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST PRODUCES THE DESIRE FOR MORE. They
had heard the testimony of John, They prized his ministry, for it had done
them good, but they now felt that Jesus could do more for them than John.
II. THz TRUE WAY OF INCREASING OUR KNOWLEDGE oF CHRIST IS TO FOLLOW
Hmsetr. They might have stayed with John and asked for further informa-
tion. How much there is to be known of Christ which human teachers cannot
impart. What is it to follow Christ? 1. Attraction from Christ. 2. Faith
in Christ. 3. Submission to Christ. III. Tue sprrir or DEVOUT INQUIRY ALWAYS
MEETS WITH THE SaviouR’s SYMPATHY AND smILE.’ 1. He awakens consciousness.
He does not teach in the first instance. 2. He invites confidence. ‘What can
I do for you?” 3. He offers a welcome. IV. IN ¥Fonnowina Curist THE
BELIEVER FINDS MORE THAN HE EXPECTED OR IMAGINED. ‘They remained with Christ
and had fellowship with Him. The world often disappoints, but Christ gives
more than we can ask or think. (J. Spence, D.D.) The first disciples, or sons of
the light:—I. ANDREW AND Joun, attracted towards the Light. II. Simon anp
James, conducted to the Light. III. Paizip anp NaTHanaen, invited by the Light.
Lessons: 1. The greatest discovery a soul can make—the Christ, 2. The purest
felicity a soul can enjoy—fellowship with Christ. 3. The’ noblest life a soul can
lead—following Christ. 4. The loftiest calling a soul can pursue—commending
Christ. 5. The grandest philanthropy a soul can practice—bringing men to Christ.
6. The sweetest commendation a soul can receive—to be an Israelite indeed. 7.
The: sublimest spectacle a soul can see—the Son of Man enthroned in an open
heaven. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) The early disciples :—I. Tur HERALDING or CHRIST,
The Baptist’s ministry was—l. Brief. Only six months, 2. Popular. 3. Mis-
understood. 4. Expectant. 6. Self-abnegating. II. Tux maniresration or Jusus
IN His TRUE CHARACTER AND mission. 1. John says, Behold—(1) Not the great
teacher. (2) Not the spotless example. (3) Not the triumphant king. (4) But the
Lamb of God. 2. Jesus says—(1) ‘‘ What seek ye?” An affectionate inquiry opening
the way to conversation. (2) Come and see—an encouraging invitation. III. Tux
BEGINNING OF THE CHRISTIAN CuuRcH. 1. By friendly service. 2. Brotherly affec-
tion. 3. Neighbourly zeal. 4. Conquest of prejudice. IV. THe RESULT OF PER-
SONAL EFFoRT. Andrew helped to make the Pentecostal preacher. How little we
know what hangs on our individual endeavours. The preacher may not be known
beyond his flock, but one soul through his appeals may be the means of converting
thousands. The Sabbath school teacher may toil on with half a dozen children,
but amongst the number may be a Wilberforce. Let none then be discouraged.
(Sermons by the Monday Club.) The Redeemer choosing disciples :—The leading
characteristics of the gospel were to be exhibited in the disciples; their selection,
therefore, was a matter of vast importance. I. THe RrDEEMER CHOOSES DISCIPLES
OF MEN OF ENTIRELY OPPOSITE CULTURE AND Disposition. In John dwells paramount
the meek, the restful, and the happy. The indicating words of the Baptist were
appropriate to this disciple—“ Behold the Lamb!” Simon is quite another man,
rock-like, rough, pressing through all hindrances, and recoiling from nothing. 1.
If diverse temperaments were necessary at the beginning, they are necessary now.
2, Each is good when it is animated by the Spirit of God. Excess and onesided-
ness, however, are to be deplored. 3. There are many gifts but one Spirit. Stern-
ness and gentleness, fiery strength and patient meekness, can, and ought, in like
measure to glorify Christ. Let them not be polished down into similarity. Let
each be content with his gift and do what he can without envying another’s.
Common love and zeal should bind all together and beget mutual toleration. II.
Tu REDEEMER CHOSE THOSE WHO ACQUIRED THE HIGHEST FAME AND THOSE WHOSE NAME
ONLY HAS COME DOWN To vs. - John and Peter on the one hand, Andrew and Philip
on the other. 1. These silent and unknown workers are not to be despised. 2.


eid ea 5 5 a ad


108 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cwap. f.
ih REEE CATA TIN 0 ed A ERE EE
Then among Christians such distinctions as famous and non-famous should have
no place. The brilliancy of the one and the obscurity of the other does not lie in
the difference of inner work, but in—(1) Outward circumstances. (2) Inclination.
One mind is called to appear in the front; the other would rather conceal itself.
The one works with quick and firm decision ; the other is slow, silent, and sure.
The one must have a wide field; the other keeps at home. Both are needful. III.
Tur REDEEMER’S CHOICE SHOWS US THAT THE MOST IMPORTANT EVENTS OFTEN BEGIN IN
AN UNLIKELY way. It is a mistake to desire the important to proclaim itself so at
first, and when this is not the case to yield to disappointment and discontent.
Present effectiveness depends on the unbiassed prospect of the future. Out of the
most modest part in Christ’s work something glorious will unfold itself. (Schlezer-
macher.) The beginnings of the Christian Church :—Vast as the Church is now,
there was a time when it consisted of only two members. I. We see wHaT GooD
I8 DONE BY CONTINUALLY TESTIFYING oF Curist. 1. The first time the Baptist
cried “Behold the Lamb of God,” no result seems to have followed. 2. When
John repeated these words two followed Jesus. 3. This simple story is a
pattern of the way in which good has been done to souls in every age. (1)
By testimony. (2) By exalting Christ and not the Church, sacraments, or
ministry. (3) By patient continuance in preaching the truth. Il. Waxat
GOOD A BELIEVER MAY DO TO OTHERS BY SPEAKING TO THEM ABOUT CuRist. 1.
Andrew spoke promptly to Peter. Who can tell what would have happened had
he been silent and reserved, like many Christians now! 2. Of the first three con-
verts, one at least was brought to Jesus by the quiet word of a relative. 3. The
work of testimony must not be left to ministers alone. 4. Those who follow Christ
must abide with him. (Bishop Ryle.) The Apostle Andrew :—A native of Beth-
saida and brother of Peter. Very little known of him. Left the ministry of John
for that of Christ. No sooner attached himself to Christ, than he sought a close
intimacy with Him. He next brought his brother to Christ. Was formally called,
together with Peter, to the apostleship (Mark i. 16,17). Was present, and took a
prominent part in, the feeding of the five thousand (John vi. 5, 9). Introduced the
Greeks to Jesus (John xii. 21-22). Inquired with the three about the destruction
of the Temple (Mark xiii. 4). I. His conversion ro Curist. 1. His old master
effected it, Religious teachers who have little souls are anxious to keep their
disciples entirely under their own influence, and are jealous of greater teachers.
2. His old master effected it through the proclamation of a great truth. The crossis
the converting power. IJ. His interest in Curist, 1. Expressed in the question
addressed to Christ. ‘ We want to know more of Thee.” A desire which is ever
the effect and evidence of true conversion. 2. Heightened by the reply Christ makes
to them, ‘Come and see.” Christ has nothing to conceal, He wishes the world
to know all about Him. Do not judge from hearsay, but search for yourselves.
III. His servick ror Curist. This and John xii. 23 indicates his desire to bring
his fellow-men to Christ. 1. This can only be done by those who are themselves
true disciples. ‘They only have the spirit necessary to give emphasis to the invita-
tion and the character which reflects Christ. 2. The true disciple will do it not ag
a dry duty, but as a delightful privilege. Thisis the highest Christian gratification.
3. This work is not bringing men to our systems and sects, but to Christ. 4. Unless
men are brought to Christ, we do them no lasting service. (D. Thomas, D.D.)
Andrew and John:—I, Discerntnc tHe Lieut. Galilean fishermen, of deep
religious susceptibilities, perhaps belongiig to those who were waiting for the con-
solation of Israel. Leaving their boats, they -cp.iced to the national rendezyous,
where they received the rite of baptism at John’s hands. When Christ was pointed
out, they felt themselves, by personal consistency, intellectual conviction, and
spiritual aspiration, shut up to seek his further acquaintance. So will the light
still be discerned by all who prepare for it by penitence and faith (Isa. lxvi. 2;
Zech. i. 3; Mal. iii. 7; Matt. iv. 17; Acts xx. 21; i John v. 9-12). Faith is the
organ by which Christ’s glory is discerned; Repentance the tear-drop that keeps
the soul’s eye pure and clean. II. Founowine tHe Lieut. Many discern the Light
who neither rejoice in it (iii. 19) nor walk after it (1 Thes. v. 5). Not so these, who
no sooner beheld than they followed. 1. Promptly, as men who—(1) Realized their
need (2 Kings vii. 3). (2) Knew the value of their discovery (Matt. xiii, 44-46).
(3) Recognized the danger of delay (2 Cor. vi. 2; Heb. iv. 7). 2. Humbly: walk-
ing respectfully at a distance behind (Psa. xxxi. 1). 38. Sincerely: their reply to
Christ’s question teaching that openness and frankness which is indispensable in
true religion. 4. Harnestly: embracing Christ’s invitation at once, since the King’s


ee Se


OHAP, 1.] ST. JOHN. 109
SS ieee le a dD ee Se a
business requires haste, and Christ’s kingdom brooks no delay, and becoming so
absorbed that they heeded not the lapse of time. III. Finpivc rae Licut. Their
judgments were convinced that Christ was the Messiah, and go will all those who turn
towards the Light (John viii. 12; ¢f. Hos. vi. 3). In the order of nature, seeing
goes before believing ; in the realm of grace, a soul believes. to see (John xi. 40;
Psa. xxvii. 13). (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) The law of Christian increase :—The most
elementary mathematics treats of two laws of progression, which are distinguished
by the terms ‘‘ arithmetical” and ‘ geometrical.” The one grows by the succes-

sive addition of a fixed quantity; in the other, each successive term is increased by
a fixed proportion of itself. Now, let the quantity added in a progression of the
first sort be never so large, and the proportion in a progression of the second kind
never so small, the last will eventually outstrip the first. But what is more im-
portant to notice is, that the arithmetical progression is the law of mechanical
growth, while the other is the law of the growth of life. A tree does not grow by
the addition of a certain number of twigs and leaves every year; but where a leaf
was one year, there we find a twig with several leaves the next year. The human
race itself follows the law of a living organism, and grows not by the addition of a
certain number each year, but by a certain proportion of the population of the
previous year. If, then, the Church is ever to overtake the world, it must grow,
not by the arithmetical, but by the geometrical law; and as the world had the
start, its rate of growth must be greater. The Church must be a living organism,
and an organism of greater vitality than the human race. Its growth must be
something out of itself, something proportionate to itself, The work of the
individual is the true law of the Church’s growth, stamped upon it from the very
beginning. How easy it was for the three disciples to become six! Each man
brings in one; that is all. And these men are not now apostles or ministers; they
are private Christians—mere babes in Christ. What they did all can do. (P. H. Hoge.)
Small beginnings-:—Jesus gained one follower at His baptism—His baptizer; but this
one was soon multiplied. John bears further witness to Jesus. Two of John’s dis-
ciples hear his testimony, and at once leave their old master and follow the new.
So now Jesus has three disciples. One of them, Andrew, was so glad that he had
found the Messiah, that he started off and found Peter, his brother, and brought
him to Jesus. So another follower was secured, making four in all. The next day
Jesus calls Philip, and he obeys the call; so now there are five. Five are not very
many ; but still five are five times as many as one. Philip felt just as Andrew had
done before him, and sought his friend Nathanael. Nathanael was rather hard to
convince ; so Philip said, Come and see for yourself. Nathanael came, and was
convinced. So now there were six. This was only a small beginning, it is true ;
but most large things begin small. The locomotive that rushes along sixty miles
an hour began its motion by inches. The giant tree of California was once only
half an inch high. The Amazon at its source is narrow enough to allow a child to
jump over it. The question is not so much, Was the beginning small? as, Is the
growth rapid and enduring? How many disciples Jesus has to-day. Millions on
millions. How have these millions of disciples been won? Mohammed won
millions by the power of the sword. But Jesus never authorized the use of physical
power to subdue men to His rule. Jesus’ true disciples have all been won, just as
those first six were won, by gentle means. One has persuaded one more, OF even-
tually, as Peter, thousands. (A. F. Schauffler.) John and Jesus :—Christ, the
Heavenly Bridegroom, came to join to Himself the Church. He said nothing, but
merely came. It was His friend, the Baptist, who put into His the bride’s right
hand. (Chrysostom.)


Ver. 36. Behold the Lamb of God!—This is the main business of the preacher.
Had John been an eloquent declaimer of repentance merely, he would have missed
his life-work. As the stars called ‘‘ the Pointers ” always point to the Pole Star, so
must ministers point to the Redeemer. The Baptist’s eye was fastened on the
Master, while he pointed to the Master. They preach Christ best who see Him
best. I. Learn rHat Curist 1s tHE Lams or Gop. 1. He is the chief of all
sacrifices, the term “ of God”’ often signifying ‘‘ greatest,” “noblest.” (1) Because
it contains all others, (2) Because it does really and for ever what the others
only typified. 2. He is the Lamb of God’s appointing; 3. Of God’s provid-
ing; 4. Of God’s offering; 5. Of God’s setting forth to the sons of men
(Rom. iii, 25). JI. Conrrmpnare Jesus UNDER THAT cHARACTER. 1, Christ, as the
atoning sacrifice, ought to be the principal object of every believer’s thoughta


110 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. 1
iil ERNE NN IS ioe a ELT oe
2. This is the grandest subject of thought in the universe. What are the sciences,
the classics, poetry, in comparison? 38. No subject so well balances the soul as this.
Other themes disturb the mental equilibrium, and overload one faculty at the
expense of others. 4. This is the most needful subject of contemplation. Other
things may be forgotten without serious damage. III. GaTHER INSTRUCTION FROM
Jesus UNDER THAT ASPECT. 1, Doctrinal. (1) The evil of sin. (2) The magnitude
of God’s love. 2. Experimental. Sin vanishes when Christ appears, and grief
and fear, IV. Behold the Lamb of God wirn REVERENCE, as do angels and glorified
spirits. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Beholding the Lamb of God:—I. WHAT ARE WE TO
SEE WHEN WE LOOK oN Jesus? With what eyes? Time was when men saw Him
with their natural eyes, and He was an offence. Time will be when every eye shall
see Him, and He will be to many a terror. In heaven He is seen with glorified
eyes. To us now He may be seen with the eye of faith. Using this, not having
seen Him, we love Him and receive life from Him. What is the sight? 1. The
great Creator (ver. 1). 2. The great Creator manifested in the flesh. 3. The
Divine fulness for the salvation of men. (1) The full expiation of sin. (2) All
the grace to be communicated to His saints. (3) Gracefor grace. (4) All supplies
necessary for living and dying, obeying and suffering, endurance and triumph, pro-
gress and perfection. II. For wHAT ENDS ARE WE TO CONTEMPLATE Him. 1. That
we may have tenderness of heart under sin. Here is a sight to soften stony hearts.
2. That we may have relief under conviction of sin. If He can take away the sin
of the world, He can take away a world of sininyou. 3. That we may have courage
and patience under all suffering. As He was in the world,so must we be. 4. That
we may not stagger at the promises through unbelief. The Messianic prophecies
were fulfilled in Him. Shall we, then, disbelieve that those which concern us will
be broken. (A. Beith,D.D.) The Lamb of God:—I. Srmn. 1. By whom? By the
Forerunner, who had been preparing His way; as all will—first here in spirit,
afterwards in body; first by faith, and afterwards by sight; who b¥ humility, faith,
and desire, make themselves ready for His coming (Matt. v. 8; John xvi. 16;
1 John iii. 2). 2. When? On the day after the preceding vision. Christ seldom
puts His followers off with one sight of Himself: view follows upon view, according
to growth in seeing and desiring. 3. Where? On the river’s bank, as He was
separating Himself from the Baptist to commence His own work. Christ is best
seen at a distance from His servants. 4. Why? To be pointed out. For this
same reason Christ appears to His servants now. II. Pornrep our. 1. In what
character? As the Lamb of God. Suggestive of—(1) Personal innocence or sin-
Jessness. (2) The meek and unresisting patience with which he should carry on
His work, (3) The propitiatory character of His mission :—the three main themes
of the gospel ministry. 2. In what manner? With a Behold: to indicate—(1)
The importance of the announcement. (2) The earnestness of the herald. (3) The
liveliness of mind with which the announcement should be welcomed. 3. With
what intention? To send men to Christ. 4. With what result? Two of his
disciples follow Christ (Isa.lv, 11). III. Fornowrp. 1. Promptly. Delay imprudent
and dangerous. If Christ be what the Baptist says, there is no time to be lost.
2. Inquiringly. This is all that Christ desires at first. The chief complaint is that
men reject Him without examining His credentials. 8. Finally. So will all who
seek Him with the whole heart. 4, Exemplarily. They led the way to a larger
movement. Lessons: 1. The proper business of the Christian ministry: to point
out Christ to the world, and to point the world to Christ. 2. The necessary quali-
fication of the ministry: to behold Christ, and have a personal insight into the
character and work of the Saviour. 3. The encouraging reward of the ministry :
to behold disciples going over to and following the Saviour. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.)
Lhe Lamb of God :—I. Tue import of THE APPELLATION. 1. It had respect to the
personal character of Christ. He was a perfect pattern of (1) innocence and (2)
patience. It was thus that He illustrated, in His own example, the nature and genius
of the gospel dispensation, as superior to every other. 2.It had a distinct reference
to the great design of His appearance and death. It marks out His sacrificial cha-
racter, prefigured by the legal offerings, more particularly the paschal lamb, the most
ancient and important. (1) The passover commemorated a great deliverance, and pre-
figured a greater. (2) The passover averted an inevitable destruction; so did the
sacrifice of Christ. (3) In both cases there is no natural connection between the
means and the end; the benefit is moral, not physical. The sprinkling blood was
simply of Divine appointment, as a sign to arrest the progress of the destroying
angel. So between the sacrifice of Christ and the expiation of guilt the relation ig


letersi Loi


CHAP 1.] ST, JOHN. 111


moral, resulting from the will of God. (4) The personal qualities in t icti
are similar. The lamb was to be Senne spot a plontehs 80 was Chri 65) The
blood of the one had to be sprinkled, so that of the Other must beapplied. (6) While
many of the legal sacrifices were offered by individuals, the paschal lamb was
required to be slain and offered by the whole congregation of Israel, it being under-
stood that he who neglected this important sacrifice, would lose its benefit—would
be cut off from the congregation. ‘Behold’? [here] ‘the Lamb of Ged that taketh
away the sin of the world!” (7) The time of slaying in both cases was the evening.
(8) Not a bone was broken in either. (9) The paschal lamb was prepared by fire
signifying the agonies of the Lamb of God. How strangely mistaken, therefore,
those who represent Christ’s death as an example or a martyrdom for truth. I.
THE SPIRIT AND DESIGN OF THE EXCLAMATION. It expresses the claim of Christ to
attention from beings of every order. 1. Those who remain, as sinners, in their
original character and state. There are three qualities which entitle an object to
our regard: (1) Intrinsic greatness—e.g., the wonders of the material world ; those
of the intellectual and moral universe ; but here is something incomparably greater
—Incarnate Deity. (2) Novelty. What so original as the Invisible Creator clothed
in mortal flesh; the Ancient of Days cradled as an Infant; He who upholdeth all
things sinking under a weight of suffering; the Lord of Glory expiring on the cross;
the Light of the world sustaining an awful eclipse; the Sun of Righteousness
immerged in the shadow of death? (3) Usefulness. The Lamb of God is the only
Saviour. 2. Those who have repented and believed. The efficacy of this sacrifice
covers all the needs of the spiritual life. 3. The redeemed in the world of glory.
They owe their position and their continuance in it to the Lamb of God. 4, The
holy angels, who may probably be secured in that felicity to which saints are pro-
moted, by the mediation of Jesus Christ. 5. God Himself. To Him the Redeemer
is an object of complacency and satisfaction. (Robert Hall.) Christ’s whole
character must be studied :—If you wish to look at a portrait of Raphael’s, what
would you think to see only the forehead uncovered, and then only the eyes, and so
on, until all the features had been separately seen? Could you gain a true idea of
the picture as a whole? Yet this is the way men look at the picture of Christ in
the gospels, reading a few verses and mottoes here and there, and never considering
the life in its wholeness and harmony. (H. W. Beecher.) A two-fold use of the
eyes :—It is a beautiful remark of an old divine, that eyes are made for two things
at least; first, to look with, and next, to weep with. The eye which looks to the
pierced One is the eye which weeps for Hira. Oh soul, when thou comest to look
where all eyes should look, even to Him who was pierced, then thine eye begins to
weep for that for which all eyes should weep, even the sin which slew thy Saviour!
There is no saving repentance except within sight of the cross.


Vers. 37-39. And the two disciples heard Him speak.—The first two disciples :
—I. THE FRUIT OF GRACE IN THESE Two pisciPpLES. 1. They followed Jesus.
When a man has become a doer of the Word, he ever seeks increased knowledge.
2. They acknowledged His high character as a Master on whose instruction they
desired to wait. It is a blessed progress when the issue of outward preaching is to
make men desire that inward teaching which is by the saving power of Christ. 3.
They sought intimate acquaintance with Him. No short interview was sufficient.
II. Cunist’s TREATMENT oF THE Two bDiscipLEs. 1. He took notice that they
followed Him. Why did He not speak? Because He would honour His own word,
as spoken by the Baptist, and give time for its proper effect, Christ knows those
who are following Him, however hidden, silent, and feeble. 2. He set them on
examining their purpose in following Him. 3. He gave them most welcome invi-
tation and grateful entertainment. (4. Beith, D.D.) John and Andrew :—I. It
was not an accident that the first words which the Master spoke in His Messianic
office were THE PROFOUNDLY SIGNIFICANT QUESTION, “ What seek ye?”’ which sug-
gests—1. The need of having a clear consciousness of what is our object in life.
(1) Most men have never answered that question, but are driven by circumstances,
and whose incoherent, unreflective lives are a shame to their manhood. (2) Others
are full of low, unworthy aims. (3) If we would ask this question and answer it
thoroughly we should not make so many mistakes, If we knew what we were really
seeking we should know where to go and look for it. 2. These words are also a
veiled promise. (1) Christ asks all such questions, not for His information, but for our
strengthening. (2) The condition of the fulfilment of the promise is that a suppliant
is conscious of His own wants, and turns to Christ for their supply. (3) Christ has


112 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, . [cnar. t.


a ee
done what He has promised. No man can ask from Christ what He cannot or will
not bestow. II. The second words which Christ speaks are 4 MERCIFUL INVITATION
TO THE worLD. The disciples’ answer was simple and timid. They did not venture
to say, ‘‘ May we talk to you?” ‘ Will you take us to be your disciples?” All
they can muster courage to ask now is, ‘‘ Where dwellest Thou?” At another
time, perhaps, we will go to this Rabbi and speak with Him. His answer is ‘‘ Come
now!” 1. Christ is always glad when people resortto Him. When He was
here in the world, no hour was inconvenient or inopportune. He was never im-
patient or wearied. 2. This invitation is a distinct call to first hand knowledge of
Christ. 3. This isa call to the personal act of faith. ‘ Come” and ‘‘see” are
standing emblems of faith. III. The words of the Evangelist are 4 PARABLE OF THE ;
BLESSED EXPERIENCE WHICH BINDS MEN’S HEARTS TO JESUS FOR EVER. 1. ‘‘ Dwelt”
and ‘‘ abode” are the same words in the original, and express the close, still com-
munion which the soul may have with Jesus Christ. 2. John had nothing to say
to the world about what the Master said to him and his brother in that long day of
communion. A lesson for a great deal of blatant talk about conversion and the
details thereof. 3. The impression of Christ’s own personality is the strongest
force to make disciples. 4. The experience of the grace and sweetness of the
Saviour binds men to Him as nothing else will. (A. Maclaren, D.D.) The
character of a leader shown by the character of his following :—One gets an idea
of the greatness of a chief of men from the greatness of those whom he gathers '
around him, and who carry out his plans. ‘Thus, for example, one infers that
Cromwell must have been a great-natured man, from the fact that he had Howe for
his chaplain, Milton and Marvell for his secretaries, Blake for his admiral, and so
on. Noscitur a sociis, and we might add, a servis. So we reason, perhaps un-
consciously, in the case of other historicnames. Speaking reverently, I would say,
that in a parallel manner, we recognize the ‘‘ sovran”’ greatness of our Lord in the
fact that He gathered into His service and commanded men of such varied and
magnificent natures as a Peter, a John, and a Paul; not to speak of men in other
times. His heroes are no less wonderful than the most wonderful in the ancient
days of Israel. (J. Culross, D.D.) The difference between the conversion of John
and the conversion of Paul :—In the case of Paul, we find a man of powerful nature
committed out and out against the cause of Jesus, thoroughly conscientious in his
hostility, not merely standing out against the Gospel as a fraud or delusion,
blasphemous in its every essence, but resolved to put it down. This man is sud-
denly arrested in the mid-career of his opposition. There is a mighty shock to his
nature; and for three days he can neither eat nor drink. With John it seems to
have been otherwise. We cannot indeed tell what the Baptist’s ministry may have
been to him ; how the sorrows of death may have compassed him and the pains of
hell gat hold upon him. But in coming to Jesus, he is ‘‘ drawn,” as with the cords
of love and the bands of aman. There are those who think that all is not right with
a man unless there is something approaching convulsion in the bringing of him to
God. For myself, I entertain no manner of doubt that the great change is often
accomplished thus, But the convulsion is not of the essence of the change. Often
it is the sign of resistance and struggle against God, and has more to do with un-
belief than with faith. Let us not limit God, or prescribe to Him, but accept His
grace in whatever way it comes. (Ibid.) Jesus saw them following.—There
are different causes of following one who is worthy ofattention. A good man may
be followed by an enemy from a desire to injure him; he may be followed in sus-
picion and doubt; he may be followed from mere curiosity ; he may be followed in
the hope of purely personal gain; he may be followed in loving devotedness. The
following may be a good sign, or it may be an eyil sign, on the part of those who
foliow. (H. C. Trumbull, D.D.) Rabbi.—The Jewish terms of honour for their
religious teachers were three. These were, in ascending honour, Rabh, Rabbi
Rabban, the last term being given in cases only of the extremestrarity. As regards
the relation of the rabbi to the people, the Sages advised every man: ‘Chose for
thee a Master, and withdraw from doubt ;” that is, Chose for yourself a rabbi who
can solve the legal and casuistical questions which perplex you. Jesus was not a
rabbi in the strict sense; but the title was given to Him in point of courtesy by
those who would learn from Him. (A. F. Schauffler.) What seek ye ?—It isa blank
cheque that He puts into their hands to fill up. It is the key of His treasure-house
which He offers to us all, with the assured confidence that if we open it we shall
find all that we need. Christ stands before us like some of those fountains erected
at some great national festival, out of which pour for all the multitude every


i a i


ae ae


oOnaP, 1] ST. JOHN. 113
ee —— ee

variety of draught which they desire, and each man that goes with his em

gets it filled with that which he wishes. ‘ What wok, 7uine! Wisdom? You
students, you thinkers, you young men that are fighting with intellectual difficulties,
“What seek ye?” Truth? He gives us that. You others, “What seek ye?”
Love, peace, victory, self-control, hope, anodyne for sorrow? Whatever you desire,

you will find in Jesus Christ. The first words with which He broke the silence,
when He spake to man as the Messias, were at once a searching question, probing
their aims and purposes, and a gracious promise pledging Him to a task not beyond
His power, however far beyond that of all others—even the task of giving to each
man His heart’s desire. ‘“ What seek ye?” ‘Seek, and ye shall find.” (A.
Maclaren, D.D.) Where dwellest thou ?—By this example we are taught from
the first rudiment of the Church—1. That we ought to draw such a relish for
Christ as will excite our desire for profit. 2. That we ought not to be satisfied with
a mere passing look, but that we ought to seek Christ’s dwelling that He may
receive us as guests. For there are many who smell the gospel at a distance only,

and thus allow Christ suddenly to disappear, and all that they have learned con-

cerning Him to pass away. (Calvin.) Come and see.—Investigation the way to
Faith:—I. THe INVESTIGATION BY WHICH CHRIST’S EARTHLY FOLLOWERS GAINED
raiTH IN His mission. Invited by Christ, they spend many hours with Him, and
come away convinced of His Messiahship; He had nothing to conceal. The more
they know the clearer His glory. In this He is a contrast to most of the world’s

heroes and an example to all teachers, II. Tum INVESTIGATION BY WHICH STUDENTS
or CHRIST’s BIOGRAPHY GAJN FAITH IN CHRIST’s CHARACTER, proving it to be—1.

Original. 2. Beautiful. 3. Perfect. III. Tu mnvestication BY WHICH STUDENTS OF
HISTORY GAIN FAITH IN CHRIST’S INFLUENCE, proving its—1. Might. 2. Beneficence.

IV. THE INVESTIGATION BY WHICH INQUIRERS FOR PERSONAL SALVATION GAIN FAITH
in Curist Hmsztr, This faith can only be possessed by those who hold intelli-

gent, devout, constant communion with Him. (Urijah R. Thomas.) A loving
invitation. At the beginning of the gospel Christ says, ‘‘Come and see;” at the

close, ‘‘Come and dine.” The first is for babes in Christ, the second for strong men.

The first is the beginning of spiritual life, the second a high after privilege, and the

result of it. The first is the Gospel’s cry to those outside its pale, the second to

those who have embraced it. Christ has nothing to conceal. Romanism may
conceal its worship under the Latin tongue, difficult phraseology and polished
periods may hide the teaching of professed protestants. We have here—I. AN
ENCOURAGEMENT TO SINNERS. ‘There are four ways by which persons are to ‘*Come
and see.”’ 1. By observation, Many persons are careless; they will consider the
last new novel, but concerning Christ they have no curiosity. 2. By diligent study
of Holy Scripture. The worst read book is the Bible. People read averse or half a
chapter and think they understand it. But they do not read Shakespeare in that

way. 3. By hearing the Gospel. What do you come to God’s house for? To

admire the eloquence of man? Go to the theatre or senate if that be your errand.

To God’s house we should resort to learn to see for ourselves the Lord Jesus. 4.

By believing. The best way of knowing about Christ is to try Him. The only way
of knowing His power to forgive sins is to trust Him to forgive yours, II. An

ADDRESS TO BEGINNERS IN THE SCHOOL oF CuRist. We ought not to be satisfied
with merely being saved. Our next business is to learn more of Christ, 1. For
the understanding of doctrine. 2. For the fulfilment of promises, 3. For the

ripening of experience. III. Tum cry or tHE GosPeL To Evrry sInNER. It is
more pleasing to use the eye than the ear. You can keep children as happy as
birds in the air with a picture-book, when they would probably go to sleep if you

were to talk to them. Christ bids us use the eye. What is there to see? Christ—
1, Incarnate. 2. Crucified, 3. Risen. Comeand see. (C.H. Spurgeon.) Man invit-
ing Christ to his dwelling :--As He invited the disciples of John to see where He
dwelt, so we should be able to invite Him to see where we dwell, and to look if there
be in our habitations anything which betrays a spirit contrary to His. (J.
Fawcett, M.A.) The dwelling-place of Jesus:—1. So humble and obscure that
tradition, so industrious in marking every spot trodden by His blessed feet, fails to
point it out. 2. In this lowly dwelling Christ first preached His gospel. 3. It was*
the first sanctuary of the Christian faith. Where does Christ dwell now? I. In
HEAVEN (Luke xxiv. 51; Heb. x.12), 1. Then Heis visible only tofaith? 2. There
He ever lives to make intercession. II. In His cuurcm (Hxod. xx. 24; Matt. xviii.
20). 1. There He is worshipped. 2. Therewe commune with Him. III, In rue
HEARTS oF His FAITHFUL PEOPLE (Proy. xxiii. 26; Eph. iii. 17). 1. In spite of


Te


114 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cHar. %
icin UENae rename DON RE SS Si re A
their unworthiness. 2. In response tofaith and love. 3, To animate hope. (John
N. Norton.) A memorable day :—I. For Jusvs. The first fruits of His redeem-
ing work. II. For Jonn. The beginning of a new life. ILI. For THE cHURCH.
The day of its foundation. IV. For THu wortp. A promise of its regeneration.
Lesson; the importance of little things. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.)_ | Experience of
Christ better than description of Him :—An affecting scene occurred in the streets of
Baltimore. ‘Two little sisters were looking through a large store window at the
toys within, and trying to describe what they saw to a little blind sister who was
with them. They were exhausting their feeble powers of description to bring home
to the mind of their blind companion what they saw, although she listened greedily.
But, after all, they failed to present anything more than an imperfect representa-
tion. The gentleman who saw the circumstance said that it was extremely touch-
ing, that they tried hard to describe the collection in the store, but they could not
do it. That is just like trying to tell you of Christ. We may exhaust our powers
of description, but the effect will be very moderate. You must come and see His
beauties with your own eyes.


Vers. 40-41. One of the two which heard John speak.—Andrew :—I. THE
EARNEST SEEKER AFTER SALVATION. 1. His mind had been prepared—(1) By the preach-
ing of the Baptist—(2) By independent reflection and Bible study. 2. He came to
Jesus with an openheartedness worthy of imitation. He had his own notions,
doubtless, about the grandeur of Israel’s Messiah; but was not offended when the
solitary, unattended man was pointed out to him. Some, in the hasty revulsion
of feeling, would have turned away indisdain. But Andrew’s faith mastered his pre-
judice. 3. His search was marked byindomitable earnestness. He followed Jesus,
and by addressing Him as Rabbi, puts himself under His teaching, and follows Him
home, II. THe saTIsrIED BELIEVER IN Jesus. 1. The openheartedness of Christi-
anity. ‘‘Behold the Lamb!” ‘Come and see.” There is no disguise, fornone is
needed. Christianity requires intelligence, reliance, not blind credulity. Ancient
mythology and modern superstitions at Delphos, or Mecca, or Rome, had and have
their reserve and mystery; but Christianity has light in herself, and studies no con-
cealment. 2, The satisfactoriness of Christianity. When you come and see, there
is always something to be seen. The search for Christ yields an intellectual
and emotional satisfaction. The charge is warmly felt as well as intelligently
realized. ‘* We have found the Messiah.” III. THe ENERGETIC misstonaRY. 1.
He proclaims the truth to his brother, 2. He resumes his secular duties. It was
a great soul that could bear to be with Jesus at night, and to be fishing in the
morning. 38. What a contrast between the first two brothers in the New Testament
and the first two brothers of the Old. (W. M. Punshon, LL.D.) The conduct of
Andrew illustrates—I. The general duty of ENDEAVOURING TO IMPART TO OTHERS THE
SPIRITUAL BLESSINGS ENJOYED BY OURSELVES. There is all the difference here between
natural and Spiritual things. The discovery of a hidden treasure would beget no
anxiety that others should know of it. The discovery of a remedy for a direful disease
would inspire eagerness in mostmen to give it a wide notoriety ; but not necessarily in
all cases, inasmuch as the discovery involves no change in the character. But the man
who has lighted on heavenly treasure has found that, the direct tendency of which is to
the overcoming of selfishness. A man renewed by God’s Spirit, who does not desire
and seek the renewal of others, is a contradictionin terms. The wealth acquired by
the believer is kept through being dispersed ; the cure accomplished through the
blood of the Redeemer is a cure which is radical only in proportion as it seeks its
own extension. Let, then, men take it as a test by which to try their own spiritual
condition, Andrew findeth his brother Simon. He felt at once the communicative
and diffusive nature of religion. II. The special duty of BEGINNING WITH THOSE
WITH WHOM WE ARE MORE IMMEDIATELY CONNECTED. 1. Our own household and
relatives have the first claim upon us; parents and masters are bound, if they would
imitate Andrew, to provide first for their own children and servants ; or parishioners
or citizens are bound to provide for their own poor, before they attempt the relief of
other parishes and other cities. To Englishmen, their necessitous countrymen
et pecially come first, before they turn their attention to the African or New Zealander.
There is nothing of selfishness in this, We must enlarge our operations with the
enlargement of our ability. But God may be said to have parcelled out mankind into
concentric circles, and he hath made it incumbent upon us that we go carefully round
the inner circle before we pass on to the outer ; so that, while benevolence is not to be
churlishly limited, she is not to leave waste ground here, in her eagerness to spread


eS a eee ae


car, 1.] ST. JOHN. 115


culture over some remote and savage section of the earth. 2. But as Andrew did
not stop short at his brother, so home missions must expand into foreign. 3.
The great lesson, however, is that we should care for the conversion of those with
whom we were associated when unconverted. The merchant, who nearly lost his soul
in hunting after gain, but who is now seeking treasure above—is he doing his best to
cause those who were one with him in the struggle after perishable wealth to be one
with him in labouring for the incorruptible? The young man who was the slave
of vice, driven headlong by his passions, and who has now forsaken the haunts
of licentiousness—is he striving to withdraw from those pleasures his former
associates, and to lead them to take delight in heavenly things? The young woman
whose whole mind was engaged in frivolous amusements, but who now seems awake
to the solemnities of eternity—is it her endeavour to teach the thoughtless with
whom she squandered away life that there is something more to be cared for than
dress, and something more communicative of happiness than the dance? All such
cases may be gathered under the “ first”? of our text. The converted man’s first
care will be for those with whom he has been intimately associated, either in
relationship, or friendship, or business. (H. Melvill,B.D.) Andrew’s ministry :—
I. WHATEVER THERE IS IN FAMILY RELATIONSHIP THAT CAN BRING MEN TO JESUS
SHOULD HAVE ITS FULL AND FAIR PLACE. Many people who ought not only be more
useful, but more happy and healthy, by sharing as far as possible their new found
light and joy with those who are near and dear to them, have become the merest
religious recluses. Sometimes it is difficult to bring any direct influence to bear.
How important, therefore, that every indirect influence should be wisely employed.
And all have this. II. THE vaLUE oF THIS UNCONSCIOUS INFLUENCE. Let the
fountain of our inner life be pure, and its manifold streams entering the most arid
wastes will promote verdure and blessing in a hundred unforeseen forms. III. Tux
DIRECT INFLUENCE OF A PERSONAL TESTIMONY. Men need to be told of the source of
blessing, and the burden of the testimony rests with those who have heard. There
are some things, the knowledge of which would brighten men’s lives, and these
things you know. Tell them. God takes hold of the natural love of communica-
ting, and uses it for the good of humanity. You are ready enough with your advice on
most-matters, be ready with these good news of God. IV. THE QUESTION OF PER-
SONAL CONVICTION AND EXPERIENCE. An inward intelligent experience will ever be the
first demand of the Church. If we felt the power of the indwelling Christ, He
would speak in us and work by us. If we have no light we cannot let it shine ;
but if we have we must not put it under a bushel, or it will go out. V. A wonpER-
FUL ENCOURAGEMENT TO MEN OF RETIRING DISPOSITION OR LIMITED CAPABILITIES. We
never read much of Andrew; and since we cannot tell the possible result of any
act or influence, however insignificant, it becomes us not to disparage anyone. And
who shall call an action insignificant? Like a winged seed carried by the wind to
some barren islet, bearing in its bosom the germs of all future loveliness and
verdure; so blessed oft is the deed of a good man. (G. J. Procter.) Coming to
Jesus, a motive for bringing others to Him :—I. TRUE RELIGION IS THE RESULT OF PER-
SONAL CONVICTION RESPECTING THE CLAIMS OF Jesus Curist. You must possess that
religion or you can never impart it. ‘I will bless thee and thou shalt be atblessing.”
‘“‘ He that believeth on Me shall never thirst, and from within him shall flow rivers of
living water.” The truth of Christ must first be known, and the knowledge ot
Christ is essentially connected with the love of Christ as the medium and material
of that knowledge. We have in the narrative an illustration of the way in which
personal religion commences. When directed to Christ, the first disciples were
not satisfied with a passing glance, but they looked to Jesus and followed Him.
Then commenced their friendship with Christ. There is an immense diversity in
the operations of the Spirit. Some are brought at once out of darkness into light.
Others by a gradual method: but the results are the same. They are brought to
Jesus as the result of inquiry marked by prayer and solicitude. And there is every-
thing in the character and religion of Christ to deserve and challenge inquiry.
These things were not done in a corner ; everything will bear the light. II. Tuosz
WHO HAVE BECOME THE DISCIPLES OF CHRIST WILL BE ANXIOUSLY CONCERNED TO BRING
orgEeRs To Him. Everything in religion is gloriously expansive, 1. Our object in
all our Church operations is not sectarian, but to bring men to Christ. Keep this
object before you in your families, neighbourhood, communities. If you aim at
anything short of this you will fail to reach even your subordinate object. While, on
the other hand, in enlarging our minds to the amplitude and sublimity of this higher
object, we shall lay the most enduring basis for the accomplishment of even the


116 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (CHAP. I,
ee


minor object. 2. Contemplate your responsibility. You have the great remedy
for the world’s moral diseases ; you dare not keep it to yourselves. 3, Your oppor-
tunities. No man was ever disposed to do good who did not find ample opportunities
as the member of a family, as a master or a servant, as a Church member. 4.
Your encouragement: The command of Christ, the assurance of His presence, the
success already secured, and the certainty of final success. (J. Fletcher, D.D.)
The magnet and the turning-point :—No literature is more interesting or instructive
than biography. Sacred biography has peculiar demands upon us. There is no
part of the life of an individual which possesses more interest than its turning-
point in the case of a statesman, soldier, merchant, but above all a Christian.
Our text describes the turning-point of a man who stands conspicuous in sacred
biography, the spiritual first moment of Peter. Notice—I. Taz Brine wHoIs THE
OBJECT OF ATTRACTION. 1. His name: Jesus, Saviour, who was perfect God and
perfect man. 2. His title, Messias: inclusive of all His offices, Prophet, Priest,
King, Lamb of God, Baptizer with the Spirit. II. Tuz work wrovent. “He
brought him to Jesus.” 1. Andrew was the instrument, and the means he used was
the proclamation of Christ. Have you a brother? Bring him to Jesus. 2. God
was the efficient agent (1 Cor. ii. 14; John vi. 44,45). III. THe consequences
RESULTING FROM THIS WoRK. The Christian Church. (J. T. Whitestone, A.B.)
The Sunday-school teacher :—I. THE GREAT OBJECT SOUGHT TO BE ACCOMPLISHED, 1.
Introduction to Jesus. 2. Interest in Jesus. 3. Instruction from Jesus. 4.
Intimacy with Jesus. II. Tae QuaLirIcATIONS WHICH TEACHERS OUGHT TO POSSESS TO
SECURE THIS GREAT OBJECT. 1. Sincere and ardent piety. 2. An enlightened know-
ledge of Christ and the method of salvation by Him. 3. An adaptation in the
mode of instruction to the disposition of the child. 4. An exhibition of the prac-
tical effects of the knowledge of Christ in your conduct. III. THE spEciAL EFFECTS
RESULTING FROM THE ATTAINMENT OF THIS GREAT OBJECT. 1. Christ will be glorified.
2. The Church will be enlarged. 3. The world will be benefited. 4. Your labours
will be rewarded. Conclusion: Notice—1. The importance of looking out for
souls to bring them to Jesus. 2, The value of union. (J. Sherman.) Simon
Peter brought by his orother to Jesus :—I. JEsus 18 THE BEING TO WHOM MEN SHOULD
come, 1. What is it for men to come? Andrew and his brother came corporeally.
The corporeal was the sign of a mental state which is equivalent to believing. 2.
‘Why men should come to Christ for salvation. II. WHEN MEN HAVE COME TO JESUS
THEY SHOULD ENDEAVOUR TO BRING OTHERS TO Him. 1, The argument by which this
duty is confirmed. Christ has committed His cause into their hands. They are
His property. He appeals to their love to Him and their tender concern for souls,
to bring the world to Him. 2. The manner in which that duty must be performed.
(1) By the exhibition of the truth in the exercise of the ministry, the circulation
of the Bible, the spread of good literature, education, visitation, and the ordinary
intercourse of domestic and social life. (2) By supplicating the influence of the
Divine Spirit to sanction and bless the means employed. III. In ENDEAVOURING TO
BRING OTHERS TO CHRIST, MEN SHOULD CHERISH ESPECIAL ANXIETY AND EFFORT ON BE-
HALF OF THEIR OWN CONNECTIONS AND FRIENDS. This is beautifully illustrated in the
New Testament. Andrew, the woman of Samaria, Cornelius, &. 1. In justifica-
tion of this principle, notice that—(1) The relationships of kindred or affection are
formed under the physical or moral providence of God. (2) God has implanted or
inspired in connection with these relationships certain affections which grow out of
them and are appropriate to them. (3) The due culture of these affections issue in
important results, and neglect and failure are fraught with great evils. (4) The
solicitude ought to operate in matters which affect the interest and happiness of
the soul, 2. The order of exertion will not disqualify or prevent from the larger
and more expanded sphere of operation as regards the general welfare of mankind.
3. Inquire how you who have been brought to Jesus have fulfilled your obligations.
IV. ENDEAVOURS TO BRING OTHERS TO JESUS, WHEN RIGHTLY CONDUCTED, ARE MUCH
ENCOURAGED BY THE HOPE AND PROSPECT OF success. 1. Success does frequently
attend such endeavours, as is seen in the cases of Andrew and the Samaritan woman.
And many a preacher, Sunday-school teacher, tract distributer, &c., could tell a
similar tale; and so could parents and brothers. 2. Success in these endeavours is
eminently and surpassingly delightful, because—(1) Of the valueofthe soul. (2) Of
the opening up of channels of usefulness in connection with the cross of Christ. Who
can tell where a single conversion will terminate? Think of Doddridge, Whitefield
Morison. (3) Of the connection of success with our everlasting reward. (J. Parsons.)
Simon Peter ;—I, THE WITNESS OF THE DISCIPLES, We see—l. How instinctive and


aS Ld is.


omar. 1.] ST. JOHN. 117


natural the impulse is when a man has found Jesus Christ to tell someone else
about Him. Nobody said to Andrew, “Go and look for your brother!” If aman
has a real conviction, he cannot rest until he has shared it with some one else.
Even a dog that has had its leg mended will bring other limping dogs to the
mender. How isitin the world? And are Christians to be dumb when worldlings
are in earnest 2 This man before he was four and twenty hours a disciple had made
another. Have you made one in the same number of years? 2, He first findeth
his own brother. There was a second, then, that found somebody. Andrew found
Peter before John found James, Each of the original pair of disciples brought the
nearest to him in blood and affection to Christ. (1) Home, then, presents the
natural channel for Christian work. It is a poor affair if all your philanthropy
and Christian energy go off noisily in Sunday-schools and mission stations, and if
the people at your own fireside never hear anything of Him whom you say you love.
(2) But the principle has a wider application. Why has God placed you where you
are? For business and personal ends? Yes, partly. But where a man who knows
and loves Christ is brought into neighbourly contact with thousands who do not,
he is thereby constituted his brother’s keeper. If you live in luxury in your own
ventilated and well-drained villa, and take no heed to the typhoid fever or cholera
in the slums at the back, the chances are that the disease will find its way to your
wife and children. And Christians who, living among godless people, do not try to
heal them will be infected by them. 3. The simple Word, which is the most
powerful means of influencing most men. Andrew did not argue. Some of us
cannot do that, and some of us are not influenced by argument. The mightiest
argument is, ‘‘ We have found the Messias”’; and if you have you can say so.
Never mind how; anyhow. 4. Remembér the beginnings of the Christian Church ;
two men, each of whom found his brother. Two snowflakes on the top of the
mountain are an avalanche by the time they reach the valley. II. Tue srnr-
REVELATION oF THE Master. 1. He shows Himself possessed of supernatural and
thorough knowledge. (1) The look described by an unusual word was a‘penetrating
gaze which regarded Peter with fixed attention. It must have been remarkable to
have lived in John’s memory for all those years. (2) The saying was meant to
imply more than natural knowledge. ‘‘ Thouart Simon.” “Thou God seest me,’ an
unwelcome thought to many and to us unless, through Christ. 2. He changes
Simon’s name, and s0 (1) reveals His absolute possession of him, Jehovah changed
the names of Abraham and Jacob. Babylonian kings changed the names of their
vassal princes ; masters those of their slaves; husbands those of their wives. We
belong to Him altogether because He has given Himself altogether for us. (2)
Reveals His power and promise to bestow a new character, new functions, new
honours. Peter was by no means Peter then. Like the granite, all fluid and hot,
he needed to cool in order to solidify into rock. But he eventually became all that
Christ here meant him to be. No man’s character is so obstinately rooted in evil
but Christ can change its set and direction. He will not maxe Peter into a John,
but He will deliver Feter from the defects of his qualities, and lead them up into a
nobler region. The process may be long and painful, but it will be sure. (A. Mac-
laren, D.D.) “ Introductor to Christ” :—This is the appropriate name given by
Bede to Andrew, who brought his brother and the Greeks (chap. xii. 20) to Christ,
J, SprrivvaAL USEFULNESS BEGINS IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE. Before we can intro-
duce any one to the Saviour we must have found Him ourselves, I. Sprirvan
USEFULNESS OFTEN WORKS BY PERSONAL TESTIMONY. The prevalence of a blatant
religionism should not hinder the Christian man or woman giving the witness not
only of life, but also of lip, on all right occasions, ILI, SprrirvaL UsEFULNESS MAY
BEGIN WITH THE MEMBERS OF OUR OWN HOUSEHOLDS. Sometimes the influence to be
exerted must be indirect and quiet, rather than by appeal and word; but even
then the time comes to speak, in order to lead others nearer to the truth who are of
our own kith and kin. IV. SrrrirvaL USEFULNESS DOES NOT DEMAND OUTSHINING
apiuities, St. Andrew, of whom we read little, led St. Peter, of whom we read
much, (Family Churchman.) Finding and following (cf. Matt. iv. 19):—I.
Fotiowine to FInp. Christ was found—1. By association with the godly. 2. By
listening attentively. 3. By unhesitating action. 4. By reverential inquiry. II.
Finvine To rotzow. 1. The first to become a disciple is the first to be selected as
an apostle. 2 After the definite summons he followed to serve. (Tertius.)
Christian service:—I. Andrew rinpina Peter. 1, Andrew sought his brother at
once. (1) John and Andrew set out to find their brothers. Andrew was the first
to find his. (2) Andrew found his brother first and others subsequently. 2. Andrew


Pa


118 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [onar. 1
ne ee
was not specially gifted; but what gift he had he used for Christ. 3. Andrew was
not specially commissioned to go and convert others. The authorization was given
later on. IL, Andrew sPEakina To Simon. 1. Andrew did not preach or argue;
he simply talked to him. 2. He talked earnestly. You have no fine language, or
polished phrases, or balanced periods, but a few brief words coming hot from the
heart. Intense earnestness has no leisure to indulge in the luxury of elocutionary
flourishes. 3. His conversation was inspired by brotherly love. ‘‘ His own brother,”
indicative of close, warm friendship. 4. His announcement was marked by in-
completeness. Had he been asked to explain he would have been embarrassed.
But imperfect teaching is often blessed, If you cannot speak the whole truth, speak
half of it. Dotato planters are never afraid of splitting the seed if they can only
secure an eye in each half. See that your fragment of truth has an eye in it.
5. His talk was characterized by much assurance. ‘‘ We have found,” not, I think,
or I hope. Religious dogmatism is much deprecated in certain quarters. You
may dogmatize as much as you like against theology, but you are warned under
heavy penalties not to dogmatize in its favour. But the dogmatists are the suc-
cessful evangelists after all. III. Andrew princine Simon to Christ. 1. Our chief
aim should be to lead men to Christ, not to any particular sect. Proselytization is
not conversion. 2. Creeds and theologies should be subordinated to Christ. Men
should be brought to Christ, not to our own systera of divinity. If creeds stand in
the way of Christ, then away with creeds. They are for edification, not conversion.
3. Christ should be placed above the Bible itself. It is possible for men to read it
diligently and yet stop with it, instead of making their way to the interior court to
contemplate the inner radiance. There is not a town or house in Great Britain
but there is a way from it to London; so there is not a subject named in the
Bible but it is directly or indirectly connected with Jesus. IV. Christ RE-
ceIvinae Simon. 1. Jesus beheld him, took stock of him, formed a correct esti-
mate of him; looked, as the word implies, with the eyes of the mind as much
as with the eyes of the body. 2. Christ saw that possibilities of good lay in
Simon ; doubtless the possibilities of evil also. But the Saviour estimates
character not by the evil but by the good. God singles out every grain of
virtue that may be hid in our deepest nature. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.)
The first home mission:—We cannot tell certainly who was the first foreign
missionary. But we know who was the first home missionary—Andrew. I. Tue
SPRING of all true home mission work. Andrew had himself made acquaintance
with the Lord Jesus Christ. We must come into personal contact with Christ, be
in the house with Him, learn to know Him as the Lamb of God. In the degree in
which men have been in the house with Christ, and have learned to know Him,
will they be ready to go out with the message to others. II. Tur opsect of the
first home mission. It was not enough for Andrew to speak to his brother about
Christ, his aim is to bring him as close to Christ as he himself had been. We
should be satisfied with nothing less. Here is a lesson for parents with their
children, for a teacher with his scholars, for a minister with his hearers. We
must neither begin nor end with ourselves. In this object of Andrew, notice—
1. He was perfectly sure that Christ was willing to receive his brother. It does not
appear that Christ had said anything about this. And Andrew does not seem to
have thought it needful to ask Christ. He knew it from the way in which He had
welcomed him. 2. Andrew is sure that he himself can have his own share in no way
diminished, There would not be less of truth and love falling to his lot when
Peter came to have his part. Ifa man covets land or wealth or power, the more he
gives away the less he possesses. But let a man bring others to the treasures of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and his own share will be increased. III. Tur prace of thig
mission, 1. There are some who say we should have no foreign missions till our
own country is redeemed. But these people forget that when Christ said, “ Preach
the Gospel among all nations,” &c. He did not say stopping at Jerusalem. They
forget that if the apostles had acted on this principle we should have been heathen
still, They forget, moreover, that it was only when the Church of Christ began to
think seriously of the foreign heathen that she had her thoughts turned to the home
heathen. We generally find that those who are always talking of confining our
attention to the home heathen are those who do least for them. 2. But this surely
we may say, that in our zeal for the foreign heathen we are not to forget our own
kinsfolk ; and here are some reasons—(1) They have not the only claim upon us
but they have the first claim. ‘Go home to thy friends,” &. (2) And even for
our own sakes we must think of home. We cannot let masses of ignorance and sin


a We ei a at Tee |


OHAP, 1.} ST. JOHN. 119


_ and wretchedness fester and grow, without bringing a blight on our own Christianity.


It is like having an unwholesome marsh beside our house; it spreads malaria and
fever and ague. Think of your children living in this atmosphere, and of the
danger to them in the sights and sounds and associations around them. (3) In the
home mission field there is opportunity for every one of us to do something
personally, Few of us can go to the foreign field. But there is always a sphere
not far from our own door. (4) It seems to be part of the Divine plan that this
opportunity should be given to Christians for the benefit it brings to themselves.
It is thus we are to be like our Master, “‘ going about doing good,” and to grow
always more like Him in the work of doing it. As the Church labours for the world
around her, she would feel the duty of arising and shaking herself from the dust
and putting on her beautiful garments, IV. THe time, Andrew did not wait till
he had been made an apostle, or even a regular disciple. He began at once. If we
never think about doing good to the souls of men till we are licensed, we should think
seriously if we ought to be licensed at all; and if, when we are licensed or ordained, we
look upon our work asa task, and measure carefully what we have to do and what we
have not to do, we should ask ourselves, ‘‘ Is this not the place of a hireling?”? And
the same lesson comes home to all. A man may never think of being a minister or
missionary ; but he is not thereby freed from the duty of beginning at once to speak
a word to his brotaer about the Gospel of Christ. And it is not necessary to wait
for a great deal of knowledge; let us use the knowledge we have, not pretending to
more, All cannot speak in public, teach in the Sabbath-school, go from house to
house and influence strangers, but what one is there who has not some neighbour,
by whom his word will be regarded? Like that of Andrew, it may be simply “‘ We
have found the Christ.’”’ But it will serve the purpose if it leads the man to where
he will learn more. ‘This is, indeed, all that any of us, if we are true speakers, need
to say, ‘‘ We have found the Christ; He has met our need, answered our desire.
He will meet yours; will you not come and see?”? V. Tue sprint of the first home
mission. Andrew went to his brother from his interest in him. Ha did this
naturally, not from calculation, but because he had it in his heart. It is in this
spirit we must go to our fellow-men, whether they be closely related or not. They
are our brethren, with the same nature, needs, sins, sorrows, destinies. It is love to
Christ and love to men that are the secret of power in Christian persuasion. We
shall never have great success otherwise. Andrew did not say to his brother,
“Go; he took him by the hand and led him. VI. Irs success, Andrew
gained his brother—a great encouragement. Perhaps we may see much fruit,
even here. In any case, if our work be sincere and loving and prayerful, if we go
out from Christ to men that we may bring men to Christ, the work will not be in
vain. We may touch one who will touch many more. A humble soldier may draw
in some young recruit who may become a leader among thousands and subdue
kingdoms. Conclusion: If the work is to be well and perseveringly done, there
should be common counsel and co-operation. Many are afraid to commit them-
selves. Andrew, indeed, went alone—he could do nothing else; but our Lord sent
them out two and two, and brought them together again to speak and hear about
their work. (J. Ker, D.D.) Christian missions :—We have here the first step in
the history of the Gospel, and an indication that it was to survive the ministry of
its founder. I, THe PREPARATION OF THE MEN. 1. In the wilderness was the first
missionary college. 2. John was the teacher. 3. His lesson was the atonement of
Christ. II. Tuer catu sy Carist. 1, The seed sown in the wilderness bore
fruit, when Christ by His invitation quickened it into life. 2. They obeyed the
call and followed Jesus. 3. They attached themselves to the higher Master and
became pupils in the higher school. III. THEIR USEFULNESS IN THE CAUSE OF CurIsT.
1. The fruit now become seed to develop in other hearts and lives. 2. Andrew
brought his brother to Christ: only one man, but had the Church gone on at that
rate the world would long since have been converted. 3. We have no right to
expect that Christ should spread His Church. That is our work in co-operation
with Himself. Conclusion: Pleas on behalf of the missionary effort here exempli-
fied. 1. Christ’s commission: “Go ye into all the world,” &c. 2. Christ’s example,
Christ never asked us to do what He has not done. 3, The purpose of the Christian
Church as set forth in the parables and prophecies. It is a living growing body
to spread by its inherent Divine vitality. 4. The nature of our call to the work.
(1) The call of Christ, “ Come follow me,” “ Go ye;into all the world.” This call
reaches mcdern counting-houses and workshops as well as ancient custom houses
and fishing stations, to spread the gospel at home, in the town, in the country, in


120 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (omar. n
ee
the world. (2) The call from within—the call of conscience impelling us to rescue
others from the danger from which we have been saved—the call of Divinely-kindled
love. (3) The call of the heathen unconscious of their darkness and sin. 5. The
extent of the investments already made. An investment makes a man a partner in
the concern, and the greater the investment the more difficult or dishonourable is
it to try to get out of it. During the past 1,800 years the Church has been investing
her men, her energy, her money. We must not, we dare not draw back. By the
blood that has been shed and successes attained we are pledged to go on with this
work. (R. Maguire, D.D.) Gospel propagation:—I. THE KIND OF WORK TO BE
pone. 1. Not to swell denominational ranks, although that may be a consequence,
2. But to (1) ‘‘Find,” (2) “Tell,” (3) “Bring.” Il. Tas work cAN ONLY BE DONE \
BY THOSE WHO HAVE FOUND CHRIST THEMSELVES. 1. Not unbelievers—2. Not worldly ‘
professors, 3. But those who love and are in union with Christ. Ill. Tux sprcian
DIRECTION OF EFFoRT. Our brother: 1. Literally. 2. Socially. 3. Nationally.
4, Universally, for ‘God hath made of one blood all the nations of men.” IV. Tue
ULTIMATE AIM, To bring our brother to Jesus, V. Tue speciric MEaNs—individual
personal effort. 1, Subscription to a missionary society does not relieve us from
this, If you were to see a man drowning it would be a poor excuse for not helping
that you gave a sum to the Royal Humane Society. 2. Andrew himself brought his
brother to Christ. 8. Andrew brought his brother to Christ before he was com-
missioned to do so. The grand weakness of our Church membership is the failure
to realize that every man who is made a Christian is madea missionary. (J. Culross,
D.D.) The aim and methods of Christian work :—The ambition of every Christian
is to leave the world better than he found it. The instincts of Christian life, the
example of the Master, the needs of the world, and the blessedness of doing good
strengthen its ambition. Various methods are open to us—education, philanthropy,
hospitals, civil and religious liberty, civilization: all of which are sanctioned by
Christ, but were subordinate with Him to the great work of preaching the gospel.
And what He did Himself is set forth in the earliest labours of His disciples. I. Tue
AIM OF ALL CHRISTIAN WORK IS TO BRING MEN TO Curist. Other methods of usefulness
are to be honoured, but they fail to reach man’s deeper needs, and at best only
secure present happiness, and leave moral character unrenewed and eternity
unprovided for. But even here the highest happiness is not to be secured by
temporal means. This is only to be had by union with Christ. Therefore, God
Himself sets us the example of evangelism (Titus. iii. 4), and now sends the Holy
Spirit to reveal the things of Christ. II, THe merHops BY WHICH THIS END IS TO BE
GAINED. 1. We must try it with the members of our own families. The charity of
the gospel begins, but does not end, at home. The healed man was commissioned
to tell his friends what great things had been done for him. The apostles were
commissioned to begin at Jerusalem. (1) What more fitting than this. (2) What
more profitable. (3) Yet what more neglected. 2. We must make the office and
work and teaching of Christ our chief theme. ‘‘ Messias”—(1) Prophet; (2) Priest;
(3) King. 3. The quiet talk of private men may effect our purpose as well as the
preaching of public teachers. Andrew was not in office. (1) We must not under-
value the ministry, only it is not substitutionary but supplemental. It does not set
aside individual effort: it trains, guides, and completes it. (2) Public preaching
has disadvantages of its own: it is necessarily general and indiscriminate; its
hearers pass on the message to the next pew. Preaching scatters the seed, but talk
afterwards presses it into the soil; and in this talk the private Christian has the
advantage over the public minister. 4. It will be more easily done by simple
announcement than by discussion. There are exceptions, but as a rule arguments
only raise objections to shield the conscience and to gain time. What we want is
fewer appeals to the reason and more to the heart. 5. We must rest largely on our
own experience. ‘* We have found” this does not require genius or learning. If
we have been to Christ ourselves we can tell others the way. 6. We must make it
our chief business to bring men to Christ—(1) Directly. Not to this teacher or
that Church; (2) Promptly. There is no time to lose. (J. Angus, D.D.) —‘-Find-
ing the Messiah :—I, How GReaT MAY BE THE EFFECTS WHICH FOLLOW IN THE SPIRITUAL
WORLD FROM WHAT WOULD APPEAR TO BE A VERY TRIVIAL CAUSE. It was a passing
remark of the Baptist, to all appearance, which was the means of Andrew’s conver-
sion. 1. But we must remember that that remark fell on prepared minds. The severe
life of the Baptist, and his lofty teaching—recalling the great Elijah—must have
made a profound impression on them. They were present when John denied before the
agents of the Sanhedrim that he was the Messiah, and declared that he was only


CHAP. 1,] ST. JOHN. 121
eee ear eee Fearn are ames irl Rk ten Nh hag nh pee thecal Se
the forerunner of One who was of a higher order of Being than himself. On the fol-
lowing day Jesus presents Himself; and then John solemnly refers to Him, and ex-
plains that this was the Person of whom he had spoken on the day before—the Son
of God. Then, on the third day, John said much less, but his short sentence crowned
the preparatory work. 2. All this seems to show that outward circumstances, per-
sons, language are only a part of a complex providential agency. The deepest causes
are unseen, and wait like the tinder for the spark, the passing word or influence
which shall set them in motion, II. Tae coMPARATIVELY SMALL STOCK OF RELIGIOUS
KNOWLEDGE UPON THE STRENGTH OF WHICH ANDREW SETS TO WORK TO BRING ANOTHER
INTO THE SCHOOL oF Curist. 1. He had heard of the Messiah all his life ; but there
was, and there continued, up to the hour of the Ascension an earthly and mistaken
element in his idea of Him. A meaning had been read into Jewish prophecy for
generations which did not belong to it. The Messiah was to be a rival to Cesar on a
more splendid scale. He also failed to grasp the vast consequences to the world of
Christ’s coming. 2. But the one simple truth that he did grasp sufficed to kindle
every affection and power of his Spirit ; to concentrate in its analysis every ray of
his understanding. He had seen enough of Jesus in a few hours to know that John
was right; that Christ was one whom he could perfectly love and trust; and that
the best thing he could do for his brother was to bring him to Jesus. 3. Here St.
Andrew reads an important lesson. There is no doubt a great deal of forward
ignorance in religious questions which is willing to set the Church and the world to
rights on subjects the first elements of which have not teen mastered. But there is
also a great deal of false modesty which declines plain and practical duties on the
ground of insufficient knowledge. But the great truths which moved Andrew and
move us are the simple truths about which, amongst Christians, there is no con-
troversy, and which are learned by experience. No Christian need delay to testify
to Christ because he is not a theologian. He may at least do as well as Andrew.
III. ReELicious TRUTH CANNOT BE HOARDED LIKE MONEY, like a discovery for which a
man wishes to take out a patent. It belongs to the race, and in the first instance
to those who stand by the appointment of providence nearest to its possessors.
Andrew found hisown brother. Go thou and do likewise. Conclusion: 1. Con-
sider the untold capacities which lie buried in men who as yet know nothing of
grace and truth. Peter takes precedence of Andrew. 2. The reflex blessing of every
sincere effort for Christ and His kingdom. Every teacher knows more of his subject
after he has taught it. He that watereth is watered himself. (Canon Liddon.)
Christian fraternity :—Andrew was before all else a good brother. In the great
church at Rome, which is dedicated to him, no other inscription could be found
suitable, except ‘‘ Andrew, the brother of Peter.” Before casting his nets on Jew
or Gentile, he first bethought him of the one fellow-creature who was near to him
by the ties of home and family. “ Blood is thicker than water” in sacred as well
as in social life. ‘If a man loves not his brother,” &¢, This is a principle which
needs to be asserted as a corrective of the excesses of the missionary or proselytis-
ing spirit; but it also contains within itself some of the best methods of the true
conversion of the world. I. It exemplifies the undoubted truth that raz Bust MopE
OF DIFFUSING CHRISTIANITY IN THE WORLD is by converting our own brethren who
have settled abroad. The chiefest missionary, who was especially the Apostle of
the Gentiles, in every case made his own Jewish countrymen the nucleus round
which the heathen converts were to be gathered. This is a practical lesson for all
of us in respect of foreign missions. Every English settler in a distant land is
already, by his good or evil conduct, a missionary for God or for the devil; nay,
every country in Europe, according as it holds up Christianity in a repulsive or an
attractive form, repels or attracts the outside world from the light of the Gospel.
It is said that some of the Japanese envoys who lately visited the nations of Europe
and America had come with the predisposition to establish Christianity on their
return, but that after witnessing its actual fruits they in disappointment relinquished
the project. ‘Let us first find and convert our own brethren, and we shall then go
with clean hands to convert the Jew, the Turk, the heretic, and the infidel. ‘This
is a missionary enterprise in which every man, woman, and child can bear a part.
In this way the Home Mission becomes the mother of all missions. II. But the
same principle also points out to us THE BEST ACCESS TO THE HEARTS AND MINDS OF
THE UNKNOWN STRANGERS OF HEATHEN LANDS, In every heathen country there are
those whom we may call our own brothers, for the nobler qualities which raise them
above their fellows, and bring them nearer to the civilized and the Christian type.
Often, indeed, this fraternal sympathy has been rendered impossible on the one


a

122 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. I.
ee
hand by the impurities, the cruelties, the follies of heathen nations, on the other
hand by the pitying ecorn, or the iniquitous dealing, with which the European has
looked down on what are called the inferior races of mankind. But happy are those
Englishmen and missionaries who have made ita point first to find their own
brothers in those strange faces. Livingstone was never tired of repeating that
he found amongst the native races of Africa the same feelings of right and wrong that
he found in his own conscience, and that needed only to be enlightened and de-
veloped to make the perfect Christian. Bishop Patteson won the hearts of his
simple converts by treating them as his brothers, detecting the Christian beneath
the heathen. III. There is one further application of the principle, viz., THE DUTY,
obvious, though often neglected, OF SEEKING FOR OUR CO-OPERATORS IN THIS, a8 in all
good works, Nof THOSE WHO ARE FAR AWAY, BUT THOSE WHO ARE CLOSE AT HAND. Let
us cultivate by all means a friendly intercourse with all Christian people throughout
the world. But an intimate, organic union can only be with those who are near at
hand, or of the same race and nation and culture as ourselves. It is because the
work of evangelizing the heathen has a direct tendency to bring all English Chris
tians together that this (St. Andrew’s) day is doubly blessed ; blessed alike in what it
gives and in what it receives. Let us first find those of our own communion. But
next to our own Church, and before any combinations with foreign Christians, how-
ever estimable, let us find out our own brethren in the British Islands, who, however
parted from us, are yet heirs of the same national traditions and of the same inspiring
future. Such are our brethren amongst the Nonconforming communions of Eng-
land, whose praise for their missionary zeal is in all the Churches. (Dean Stanley.)
Our brother :—You are wealthy, and that poor man who lives near you is your
brother. Or you are poor, and your brother is that wealthy neighbour of whom you
think with envy and anger. Our brethren are not confined to those who can enter
into our thoughts and sympathies; they are also those whose narrowness and
ignorance make mutual sympathy and intelligence impossible. They are not only
those who are honest and respectable, but they are those who are under the ban of
society, outside the frontiers of decent and civilized life. Our brethren, they are
not only our near relatives by blood; nor our fellow-townsmen or countrymen ;
they are not confined to the races which are now in the van of civilization, or have
played a great part in the world’s affairs. They are also the races on whose rights
civilization is apt to trample with heartless selfishness. They are the natives of
Australia and America; they are the Maories of New Zealand ; they are the islanders
of the Pacific. Our brethren are everywhere. (Canon Liddon.) The difficulty of
bringing a brother to Christ :—It would seem the most natural thing in the world to
urge one’s own brother to share in one’s faith before looking elsewhere for a new
believer. Yet, as a matter of fact, one is more likely to shrink from speaking on
the subject of personal religion to a brother who is out of Christ than to one who is
a comparative stranger. A reason for this is that one’s own shortcomings and
failures are so well known to a brother, that one often hesitates to urge the import-
ance of a truth he is supposed to illustrate, but which he feels he represents un-
worthily. Andrew seems to have avoided this difficulty by saying nothing about
himself to Peter. If Jesus were more prominent in the thoughts and words of
believers, there would be less thought of self, and less embarrassment on that score,
in pleading His cause with those whoare yet alooffrom Him. (H.C. Trumbull, D.D.)
Christ the inspiration of Christian effort :—The Egyptian Memnon is represented as
keeping silence all the dark hours of the night, but bursting forthinto mystic strains
of weirdlike music every morning justas the first rays of the sun kiss hislips. Like
that idol, John and Andrew and Philip lived mute and inactive; but when the first
beams of the Sun of Righteousness began to play around their hearts they began
immediately to speak. The flowers require not to be sternly told to grow and
blossom and make themselves beautiful; let the sun but shine and they will do it
out of the gladness of their own hearts, Birds need not an almanack to apprize
them that the month of May, the season for open-air concerts, has arrived. And
once men have been in the presence of Christ they require no elaborate certificate to
empower them to go and tell others of His beauties—the fire burns, and speak they
must. Commission or no commission, be not ashamed to tell others that you have
found the Saviour. (J. C. Jones, D.D.) Personal testimony :—I was reading the
other day about a minister who preached an elaborate course of lectures in refuta-
tion of infidelity for the special benefit of a man who attended his church. Soon
after the man came and declared himself a Christian. The minister said to him,

‘Which of my discourses was it that removed yourdoubts?” The reply was, ‘“‘ Oh,


HAP, 1.) ST. JOHN. 123


it was not any of your sermons that influenced me. The thing that set me thinking
was that a poor woman came out of the chapel beside me and stumbled on the
steps, and I stretched out my hand to help her, and she said, ‘Thank you,’
Then she looked at me and said, ‘Do you love Jesus Christ, my blessed Saviour ? |
And I did not; and I went home and thought about it; and now I can say I love
Jesus.” The poor woman’s word, and her frank confession of her experience, was
all the transforming power. (A. Maclaren, D.D.) The value of private Christian
efort :—The Niagara excitesour wonder, fills us with amazement, perhaps with awe;
but one Niagara is enough for a continent. That continent, however, requires tens
of thousands of silver fountains and lucid brooks; and let me tell you—those clear
springs and busy streams, whose names have never been registered in any geography,
prove an inestimably greater blessing to America than the mighty Falls, whose fame
fills the world. And God, now and again, once or twice in a century, raises a man
great and gifted, a Niagara of a man, in whose presence the world trembles and
admires. Yet the Church depends more for its prosperity upon the ten thousand
happy souls who quietly and unobtrusively scatter blessings broadcast in every
neighbourhood and throughout the length and breadth of our beloved country.
Though you be but slender rills, yet let not the slender rills think they may as well
cease flowing. God fructifies the world by small rivers ; He saves the world by
private Christians. (J.C. Jones, D.D.) What is a missionary :—The term comes
from the associations of olden times, when tyrants ruled and made sport of human
life. In those days when the world was not gladdened by the ‘‘ glad tidings of great
joy,” and upon the occasion of the gladiatorial combats, when one of the antagonists
had smitten his opponent to the dust, he then had the right of life or death over
that man. But the conquered man had one source of appeal, and by the lifting up
of his finger he could appeal to the prince, and that prince had the power, if he
chose, to send a courtier from his side down to the dust of the arena to separate the
combatants and deliver from death the man who was appointed to death. -‘The
sending of that message was called in the Latin a mission, and the person sent a
missionary. So down in the dust of the arena of this world are Satan and man.
It is a deadly conflict. Man is smitten and undermost. He appeals to the King of
all; yea, before he appeal the King of all anticipates. His only Son comes on a
mission, and rescues man’s prostrate soul from Satan’s power. (R. Maguire,
D.D.) The joy of finding the Messiah :—There was joy in the breast of the
geometrician of Syracuse when he uttered his. glad ‘‘ Hureka”’ in the hearing of
people who deemed him mad; there was joy in the soul.of Newton when the first
thought of gravitation burst upon his wondering view; there was joy in the spirit
of Columbus in that moment of serene triumph over doubt and mutiny, when the
tiny land birds settled upon the shrouds of his vessel, bearing upon their timid
wings the welcomes of a new world; there is joy for the gold-finder when the
rich ore glistens in his cradle; joy for the emigrant when after years of absence
and hardship he first glimpses his boyhood’s home again ; joy for the child when he
is let into another and yet another of the marvels of the world, and claps his hands
for very joy and wonder ; joy for the poet when he sends a glad thought careering
through the world and stirring the pulses of mankind; but oh! of all the joys that
human hearts can be thrilled by, commend me to that when the glad disciple clasps
a brother’s hand and says, ‘‘ We have found the Messiah.” Then all doubt ceases,
and fear is banished from the mind, and condemnation lifts its shadow from the
spirit, and sweet peace nestles in the breast, and holy love throws itself upon the
believing heart, and a new-found sense of reconciliation pulsing through the veins
makes all creation more beautiful and brings a rarer melody than the music of the
spheres, and throws a brighter azure upon the opening heavens. Is this joy yours?
(W. M. Punshon, LL.D.) What would happen if the example of Andrew were
followed :—If every disciple to-day were to call only one other person to Christ in
each year, and that one were to call one other, how swiftly the world would be
wholly converted! ‘There are to-day millions of true believers in the world. But
if there were only one hundred, see how quickly the work would grow. In less than
twenty-five years the world would be converted, for this would double the number
of disciples each year. First year, 100; second year, 200; third year, 400 ; fourth
year, 800; fifth year, 1,600; sixth year, 3,200; seventh year, 6,400; eighth year,
12,800; ninth year, 25,600; tenth year, 51,200 (“‘ Well,” says some one, just here,
“that is rather slow progress, only 51,200 in ten whole years.” Go on, how-
ever, ten years more, and see how your numbers will look then); eleventh year,
102,400 ; twelfth year, 204,800; thirteenth year, 409,600; fourteenth year, 817,200 ;


124 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omup. 1.


fifteenth year, 1,634,400; sixteenth year, 3,268,800; seventeenth year, 6,537,600


(it’s growing now); eighteenth year, 13,075,200 ; nineteenth year, 26,150,400 ;
twentieth year, 52,300,800; twenty-first year, 104,601,600; twenty-second year,
over 209,000,000; twenty-third year, over 418,000,000; twenty-fourth year, over
836,000,000; and in the twenty-fifth year, over 1,600,000,000, or more than the
population of the whole earth. This shows the power of “ ones multiplied.
(A. F. Schauffler.) One convert wins another :—Some time ago one of our people,
who had herself been a drunkard, was standing at one of the open-air services on
the waste, when she observed a woman who had formerly been one of her bad com-
panions suddenly leave the crowd and walk quickly away. Hurrying after her, she
found’ this poor drunkard in great distress about her soul. “Oh!” she said, “I
listened to the speakers ; but when I saw you standing there so wonderfully changed
from what you used to be, I could stand it no longer.” She was induced, however,
to return to the meeting, and then to attend the service in the hall, where she found
salvation. She is now another living witness of the power of Christ to save the
drunkard, May God preserve her faithful unto death! (General Booth.) Dealing
with individuals :—Richard Baxter adopted the method of individual dealing with
the parishioners of Kidderminster, bringing them to his house, and taking them
apart one by one. He tells us that, because of it, he had reason to believe that
more than a third of the grown-up inhabitants of the place were converted to God.
The late Mr. Grant of Arndilly was so intent upon this habit of individual inter-
course that in three months he had dealt with fifteen hundred souls, while the re-
frain of all his letters was ‘“‘ Speak a word for Jesus.” Those who have found Christ
must speak of Him to others :—‘‘I was visiting at my brother’s one time,” says a
lady, ‘‘when Richard, his little boy, stopped suddenly in his play, and looked
steadily at me for a minute. ‘What are you thinking about?’ I asked.
‘Are you a Christian, auntie?’ ‘I hope so, dear.’ ‘But you never speak of
Jesus ; if you loved Him very much, would you not talk about Him sometimes?’
‘ We may love a person without speaking of him,’ I replied. ‘May we? I did not
know that. You love to talk of your brothers and sisters, and your papa and
mamma, don’t you, auntie?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘And then you speak of other people and
things you like; but you speak no word for Jesus. Don’t you love Him, auntie?’
‘Yes.’ ‘Then I should think you could not help speaking of Him sometimes.’ ”
(Sunday School Union.) Mission work must begin at home :—You will never make
@ missionary of the person who does no good at home. If you do not seek souls in
your own street, you will not do so in Hindostan, If you are of no use in White-
chapel, you will be of no use on the Congo. He that will not serve the Lord in the
Sunday-school at home, will not win children to Christ in China. Distance lends
no real enchantment to Christian service. You who do nothing now are not fit for
the war, for you are in sad health. The Lord give you spiritual health and vigour,
and then you will want no pressing, but you will cry at once, ‘*‘ Here am I; send
me!” Oh, my friends, go at once to your families, to your workshops, and declare
the name of Jesus! Oh, for more spiritual life! This is the root of the matter.
(C. H. Spurgeon.) A word in season:—On Thursday last I picked up some
“bread” which I had “ scattered on the waters” more than ten years ago. I was
preaching in Essex, and at the close of the service a gentleman came up and said,
“*Do you remember preaching a sermon on the 14th February, 1869, on the text,
‘ Blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed’? ‘Oh, yes,” I said,
‘“‘T do remember the subject and the occasion.” ‘That was the sermon that
changed this heart. Mine has been another life from that night.” Ten anda
half years that bread was floating on the waters! ‘Thou shalt find it after many
days.” (J. Thain Davidson, D.D.) Speak earnestly :—There was a dying man
upon his death-bed, and he was visited by his Christian brother. The dying man
said, ‘I am dying. 1 know that I am lost, but I cannot help putting some of my
ruin at your door. I believe you to be a Christian, I know you to be a Christian,
but I do not recollect that you ever solemnly addressed me about my soul. You
believed I was perishing, and yet you did not speak to me; therefore, as I cannot
conceive you to be inhuman—for you were always a kind brother—I suspect you do
not believe, as you say you do.” His brother said—‘ I was afraid of offending you,
I did speak to you once or twice.” The brother replied, ‘ You ought to have taken
me by the shoulders, You ought not to have let me be lost. I cannot acquit you.”
(C. H. Spurgeon.)


Vor. 42, And he brought him to Jesus.—Everyday usefulness :—We are intensely


—


OHAP. 1.) ST. JOHN. 125


desirous of a revival of religion, and we look for it through some extraordinary
agency. God works in this way sometimes; but while waiting for it we miss actual
opportunities. Our proper course is to do what we can and God will be sure to
bless it. I. Tae missionaRy pDiscrpLe. 1, His character. (1) He was a sincere
follower of Jesus. Men who have not made Christ’s acquaintance experimentally
are not fit to work for Him. Anunconverted man in the pulpit is an impostor and
exposes himself to extraordinary peril. (2) He was a young convert, He beheld
the Lamb of God one day and found out his brother the next. Those who have
learned but their a Bc let them tell that. (3) He was a commonplace disciple, yet
he became a useful minister. So servants of Christ must not excuse themselves
because they are not greatly gifted. 2. Hie manner was (1) Prompt, (2) Persevering.
Il. His creat opsect. 1. Tobring Peter to Jesus. This should be our aim—(1) Net
toaparty. To recruit one regiment from another is no real strengthening of the
army. (2) Not to bring men to outward religiousness merely. To make the
Sabbath breaker a Sabbath keeper and a Pharisee, to make the prayerless the heart-
less user of a form of prayer, you buttake one poison from him to expose him to
another. (3) Many,alas! are satisfied if they get to the priest, church, sacraments.
2. We may bring men to Jesus—(1) By prayer. (2) By putting them in the way of
being informed about the Gospel. (3) By our example. (4) By occasionally, and
as opportunity serves, giving a word of importunate entreaty. III. His wisr merxons.
1. Being zealous he was wise. (1) He used what ability he had. (2) He set great
store by a single soul. (3) He did not go far afield to do good. Many Christians
do all the good they can five miles away, when the time taken up by going there
and back might be well spent in their vineyard at home. Andrew goes to Cappa-
docia in his after life, but he begins with his brother. 2. How did Andrew persuade
Peter? (1) By narrating his own experience. What you have experienced tell to
others. (2) He put the good news before him in an earnest fashion. IV. THE
SWEET REWARD ANDREW HAD. He won his brother’s soul. In your Sunday-school
class or in your home there may be an unconverted Wesley or Whitefield. (C. H.
Spurgeon.) This highest voluntary influence:—I. It was BENEFICENT. What a
universe of good was involved in the simple act of bringing this man to Jesus! 1.
What a service was rendered to Peter! His soul translated into a new world. 2.
What a service to the disciples of Christ! The introduction of a frank, generous,
bold, inspired nature. 3. What a service to the whole world! God alene knows
the good Peter did from Pentecost onwards. All this service must be referred to
the simple act of Andrew. From one little act may issue an influence for good that
may go on widening and deepening for ages. Il. It was naturan. Andrew went
to Peter, not as an official, but as a man, a brother. What is wanted to bring men
to Christ is—1. Common sense, not learning, genius, culture. 2. Love to Christ.
Andrew’s heart was touched and inspired with loving sympathies for Christ. What
is wanted in this work is not the influence of the scholar, philosopher, or priest, but
of the man. It is the man, not the preacher, who converts. When the man is lost
in the preacher his power is gone. III. It was HONOURABLE. To introduce a man
to Christ is to introduce him to one who in philosophy is infinitely greater than
Socrates, in wealth infinitely richer than Croesus, in royalty infinitely greater than
a Cesar. The work of authors, sages, statesmen, warriors contemptible compared
with that of bringing men to Christ. IV. It was EXEMPLARY. 1. Andrew’s is an
example that all can imitate. 2. An example that all should imitate: an universal
duty, not binding on any particular class, but pressing on all relations, all social
grades, all intellectual types. (D. Thomas, D.D.) Thou art Simon, ... thou
shalt be called Cephas.—Simon and Peter :—Christ changed Simon’s name.
1. As a sign of His authority and of taking entire possession of him, as a king
might alter the name of some man whom he had captured. 2. As a promise of
transforming power. 3. As a prophecy of his future office and importance in the
Church. The Aramaic Cephas is the equivalent of the Greek Peter, ‘a stone.”

fterwards is indicative of the following lessons.


The alternation of these names a
I. Tue DANGER OF THE NEW AND BETTER NATURE FALLING BACE TO THE OLD. Where


« Simon ” is employed in the Gospels it is suggestive of the apostle’s uninspired
and unregenerate humanity. 1. “ Simon, Simon, Satan hath desired to have thee.”’
There we see the exquisite delicacy with which Christ points the too presumptuous
man away from his own fancied strength to the weakness of his humanity. 2.
‘‘ Simon, sleepest thou?” Where is Peter? He would have keptawake. 3. “The
Lord hath appeared unto Simon.” This was from the apostles—all the rest are


eo


126 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. L
ssh MISES SAE AS Te IL TTS
from Christ—all knew about his fall, that he had ceased to be the rock, and that
his precedence and influence were gone. 4. ‘‘ Simon, son of Jona (same as text),
lovest thou Me?” Christ puts the fallen apostle in his place, makes him go back
to the very beginning. He must go through the wicket-gate again. II. THE roR-
GIVING LOVE WHICH DISCERNS THE TRUE MAN BELOW ALL His SIN. 1. “Simon,
Simon, Satan hath desired . . . I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow,” &e. Here
is Christ’s clear recognition of the better nature subsisting even whilst it appears to
be smothered beneath the worse. Condemning the sinner, Christ would not break
the bruised reed. 2. “Go, tell the disciples and Peter ”—an incident recorded only
by Mark, Peter’s mouthpiece. ‘Tell Simon” would have been a rebuke; “ tell
Peter” is a smile of forgiveness, and an outstretched hand to grasp the sad hand of
the denier. III. Tue GRAND POSSIBILITY THAT THE NEW MAN MAY TRIUMPH. No
more is heard of Simon, with two exceptions. 1. Cornelius is directed to send for
‘Simon, who is called Petgr,” because outsiders would know him best by the one
name, Christians by the other. 2. James, at the council of Jerusalem, calls him
Simon, out of old and familiar friendship. Elsewhere it is always Peter. The
transformation had now become complete. Effusive, impulsive daring is changed
into steadfast, bridled courage. If once he ‘‘ was to be blamed,” that showed that
he was still a man, and not a faultless, impossible monster. The sand has been
put into a hydraulic press and comes out sandstone, strong and tenacious.
This transformation is inexplicable without the Resurrection, the Ascension, and
Pentecost. JV. THt WHOLESOME REMEMBRANCE BY THE MAN HIMSELF OF WHAT HE
WAS, JOINED WITH THE THANKFUL RECOGNITION OF WHAT HE Is. In his Second
Epistle he introduces himself as “Simon Peter.” Probably the long disused name
had vanished from the memory of that generation ; .but the old man reverts to it.
Through the mist of long years he remembers what he was, and recalls his old un-
sanctified self; but he is not afraid to call himself Peter. He is conscious of the
higher life not his own which was promised him on the never-to-be-forgotten
occasion mentioned in the text. (A. Maclaren, D.D.) Personal influences :—
Whitfield made it his wont wherever he stayed to talk to the members of the house-
hold about their souls—with each one personally ; but stopping at a certain house
with a colonel, who was all that could be wished except a Christian, he was so
pleased with the hospitality he received, and so charmed with the general character
of the good colonel and his wife and daughters, that he did not like to speak to
them about decision as he would have done if they had been less amiable characters.
He had stopped with them a week, and during the last night the Spirit of God
visited him so that he could not sleep. ‘‘ These people,” said he, ‘‘ have been very
kind to me, and I have not been faithful to them; I must do it before I go; I must
tell them that whatever good thing they have, if they do not believe in Jesus they
are lost.” He arose and prayed. After praying he sti!l felt contention in his spirit.
His old nature said, ‘I cannot do it,” but the Holy Spirit seemed to say, ‘‘ Leave
them not without warning.” At last he thought of a device, and prayed God to
accept it. He wrote upon a diamond-shaped pane of glass in the window with his
ring these words, ‘‘ One thing thou lackest.”” He could not bring himself to speak
to them, but went his way with many a prayer for their conversion. He had no
sooner gone than the woman of the house, who was a great admirer of him, said,
“Twill go up to hisroom; I like to look at the very place where the man of God
has been,” She went up and noticed on the window-pane those words, “ One thing
thou lackest.”” It struck her with conviction in a moment. “Ah!” said she, “I
thought he did not care much about us, for I knew he always pleaded with those with
whom he stopped, and when I found that he did not do so with us, I thought we
had vexed him, but I see how it was; he was too tender in mind to speak to us.”
She called her daughters up. ‘‘ Look there, girls,” said she, “‘see what Mr. Whit-
field has written on the window, ‘One thing thou lackest.’ Call up your father.”
And the father came up and read that too. ‘ One thing thou lackest! ” and around
the bed whereon the man of God had slept they all knelt down and sought that God
would give them the one thing they lacked, and ere they left that chamber they
had found that one thing, and the whole household rejoiced in Jesus. (C. H.
Spurgeon.) Personal effort :—I recollect several persons joining the Church who
traced their conversion to the ministry in the Surrey Music Hall, but who said it
was not that alone, but another agency co-operating therewith. They were fresh
from the country, and some good man, I knew him well, I think he is in heaven
now, met two of them at the gate, spoke to them, said he hoped they had enjoyed
what they had heard; heard their answer; asked them if they were coming in the


Le mepeel


ee


ouAP, 1] ST. JOHN. 127


evening; said he would be glad if they would drop into his house to tea; they did,
and he had a word with them about the Master. The next Sunday it was the same,
and at last, those whom the sermons had not much impressed were brought to hear
with other ears, till by-and-by, through the good old man’s persuasive words, and
the good Lord’s gracious work, they were converted to God. (Ibid.) One soul
precious :—‘‘ Oh,” says one, ‘“‘I have had so little success; I have had only one
soul saved!” That is more than you deserve. If I were to fish for a week, and
only catch one fish, I should be sorry; but if that happened to be a sturgeon, a
royal fish, I should feel that the quality made up for lack of quantity. When you
win a soul it is a great prize. One soul brought to Christ—can you estimate its
value? If one be saved, you should be grateful to your Lord, and persevere.
(Ibid.) The searching question :—I shall now put a question which I daresay
has passed through your minds before, but which 1 would like to tarry there. How
many, my dear friend, were you ever the means of bringing to Jesus? You believe
that they must perish everlastingly, unless they have faith in Christ. How many
have you personally prayed for? How many did you ever break your heart about?
How many have you ever talked to concerning Him who is the only Saviour?
To how many have you borne your testimony of His kindness and His grace?
Upon how many have you laid the tender hand to press them to follow after the
Saviour? Ah! well, the questions sound so trite as I put them, and perhaps as
they come to your ears you are weary with them as being so commonplace; but
by the great day of the appearing of our Lord, when He shall require of you an
account of your stewardship, I implore you answer those enquiries, even if they
humble you in the very dust. If the answer be painful, seek for the future that
your course be mended, and as servants of Christ yearn over souls. (Ibid.)
Rareness of personal effort for souls :—In hundreds of cases I have put the ques-
tion pointedly, ‘Do you know that you have been instrumental in leading one
soul to Christ? ’’ only to hear the sad confession that there has been no effort
made in that direction. (A. G. Pearson, D.D.) Individual effort :—Do not forget
individual souls. There is a great rage nowadays for large congregations and for
prominent work ; but do not forget individual souls. I think it was Rowland Hill
who used to say that if he had a number of bottles before him, and he were to
dash water over them, a drop might go into this one and a drop into that ; but he
said, ‘‘If I take one bottle and pour water in I fill it up to the brim.” And so it
is with individual souls. There is a personality in the application which cannot
be estimated if we are speaking face to face in an honest, manly way. Is not this
the best way to do Christian work? (W. P. Lockhart.) How to win souls :—
T eome from a house from which there is a considerable contingent attending this
service this morning, and the question last night was how we should be awakened
in time. They resolved to do it by detachments. One young fellow woke up the
servant, and some others woke the young ladies, and they each had some one under
their care, and knocked at the door until they were answered. It was best done by
dividing it, and by giving to each one a special department in the work. And so
we do our work best by dealing with individual men. (Ibid.) The great secret
of the success of Harlan Page was that he always aimed at the conversion of
some individual; wrestling in prayer with God, and in affectionate entreaty with
the sinner, till he saw his wishes realized. By following this plan, although he
was in humble life, active work, and often in deep poverty, he lived to see more
than a hundred brought to God as the fruit of his zeal and intercession.
Example brings men to Jesus :—The Rev. J. A. James, the well-known minister of
Birmingham, says, in one of his lectures: “If the present lecturer has a right
to consider himself a real Christian, if he has been of any service to his fellow-
creatures, and has attained to any usefulness in the Church of Christ, he owes it,
in the way of means and instrumentality, to the sight of a companion, who slept
in the same room with him, bending his knees in prayer on retiring to rest. That
scene so unostentatious, and yet so unconcealed, roused my slumbering conscience,
and sent an arrow to my heart ; for, though I had been religiously educated, I had
restrained prayer, and cast off the fear of God. My conversion to God followed,
and soon afterwards my entrance upon college studies for the work of the ministry.
Nearly half a century has rolled away since then, with all its multitudinous
events; but that little chamber, that humble couch, that praying youth, are still
present to my imagination, and will never be forgotten, even amidst the splendour


of heaven and through the ages of eternity.”


128 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. foHAP. 1,
Se a ecg a EG

Vers. 48, 44. Jesus... findeth Philip.—I. Tux srExine Curist, This isachapter
of seeking and finding. Christ asks Andrew and J: ohn, ‘‘ Whom seek ve (oe
Andrew “ findeth his own brother and saith unto him, We have found.” Then,
again, Jesus finds Philip, and Philip Nathaniel, and both the Messias. There are
two kinds of finding: a casual stumbling on the thing we were not looking for,
and that which is the result of seeking. Thus Jesus found Philip, who was un-
expectant and undesirous, That is what Christ often does. There are men, like
the merchantman seeking goodly pearls, seeking what they want in a hundred
different places, and then, when expectancy has died down into despair and apathy,
the veil is withdrawn and Jesus seen there beside them. But there are others, like
Paul and like Matthew, on whom Christ lays a sudden hand and blesses without their
seeking. And so in this story He will welcome Andrew and John when they come
seeking. But when these are won, there remains that other way by which He drew
Philip to His heart by the sudden revelation of His love. 1. Whether we seek Him
or no, Christ is seeking every man. ‘‘The Son of Man is come to seek,” &. 2.
He seeks us each in a thousand ways—by the motion of His spirit-stirring convic-
tion; by our restlessness and dissatisfaction ; by disappointment and losses ; by the
brightness and goodness of earthly providences. Il. Taz Worp oF AvTHORITY.
Sheep follow a shepherd, travellers a guide, soldiers their captains. This is a
call to accept Him as a teacher, but the whole context shows that they recog-
nized Him as the Messiah. So it is more: it is a call to—1. Faith. 2. Obedience.
3. Imitation. 4. Communion. III, Tue smEnTLY AND SWIFTLY OBEDIENT DISCIPLE.
Philip says nothing, but he yields. 1. How quickly a soul may be won or lost.
Philip’s decision was trembling in the balance. It might have gone the other way.
A moment settled it. Objections to instantaneous conyersions are unphilosophical.
Hesitations may be long, but decisions are matters of an instant. 2. Why people
are kept back from yielding to Christ’s invitation. (1) Other duties which seem
more important. (2) The non-conviction of the need of a guide. These are
excuses, not reasons, manufactured to cover a decision which has been taken
before on grounds which it is not convenient to bring up to the service. Follow
Christ. This is—1. Safe. 2. Right. 3. Blessed. (A. Maclaren, D.D.) Moral
imitation:—I. Man’s MORAL CHARACTER DETERMINES HIS DESTINY. “As a man
thinketh in his heart, so is he”? in his—1. Experience, whether happy or miserable.
2. Prospects, whether terrific or inviting. 3. Influence, whether useful or pernicious.
4. Relations. (1) To God, whether approved or condemned. (2) To the universe,
whether a blessing ora curse. II. MANn’s MORAL CHARACTER IS FORMED ON THE PRINCIPLE
or imiTaTIon. This is seen in children, and the Romans, recognizing this, placed
in their vestibules the busts of great men, so that the young might be reminded of
their virtues. The seed of a child’s action is not teaching, but deeds. III. Tu
FORMATION OF A GOOD CHARACTER REQUIRES A PERFECT MopEL. Sir Joshua Reynolds
found affer years of study that he had been imitating, not Titian, whom he desired
to make his model, but a forger. After this he resolved to make nature his model,
and thus became a great master of his art. According to his model, so will a man
be. One reason why human character is so depraved is because the perfect model
is little known and less appreciated. IV. Tue onny PERFECT MODEL IS JESUS CHRIS¥.
Who is the most imitable character? 1. He who has the strongest power to com-
mand admiration. 2. He who is most transparent in character. 3. He who is
most unchangeable in the spirit which animates him. Conclusion: Follow Me.
1, This is an epitome of the moral laws of God. 2. Herein is man’s life and per-
fection. 3. Imitate Christ by inbreathing His moral spirit. (D. Thomas, D.D.)
The call of St. Philip :—No trumpet summoned the soldiers of the Cross to the
battle-field ; no hand like that at Belshazzar’s feast came forth to beckon him; no
miracle made them take up a distinctive post. And, yet, what a call this was! how
noble, singular, useful, profitable! Such acall came to Judas, and hesold it. I.
THE ORIGIN OF THIS CALL WAS THE WILL ofr Curist. Jesus “goes forth” in search
of every sinner. But the mere “ going forth” of Christ is not enough. There must
be an exercise of His secret power. This power is pervasive, leavening, and so
works upon man’s free-will that it comes into union with the heavenly will. With-
out this there can be no discipleship. II. Tae posrrion IN WHICH THIS CALL
PLACES THE PERSON BY WHOM IT IS RECOGNIZED AND OBEYED. It makes him a
follower, and when man becomes a follower—l. He abridges his right over himself,
his property, time, &c. 2. He sets aside his own wisdom, and accepts that of His
Master. 3. He follows always, even unto the end. III. In ruts caty THERE Is—l,
Exclusiveness, jealous refusal to admit of any division of the heart. 2. Mystery.


ae


ae


yy


oHAP. I.) ST. JOHN. 129


(1) It separates us from the nothingness and delusions of the world. (2) It joins
us to the invisible and heavenly. (3) It opens up new hopes, scenes, and sources
of immeasurable wealth, (P. B. Power, M.A.) Delaying Christian profession :—
The command is for instant obedience. A common objection is, “I have no confi-
dence in my future strength. I must wait until Iam stronger before I profess to
have devoted my whole life to Christ.” Reply—I. You aRE LIVING ONLY IN THE
PRESENT. The future is not. For you there may be no earthly future, for you
may die to-night. Your responsibility is for the now. II. Durres wmu come not
IN THE MASS, BUT ONE BY ONE. Strength for each is all you will need. III. You
WILL GROW STRONG FOR COMING DUTIES ONLY AS YOU PERFORM PRESENT ONES. No
one can step to the top of the pyramids; but he can climb one block ; and from that
he can reach another. Says Robert Browning: ‘I see a duty and do it not, and
therefore see no higher,’? IV. Gop’s GRACE IS PROMISED ONLY FOR TIME OF NEED.
No man to-day can be prepared for to-morrow’s duties. V. Gop’s sTRENGTH IS OUR
ONLY STRENGTH, AND THAT IS PLEDGED. ‘I will be with you even to the end of the
world.” He “ will not suffer you to be tempted beyond that you are able, but with
the temptation will provide a way of escape.” (Homiletic Monthly.) The motive
for following Christ :—It is related in the annals of the Ottoman Empire that when
Amurath II. died, which was very suddenly, his son and destined successor,
Mohammed, was about a day’s journey distant in Asia Minor. Every day of inter-
regnum in that fierce and turbulent monarchy is attended with peril. The death
of the deceased Sultan was therefore concealed, and a secret message despatched to
the prince to hasten at once to the capital. On receiving the message he leaped on
a powerful Arab charger, and turning to his attendants, said, ‘Let him who
loves me, follow!” This prince afterwards became one of the most powerful
sovereigns of the Ottoman line. Those who approved their courage and loyalty by
following him in this critical moment of his fortunes, were magnificently rewarded.
There is another Prince—the Prince of peace—who says to those around Him,
“Let him who loves Me, follow.” The method of following Christ :—Faith includes
works ; loyalty involves service; love carries devotedness. It is not merely that,
if we have trust in another, we ought to conform our conduct to the directions or
suggestions or wishes or example of the trusted one; but it is that, if our trust is a
reality, it will show itself in our conduct. It is folly for a child to tell of his love
for his mother if he has no regard to her wishes; it is folly for a patient to say
that he believes in his physician if he pays no attention to that physician’s pre-
scription; it is folly for a soldier to say that he is devoted to a commander whom
he will not obey in the heat of a campaign ; it is folly for a man to say he has faith
in Jesus if he does not seek to follow Jesus. Jesus says, ‘If ye love Me, keep My
commandments,” (H.C. Trumbull, D.D.)


Vers. 44-59. Philip findeth Nathanael—The equivalent of Theodore. He is
probably to be identified with Bartholomew, for—1. The mention of him here and
in chap. xxi, 2, shows that he occupied a prominent position among the disciples.
Those with whom he is classed in each case are apostles, 2. No mention 18
made of Nathanael in the Synoptists or of Bartholomew in St. John; while the
latter name is a patronymic (son of Tolmai), like Barjona (Matt. xvi. 17), and Bar-
jesus (Acts xiii. 6). 3. In the list of apostles Bartholomew is coupled with Philip
by St. Matthew (chap. x. 3), St. Luke (chap. vi. 14), St. Mark (chap. iii. 18). So that
the six first are the six first called. In chap. xxi. 2, Thomas is added as in Acts 1.
13. (Bp. Westcott.) Nathanael and Bartholomew :—It is a melancholy fact that
the festival of this gentle and guileless apostlé should be for ever associated with
the treachery and malice of the cold-blooded massacre in France in 1572. (John
N. Norton.) Nathanael :—I. His EFFORTS AS A GENUINE TRUTH SEEKER. 1, He
hearkens to information concerning the truth. 2. He renounces a prejudice against
the truth. 3. He prosecutes an inquiry in search of truth. In this he is influenced—
(1) By the words of Philip. (2) He is greeted by Christ. (3) He is struck by convic-
tion, IJ. His success a8 A GENUINE TRUTH SEEKER. He found in Christ—l. A
Divine Teacher. 2. A Divine King. III. His BrEssmpNEss 4S A GENUINE TRUTH
SEEKER. 1. He saw great things. 2. He would see greater. (1) A new universe.
(2) A new class of intelligences. (3) A new order of ministry. (4) A new centre
of attraction. (D. Thomas, D.D.) Nathanael :—I. In a STATE OF PREJUDICE, 1.
Philip went to him in the fulness of his heart, expecting that he would be as glad
to hear as he was to tell. 2, But Nathanael receives the announcement with cold-
ness. Ho had formed an ill opinion of the place, and therefore of all connected


130 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHAP. 1,


with it. 3. Prejudice is very common, and in religious matters is very pernicious,
and men should be on their guard against it. It may prevent them receiving sal-
vation. 4. How should we treat it? As Philip did—‘*Come and see.” Apply
this to Bible doctrines, experimental religion, foreign missions. This only will
dispel prejudice. II. An IsRaELITE INDEED IN WHOM IS NO GUILE. Nathanael
dropped his prejudice and acted as a man of candour. He was sincere, not sinless.
How. common is insincerity in word and act! How beautiful is fair transparency
of character, after the image of Christ, in whom was no guile! Nathanael was also
sincere towards God. Not that this must stand alone; it must qualify other
graces: sincere repentance, faith, love, &c, This sincerity is uncommon. Witness
the easy way in which men confess themselves miserable sinners. III. A conFEssoR
or Curist. 1. Making his confession, which was—(1) Well grounded. (2) Ample.
2. Encouraged by Christ. Christ would encourage all young converts by showing
them good things tocome, (J. Hambleton, M.A.) The character of Nathanael:
—It was necessary that our Lord should have a certain number constantly asso-
ciated with Him. He might have had many; He chose few. He might have had
those of the highest classes; He chose from the humblest. As when iron is
touched by the loadstone it draws other iron after it, so when Philip was touched
by Christ, he seeks to draw his friend. Nathanael was a cautious, incredulous
man, but he was sincere. Notice—I. SINCERITY IN A PROFESSION OF RELIGION 18
ESSENTIAL TO HAPPINESS AND SAFETY. Christ distinguished Nathanael from other
nations and from his own. He had the real thing as well as the appearance. Our
Lord, therefore, takes his sincerity under His own discipline, and by thus com-
mending, it shows that it is the grand fundamental thing in religion. You are
called Christians, but have you that which the name imports? In Nathanael
there was no deceit, no wish to impose upon himself and others. This was evi-
denced by his secret devotion under the fig-tree. Examine what you are in secret,
for then you are before God. Be a real Christian, not one in show. II. Tru
SAVING GRACE IS CONSISTENT WITH GREAT IMPERFECTION IN KNOWLEDGE. Nathanael
needed information. It was requisite that he should go and see, which, faithful to
the light he had, he did. 1. The first effect of knowledge is the discovery of our
ignorance. So Nathanael was tractable and teachable. We are not to conclude
against the possession of true saving knowledge because it is small, if it possesses
the soul, 2. Proficient Christians should learn from this how to regulate their
conduct towards the immature. We must remember that grace works gradually.
Do not force the great doctrines of Christianity on young converts. III, Curisr
KNOWS ALL, AND WILL ONE DAY TELL US OF ALL THAT WE HAVE DONE IN SECRET. 1.
Our secret sins. 2. Our secret penitence. 38. Our secret prayers. 4. Our secret
charities. IV. A READINESS TO BELIEVE UPON SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE IS VERY PLEASING
To CHRIST, AND WILL BE REWARDED WITH GREATER COMMUNICATIONS. (J. Leifchild,
D.D.) Nathanael :—I. THE ADVANTAGES OF OCCASIONAL SOLITUDE. It is alone—1.
That we disengage ourselves from the world. 2. That we obtain a knowledge of
ourselves, 3, That wecan be familiar with God. {I. How familiar our Saviour
IS WITH OUR MOST PRIVATE concexNs. 1. To know all persons and things infallibly
is the prerogative of God only. 2. ‘“‘The eyes of the Lord are in every place
beholding the evil and the good.” 3. Let the righteous rejoice, and the broken-
hearted penitent be encouraged, III. Srncrriry IN RELIGION IS A QUALITY WHICH
our SAVIOUR CALLS UPON US TO ADMIRE. 1. Because of its rarity. 2. Because of
its excellence. IV. THERE MAY BE TRUE GRACE WHERE THERE IS AT PRESENT LITTLE
tient. 1. Let us not, then, conclude that a man is a stranger to grace because he
is unable to go all our lengths in sentiment. 2. Nor let us be anxious to force
upon him doctrines he is not prepared to receive. V. WHERE GRACE IS REAL IT
WILL IN DUE TIME BE ATTENDED WITH CLEARER-LIGHT. (W. Jay.) Nathanael’s
prejudice and confirmation :—I, NaTHANAEL’S PREJUDICE EXPRESSED, AND PHIip’s
REPLY. 1. Nathanael looking for the Messiah, but had the prophecy of Bethlehem
in his mind. Hence his difficulty, and his unreasonable imputation of the character
of Nazareth to Christ. The objection of the Samaritan woman was that He was a
Jew, others that He was a carpenter, &c. But these not more unreasonable than
modern objections. 2. Philip’s reply was such as became a disciple. Let
Nathanael know Christ as he knew Him, and all objections would be removed
Il. Taz Testimony or Jesus To NATHANAEL’s CHARACTER. Nathanael’s prejudice
did not prevent his taking Philip’s advice. He approaches, and before he or
Philip open their lips, Christ’s testimony is given. 1. An Israelite indeed is
genuine, in the spirit, not in the letter. 2. In whom is no guile, because an Israelite


OHAP. 1] ST. JOHN. 131
ee a ee a ee
indeed ; no Judas, no dissembler. III, NarHanarn’s INQUIRY INTO THE SOURCE OF
CunistT 8 KNOWLEDGE OF HIM, AND THE ANSWER, The inquiry evidenced Nathanael’s
sincerity. Christ’s reply met Nathanael’s state of mind. No minister is ever first
with those who are called: Jesus has been working in them previously. As the
trees of Eden could not hide Adam, neither could the fig-tree hide Nathanael from
his Lord. IV. NaTHANAEL’S CONVICTION AND CONFESSION oF JEsus. 1. Rabbi, the
promised prophet. 2, The Son of God. 3, The King of Israel. Notice the satis-
factoriness of this testimony. V. Curisr’s EXPRESSED SATISFACTION, AND His rroMIsE
OF FUTURE CONFIRMATION TO BE GIVEN To His piscipies. Christ had already given
Nathaniel an evidence of His glory in His omnipotence, but there were greater
things in store : the things which were to prove Christ to be the Son of God with
power. (A. Beith, D.D.) The preaching of Philip :—I. Invtnrreny DIFFICULT.
The connection of the name of the Messiah, of whom Moses and the prophets did
write, with Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. II. Perrecrny pEcipep. We
have found Him. III. Inreststrsuy conrirmED. Come andsee. (Lange.) Finding
Christ the great treasure :—In Golconda, if a slave find a diamond of extraordinary
value, he takes it up to the Government, and the Government gives him his
liberty. If some of those who are this morning the slaves of sin, while they are
seeking for God, would find this Pearl of great price, the hour of their emancipa-
tion would come, and the King would make proclamation from the throne, saying,
“Go free! You have found the Pearl! Be one of My jewels!” (7. De Witt
Talmage, D.D.) Bringing companions to Christ:—The bee-hunter in America
pats a piece of honeycomb into a box, and catches a bee. He then covers the
box, and very soon the bee fills himself with the honey. Being let loose, it
finds its way home, and in a little time returns, but not alone. He brings
his companions with him, and in turn they bring their companions, till the box
is filled with a full swarm of bees. Let every Sunday scholar, and every atten-
dant at a Christian church, do likewise. If they have tasted that Word which is
sweeter than honey, let them bring their companions and neighbours with them,
till the school and the church be filled with devout and thoughtful hearers.
Philip and Nathanael:—I. Toe preparation. A soul brought to Christ by a
brother. Two men, friends before, had their friendship riveted and made more
close by this sacredest of all bonds, that the one had been to the other the means
of bringing him to Jesus Christ. Note 1. The hesitation of Nathanael. His
prejudice was—(1) Harmless, and soon melted when Christ beamed upon him. (2)
Natural. We all know the jealousies of neighbouring villages. But this prejudice
brings into relief what a real obstacle to His Messianic recognition our Lord’s lowly
origin was. We have got over it. But Judea was then ruled by the most heartless
of aristocracies, that of cultured pedants. Why did Christ come from ‘‘ the men
of the earth” as the rabbis called outsiders? (1) In accordance with the general
law that reformers always come from outside these classes; and in politics, litera-
ture, science, as well as religion, not many wise and mighty are called. (2) Because
He was the poor man’s Christ, and because His word was not for any class. 2.
Philip’s invitation, (1) He did not argue. (2) ‘*Come and see” carries in it the
essence of Christian apologetics. The wisest thing is to push Christ forward and
Jet people look at Him and let Him make His own impression. And, on the other
gide, you have not done fairly by Christianity until you have complied with this
invitation. II. The second stage: THE CONVERSATION BETWEEN CHRIST AND
NATHANAEL, when we see a soul fastened to Christ by Himself. Christ manifests
His Messiahship by a supernatural knowledge of him. 1, Before he had come,
before Christ could read him, or learn anything about him—while he was coming,
Jesus said, “ Behold an Israelite,” &c. The reference here and in ver. 51 is to
Jacob. At Jabbok the crafty Jacob became Israel. So Nathanael was one of God’s
princes who had wrestled with Him in prayer. How was the guile drawn out of
him? See Psa. xxxii. 2. Nathanael’s astonishment. Under the fig-tree he must
have wrestled in prayer, confessed his sins, longing and looking for the deliverer.
Yet so solitary was it, that Christ’s knowledge of it led to the glad confession,
“ Thou art the Son of God.” Nathanael was right. So was the woman of Samaria
when she drew the same conclusion from the same premises. 3. This was the first
miracle that Christ wrought. His supernatural knowledge is as much & mark of
His Divinity as any other of His earthly manifestations. (1) This omniscience
shows us how glad Christ is when He sees anything good in us. Not a word about
Nathanael’s prejudice, but cordial praise that he was an honest, a sincere man,
following after God and truth. (2) This omniscience is cognizant of all our inward


132 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [onap. 1.


ene en eS ae

i d struggles, We can all look back to some place or other, under some
han thoas hedee, or boulder by the seashore, or back parlour, or crowded street
where some never-to-be-forgotten epoch in our soul’s history passed unseen by all.
Let us rejoice to feel that Christ sees all these moments, III. Tux rapturous
CONFESSION which crowns the whole. 1. Where did Nathanael learn these great
names? From the Baptist’a proclamation of the Son of God and the kingdom of
heaven. 2. The enthusiasm of this confession. It is no mere intellectual acknow-
ledgment, but warm loyalty and absolute submission. 8o the great question for us
is not, Do I believe, as @ piece of my intellectual creed that Christ is the Messiah?
&e. That will save no man. What we want is the element of rapturous acknow-
ledgment, loyal submission, absolute obedience, unfaltering trust. (A. Maclaren,
D.D.) Philip and Nathanael :—I. NarHanazn uimsELF. He was—l. A guileless
man, childlike, simple-hearted, transparent, neither credulous nor mistrustful,
honestly ready to receive testimony and to be swayed by the force of truth. 2.
An earnest seeker. ‘We have found the Messiah re would be no gladsome
news to any one not looking for the Messiah, This is the universal condition
of finding. 38. Ignorant up to a certain point. He knew not Christ although
so near his home, like so many now so near His gospel. He knew not Christ
although he knew his Bible. Again the parallel holds good. | 4. Prejudiced.
Yet his prejudice was excusable, for it was due to the faulty testimony of Philip.
Jesus was neither of Nazareth nor the son of Joseph, which shows us how a
blundering and prejudice-raising testimony may notwithstanding be owned of
God. 5. A godly man up to the measure of his light—a man of secret
prayer. II, Narnanazr’s sicut or Jesus. 1. Though prejudiced he was candid
enough to investigate Christ’s claims. If you are prejudiced give the Gospel a fair
hearing. 2. He came to Christ with great activity of heart. As soon as he was
told to ‘Come and see,” he came and saw, without waiting, as many do, for Christ
to come to him. Indifference and lethargy the crying curse of the present day.
3. He saw Jesus—(1) Net merely with his bodily eyes, but—(2) With his mental
eyes he formed a just judgment of Christ. He saw one who could read his thoughts
and knew his secret actions. So we must see the Divine in Christ to be saved.
III. Curist’s siaHt or NaTHANAEL was not that of an acquaintance or a physiogno-
mist, but of a searcher of hearts. He saw—1. His guilelessness. 2. What he was
doing under the fig-tree known to no one but themselves. What this was we can
only surmise. As devout Hasterns are accustomed to have a special place of prayer,
Nathanael may have been engaged under the fig-tree—(1) In confession of sin, and
Christ brought it to his recollection, which convinced him that He knew the secret
burden and the resultant peace. (2) In heart investigation, (3) In earnest prayer
like Jacob at Peniel. (4) In making some solemn vow. (5) In sweet communion
with God. 38. And so Christ sees all sincere seekers, their tears, their prayers.
IV. NarHANary’s FraitH. 1. Note its grounds. Christ’s omniscience, as in the case
of the Samaritan woman and Zacch@us. So some sermons seem made for certain
people, although the preacher is ignorant of them. It is Christ’s word piercing the
hidden depths and revealing secrets. 2. Its clear and comprehensive character.
The Son of God to be adored ; the King of Israel to be served. 3. Its positiveness.
“Thou art.” V. NarHANsEL’s AFTER-SIGHT. 1. He had owned Jesus as the Son of
God ; he was to see Jesus in His glory as the Son of Man; Christ in His media-
torial capacity as the great link between earth and heaven. 2. The providence of
God as ruled by Jesus Christ, who ordereth all things for the good of His Church.
3. The second coming of Christ in His glory. These greater things were afterwards.
Christians should not clamour to know all about Christianity at first. (C. H.
Spurgeon.) Philip and Nathanael :—I. How various ARE THE PATHS BY WHICH
SOULS ARE LED INTO THE NARROW WAY OF LIFE. 1. Philip does not seem to have been
moved by the preaching of the Baptist. 2. He was not drawn by the outspoken
declarations of a brother like Peter. 3. He was called directly by Christ Himself.
4. Though the earliest disciples entered by different roads, they reached the same
way, served the same Master, and at length reached the same home. From which
facts we may deduce—1. That there are diversities of operations answering to
diversities of needs, All cannot be converted in precisely the same manner. 2,
That we must beware of making the experience of other believers the measure of
our own, II. How mucu or Curist THERE IS IN THE OLD Testament, Christ is its
sum and substance. 1. The promises pointed to Him. 2. The types prefigured
Him (John v, 39). III. Tue goop apvicr Pamir Gave NaTHANarL, 1. Wiser coun-
sel it would be impossible to conceive, If he had rebuked Nathanael’s unbelief he


ree


Sa i> o


— wT


cHaP. 1.] ST. JOHN. 133
en eee ree aN ey Ve ae ag a
might have driven him back for many a day. Had he reasoned with Nathanael he
might have confirmed his doubt, By inviting him to see for himself he showed his
entire confidence in his own assertion and his willingness to have it proved. 2. Let
us never be afraid to deal with people about their souls. Christianity courts inquiry.
IV. THE HIGH CHARACTER WHICH Jesus Gives oF NaTHANAEL. 1. He was a true child
of God. He had that which grace alone can give, 2. He was a genuine son of
Abraham. A Jew inwardly. (Bp. Ryle.) Philip and Nathanael :—I. Tus caun
or Pamir. 1. Christ “findeth him.” It was not by chance, although the circum.
stances may have seemed so to Philip, It was without any concurrence of his.
Christ is found of them who sought Him not, The arrangements were Christ's,
And whatever the agency now, Christ is the seeker and finder. 2. Christ said
‘Follow Me” for the first time, (1) An invitation. (2) A command, as all sove-
reign invitations are, requiring obedience. (3) Implying grace to accept. The
followers of Christ—(a) Look to Him as sheep to a shepherd; as the Israelites to
the pillar of cloud; as soldiers to their captain. (b) And, obeying, separate them-
selves from sin, from the world, from self, from every connection inconsistent with
following Him fully. (c) Abide with Him. II. Tue carn or Narwanagn. 1. Philip
findeth him, being qualified by being found himself. On the same day he was made
a disciple he conferred not with flesh and blood, but as Christ’s instrument finds his
friend. (1) Philip’s faith, ‘‘ We have found Him of whom Moses,” &e. All Scripture
treats of Christ and faith in that leads to faith in Him. (2) Philip’s partial ignorance.
“Son of Joseph.” ‘Nazareth.’? This ignorance at once placed him at a dis-
advantage, and was the occasion of prejudice, as is the ignorance of many Christians
now. Observe the faithfulness of Scripture in not concealing the infirmities of the
saints. But his intention was upright, and Christ honoured it by leading Nathanael
through Philip to Himself. (A. Beith, D.D.) Philip and Nathanael :—I. The
POWER OF THE GOSPEL WHEN RECEIVED INTO THE HEART, IN URGING MEN TO ITS
PROPAGATION. Discoyerers of hidden treasures have no motive for making them
known. Discoverers of a remedy for a direful disease have a powerful motive for
making it known, but not necessarily the disposition. But you cannot have a man
who, renewed by the Spirit of God, does not seek the renewal of others. The wealth
received from Christ is kept by disbursement; the cure accomplished by His blood
is radical only as it seeks its extension. And gratitude to the Redeemer impels to
a proclamation of redemption. So Philip felt the communicative and diffusive
nature of true religion. II. TH RECEPTION WHICH THE GOSPEL MEETS WITH EVEN
FROM MEN OF OPENNESS AND SINCERITY. Men have their prejudices, like Nathanael,
founded on some mistake or misapprehension, and these in process of time take the
form of incontrovertible principles, just as proverbs are often quoted till they
almost pass for Bible texts. 1. ‘‘Can deliverance be obtained from one who died
asa malefactor?” Yes. ‘‘Out of Nazareth,” out of shame and death we procure
deliverance: for the substitute must take the place of the guilty and bear his doom.
Examine and you will see you are putting Nazareth for Bethlehem, falsehood for
truth, disgrace for glory. The very circumstances which cause the gospel to appear
so humiliating are those which give to it its majesty and power. 2. ‘‘ Can any
virtue come out of a system which bases everything on faith?” Yes. Of all
systems for the encouragement of personal holiness there is none like the Christian.
For the man who looks to be freely justified by Christ knows that his justification
cannot be evidenced but by sanctification. 3. Let, then, all who have taken up a
taunt against the gospel, till they have virtually made the taunt itself gospel, learn
that though they may be candid, like Nathanael, they may, like him, risk an im-
measurable loss out of adherence to a surmise or saying which they have only to
investigate to prove erroneous. III. THz TREATMENT WHICH A PREJUDICED MAN
SHOULD RECEIVE FROM A BELIEVER. Philip declined all controversy, though a
fairer opening could hardly have been offered. His anxiety was to bring his friend
into personal communication with Jesus. This was the method that had succeeded
with himself, and he felt that it could not possibly fail with another. There was
great wisdom in this ; for it does not often happen that men are convinced by argu-
ment. So, to persuade a man to read the Bible is better than to draw him into a
debate onits evidences. Thereis no evidence of Christianity like that which a man
knocks out for himself with the simple apparatus of a Bible and a conscience. (H.
Melvill, B.D.) The communicativeness of the gospel: —Seed hath a natural
warmth and life in it, by which it increaseth and produceth more seeds like itself ;
so God’s Word, cast into the good ground of a believing heart, hath a supernatural
heat, it being as fire, and lively power to frame and dispose men like itself, to make


hy


134 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [onar. %.


them of fleshly, spiritual; of blind, quicksighted ; of dead in sin, alive in grace.
And as one grain quickened produces several ears, and many grains in each, so one
Christian converted and receiving this power in himself, gaineth many to God, wish-
ing that every one were, as he is, except the bonds of his sins. Philip, being called,
finds Nathanael, and brings him to Christ; and the woman at the well calls all the
town. (Dr. Lake.) “© We have found” :—The whole world may be divided into
three classes and orders of men: those who, having found God, resign themselves
up to His service; those who, having not yet found Him, do indefatigably seek
after Him; those who have neither found Him, nor are inclined to seek Him: the
first are happy and wise; the third are unhappy and fools; the second must be
owned to be wise, as they own themselves to be unhappy. (Pascal.) Testimony
bearing :—Discoverers in the natural world frequently, for prudential reasons, keep
silence as to their discoveries. When Galileo first turned his glass on the planet
Saturn he saw, as he thought, that it consisted of three spheres close together, the
middle one being the largest. Being not quite sure of his fact, he was in a dilemma
between his desire to wait longer for further observation and his fear that some
other observer might forestall him. To combine these Galileo wrote a sentence,
‘‘ T have observed the highest planet to be triple.” He then jumbled the letters to-
gether and made the sentence into one monstrous word, and published this, which
eontained his discovery, but under lock and key. He had reason to congratulate
himself on his prudence, for within two years two of the supposed bodies disappeared,
leaving only one; and for nearly fifty years Saturn continued to all astronomers
the enigma it was to Galileo, until in 1656 it was finally made clear that it was
surrounded by a thin flat ring, which, when fully seen, gave rise to the first appear-
ance in Galileo’s small telescope, and when seen edgeways disappeared from view
altogether. With an instinct that makes the newly saved Christian long that
others may share his joy, he, however, goes everywhere, saying, ‘‘ We have found
the Messiah ; this is the Christ.” (H. O. Mackey.) Can any good come out of
Nazareth.—Judge not a man by his surroundings :—I. In the 1nTELLEcTUAL world.
Can a man become a scholar without a university training? Hugh Miller, &c. II.
In the pouirican world. Can a man who was a rail-splitter in his youth makea
good President? Lincoln. III. In the socian world. Frequently a man whom
society learns to respect is of humble parentage, and vice versa. IV. In the
ECCLESIasTicaL world. Examples of pure Christianity in Roman Churches—An-
selm, Bernard, Newman. Noble pagans, Socrates, Epictetus, &c. V. In the
moraL world. Some of the most distinguished saints in obscure conditions. The
purest diamond—where is that? Precious metals too. (G. F. Green.) Come and
see.—How to learn the excellence of Christ :—Prejudices often find expression in
spite of one’s consciousness of them, and of the protest of reason. All that is
needed to betray them is simply an occasion, Such an occasion was given
Nathanael by Philip’s mention of ‘‘ Nazareth.” The best response to a sneer, as a
rule, is silence, Christ’s manner, for the most of us, is the wisest and most digni-
fied— answering not a word.” Nevertheless, it is allowable to transfix a prejudice,
or turn aside a sneer, if we can do it as effectually as Philip. He neither admits
nor denies the force of Nathanael’s objection. His answer is a challenge whose
reasonableness Nathanael himself could not deny—‘t Come and see!’ The excel-
lence of Christ may be learned in part: I. From report; oR, THE TESTIMONY OF
witnesses, ‘*We have found Him,” &c., is substantially the testimony of
every honest inquirer. Also the Samaritan woman (chap. iv. 29), whose testimony
brought many of her people to Him. The whole New Testament is but a report of
witnesses of the person, character, teachings, &c., of the Son of God. II. By mnrzr-
coursE wiTH His piscirtes. Nathanael heeded Philip’s terse advice; he went
with him to see Christ. True Christian example is an illustration of Christ Himself,
Christ’s excellence, reproduced in His disciples, may be learned even by His
bitterest enemies. Said a fterce Papist to Bishop Jewel: “I should love thee,
Jewel, if thou wast not a Lutheran—in thy faith thou art a heretic, but, surely,
in thy life thou art an angel.” Lord Peterborough, when visiting Archbishop
Fenelon, heard no argument from him on the claims of Christianity. The vener-
able prelate let logic alone, and simply lived such a life as he was wont to do when
there were no infidels about to witness. The exclamation of the deist was, ‘“‘IfI
stay here much longer, I shall become a Christian in spite of myself.” ‘Come
and see,” thou unbelieving friend! Mingle with Christians—not to mark their
inconsistencies and expose their faults, A better motive is his who is ever looking
for excellences; and these will be found even in the humblest of Christ’s disciples,


4


cHaP. 1.) ST. JOHN. — 135


——-


Ill. By PERSONAL REALIZATION.” You cannot know the excellence of a thing without
personally testing it. What do you know of a fruit you have never tasted? The
sight of food relieves no one’s hunger. ‘If any man will do His will,” &c, Chris-
tianity is a grand temple, the interior of which you have never seen. It is famous
the world over. Crowds of all ages and nationalities have entered it, and, gazing
upon its grandeur, have been lost in wonder, exclaiming, “The half was not told
me!” But you are without, looking listlessly at a single rose-window, and asking,
** What is there here to admire?” But ‘come and see.” Let me take you, as
Philip took Nathanael, into the temple. Then shall its glory burst upon you over-
whelmingly! This personal test, or experience, is the only proof of gospel blessings
which thousands of Christians can urge without fear of successful contradiction.
Conclusion :—1. Christ would be more appreciated if He were more thoroughly
known. 2. Once Scripturally known, Christ needs no longer to beg for men’s
regard. Come and see:—I. THE QUALIFICATIONS FoR SEEING Curist. 1. Deep
conviction and penitence on the part ot gross sinners. 2. Guileless sincerity on
the part of those who, like Nathaniel, have not gone so far morally astray.
Il, THe necessity or sEEING Curist. 1, Argument about an absent person
most inefficient. 2. Personal contemplation alone efficient. III. Tue muans
OF SEEING Curist. 1. Earnest unprejudiced study of the facts of Christ’s history
and of His words. Come out of the world and compare it with the Christ
depicted in the Gospels. 2. Clear patient meditation on Christ’s commentary on
His character and mission to the Church. (1) Not as Rome would have us do,
behold Christ in her ecclesiastics, rites, councils, and visible head. Often have
these things created a Nathanael-like prejudice. But (2) In the blended lives of
Christ’s saintly followers who constitute the true Church. (3) In the regenerating
effects which the Church, through Him, has produced in the world. 3. Actual
intercourse with Christ Himself. (1) We have often wished for bodily contact, a
knowledge of Christ after the flesh. This would be very precious, but, as St. Paul
shows, might bring no real knowledge. 4. The vision of faith the highest and best
means of enjoying the manifestation of Christ. This vision (1) Is progressive. (2)
Becomes a power of vision in every other direction. The believer sees Christ every-
where. (T'. Islip.) The proverbial disrepute of Nazareth :—The whole of Galilee
was a despised region in the eyes of the more polished Palestinians of the South.
The Galileans were accused of being rude, illiterate, and devoid of culture. Their
pronunciation was said to be so thick that it led constantly to mortifying blunders,
as when one could not tell from the word used whether a Galilean peasant had come
tothe market for an ass (khamor), wine (khemer), sheepskin (immer), or wool (’immar).
A Galilean woman, inviting her guest to table, said: ‘‘I am going to give you milk
to eat.” In her thick Galilean pronunciation it actually sounded: ‘‘ May a lion eat
you!” Other such ambiguities are mentioned as occurring in the rude speech of the
Galileans. Worse than all, the Galileans were said to be loose on points of doc-
tzine, so that a bad odour of heterodoxy hung over the province. It was not to
Galilee that the Judean would naturally have looked for a great theological teacher.
Nazareth shared, of course, in the reproach of the province to which it belonged.
The town was simply a typical Galilean village, filled with a warm-hearted, and
perhaps (as the Talmud suggests) a warm-tempered people, who had little sympathy
with the learned casuistry of the Judean rabbis, and were therefore looked down
upon as ignorant rabble. There is little reason for charging special moral turpitude
against the people of Nazareth. The Judean simply looked down upon Nazareth
as the urbane inhabitant of a great city is supposed to look down upon a backwoods
settlement. The inhabitants of a college town in the East would hardly turn to
the new settlement of Nosuchplace, in Blank Territory, for a teacher of culture,
That was the way the Judean felt with regard to Nazareth. (S. S. Timvs.)
Nathanael’s prejudice: —Suppose you were told that a peasant out of Ross-
shire was a man on whom the whole history of the nation hung. Would
you believe it without first saying, “That is a strange place for such a person
to be born in”? Galilee was a despised part of Palestine, and Nazareth
was a proverbially despised part of Galilee; and this Jesus was a carpenter’s
gon that nobody had ever heard of. It seemed to be a strange head on which
the Divine Dove should flutter down, passing by all the Pharisees and Scribes,
all the great and wise. Nathanael’s prejudice was but the giving voice to a fault
that is as wide as humanity, and which we have every day of our lives to fight
with—the habit of estimating people and their work, wisdom, and power to teach
us by the class to which they are supposed to belong, or even by the place from


=


eee Vie
186 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fonar. 1.
Te RS a a a
which they come. “Can a German teach an Englishman anything he does not
know?” “Isa Protestant to owe anything of spiritual illumination to a Roman
Catholic?” ‘Are we Dissenters to receive any wisdom or example from Church-
men?” ‘Will a Conservative be able to give any lessons in politics to a Liberal?”
“Ts there any other bit of England that can teach Lancashire?” | Take care that
whilst you are holding up your hands in horror against the prejudices of our Lord’s
contemporaries who stumbled at His origin you are not doing the same thing in
regard to all manner of subjects twenty times a day. (4. Maclaren, D.D.) The
power of prejudice :—A man was stoutly asserting that there were no goldfields
except in Mexico and Peru. A nugget dug up in California was shown him as con-
vincing evidence against his positive statement to the contrary. So far from being
disconcerted, he quietly answered: “‘ This metal, I confess, is extremely like gold ;
and you tell me that it passes as such in the market. All this I do not dispute.
Nevertheless, the metal is not gold, but auruminium ; it cannot be gold, because
gold comes only from Mexico and Peru.” In vain was he told that the geological
formation of California was similar to that of Peru, and that the metals were similar.
He had made up his mind that gold existed only in Mexico and Peru; this was a
law of nature; he had no reason to give why it should be so; but such had been the
admitted fact for years, and from this opinion he would not swerve. (John N.
Norton.) The power of prejudice :—It is a great pity that this way of estimating
the value of suggested truth is so common in our day. ‘Can a minister know
anything about science?” is the sneering question on one side. Yes; and on the
other side the equally scornful question often comes, ‘‘Can a scientist who is not a
Christian believer bring out facts that a Bible student ought to ponder?” ‘Is
there any truth worth considering in the outside religions of the world ?”’ asks some
‘“‘ orthodox” believer, who answers his question in the negative before he asks it,
And some “ liberal thinker” puts his question, in a like spirit of confident denial,
“Ts any ‘orthodox’ truth worth believing in these days of religious progress?” It
is the old spirit, and much the old question, of the provincial bigot of Juda, ‘‘ Can
any good come out of Nazareth?” (H. G. Trumbull, D.D.)


Ver. 47. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.—This is a chapter
of ‘‘beholds.”? We are first to ‘‘ Behold the Lamb of God,” and then to behold a
man of God. Nathanael was simple, straightforward, honest, ‘ an Israelite indeed.”
In this he was not like his great progenitor, Jacob, who was a supplanter, and not
a prince with God till that memorable night when the angel wrestled with him,
and withered his carnal strength. Then, in the weakness of that simplicity which
laid hold upon the mighty One, Jacob became Israel (Gen. xxvii. 36; xxxii. 28). A
sincere and simple character was not common in our Lord’s day. It is despised by
many at this day. It was greatly appreciated by our Lord, who has the same
character in perfection, and is truly called ‘‘ the holy child Jesus.” This charac-
teristic of guilelessness is—I. A HAPPY SIGN IN A SEEKER. We will illustrate this
by Nathanael’s procedure. 1. He is the sort of man to whom disciples like to
speak (ver. 45). 2. He is outspoken with his difficulties, and therefore his friends
see how to meet them (ver. 46). 3. He is ready to apply the proper tests (ver. 46).
4, He is honest in his use of those tests. Our Lord saw that Nathanael was no
captious critic nor idly-curious observer (ver, 47). 5. He is open to conviction it
fair evidence be supplied. As soon as our Lord proved His omniscience Nathanael
believed (ver. 48). 6. He is ready to make confession (ver. 49). 7. He is prepared
to proceed far in the school of Christ. The Lord promised him the sight of greater
things because he was prepared to see them (vers. 50, 51). An Israelite is the man
to know “ the King of Israel” (ver. 49). An Israelite is the man to understand the
famous dream of the father of all Israelites (ver. 51; Gen. xxviii. 12). ID. A vrran
POINT IN A BELIEVER, The truly upright man, and he only, can be a Christian. 1.
A sense of pardon removes the temptation to guile: we cease to excuse ourselveg
when pardon is received (Psa. li.). 2. A reception of Christ as “the truth” causeg
guile to be hated. 3. A truthful assurance of the gospel prevents a hypocritical
faith, 4. A complete consecration to the Lord puts an end to a double-minded life,
and to all false aims and maxims. 5. A sense of the presence of God makes guile
appear absurd, 6. A brave faith in God causes it to appear mean and cowardly,
III, A sUR& PRODUCER OF OTHER QuaLITIES, 1. It makes a man love his Bible.
Nathanael was familiar with the law and the prophets. 2. It makes him pray. He
is an Israelite (Gen. xxxii. 28). 3. It leads him to be much alone, ‘“ Under the
fig-tree” (ver, 48). 4. It makes him wear his heart in his countenance. ‘ Behold


+"


OHAP. 1,] ST. JOHN. 187


an Israelite indeed.” 65. It prepares him to behold the pure and true glories of
heaven. Who among us is renowned for cleverness, craft, shrewdness, and the
critical faculty in general? Let him be afraid of the much-admired quality of
cleverness. The absence of simplicity is by no means a healthy sign. Let us be
true in any case, and may the Lord teach us His truth! (C. H. Spurgeon.) A
high eulogium :—A professor of religion who is what he appears to be, and appears
to be what heis, I. Tu PROMINENT FEATURES OF THIS CHARACTER. 1. Regeneracy ;
newness of heart. This its foundation. 2. An earnest desire and endeavour to
know the truth: at first-hand ; not through a priest. 3. A deliberate purpose and
steady intention to please God in everything. The Pharisee prays to get popular
applause; Nathanael retires under a fig-tree. 4. Uniformity and consistency. The
heart answers to the life, the life to the heart. II. THe ExcELLENCIES OF THIS
cHaRacTER. 1. It is estimable, and is held in esteem. Without it a man is a worth-
less character, however otherwise distinguished. 2. It is pleasing to God. 3. It
brings peace to its possessor. 4. It secures hereafter its great and everlasting
reward. (John Brown, D.D.) One of the rare commendatory words of Christ
spoken on a most rare occasion. 1. Bestowed upon a man who spoke contemp-
tuously of his birthp)ace; was prepossessed against himself; had, immediately
after an hour of earnest devotion, fallen again under a prejudice. 2. Was bestowed
for the very reason that He was without guile. (Lange.) The Israelite indeed
is—I. A MAN WHOSE HEART 18 TRUE TO Gop. Our hearts are so—1. When we seek
our happiness in Him, and not in the gratification of the “desire of the flesh,” &c.
2. When we find our happiness in Him, é.e., when the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts, 8. When this love is persistent and permanent. JI. A MAN wHosE
WORDS ARE SUITABLE THERETO. When there is no guile in the heart there is none
on the lips. In this is implied—1. Veracity—speaking the truth from the heart;
the putting away of all wilful lying in every kind and degree. Roman casuists
distinguish lies into—(1) Malicious—such as are told with a desire to hurt. These
no one defends. (2) Harmless—such as are supposed to do neither good nor harm.
Men excuse these; but no Nathanael can speak them, and Paul condemns them
(Eph. iv. 25). (3) Officions—those spoken with a design to do good. About these
there has been much controversy. Some maintain them to be innocent, and even
meritorious. But Paul teaches (Rom. iii. 7, 8)—(a) That the good effect of a lie is
no excuse for it. (b) That it is a mere slander upon Christians to say they teach men
to do evil that good may come. (c) That if any teach this or do it their damnation
is just: which is all applicable to this kind of lies. 2. Sincerity. As veracity is
opposite to lying, so is sincerity to cunning. Cunning is confounded with wisdom.
But wisdom is the faculty of discerning the best ends and the fittest means of
attaining them. The two great means of cunning are—(1) Simulation—the seeming
to be what we are not; (2) dissimulation—the seeming not to be what we are. If
we are engaged with artful men, we may use silence and reserve without cunning ;
but we may not speak the truth in order to deceive. This is perhaps not incon-
sistent with veracity, but it is with sincerity. When we speak at all, we should
speak the naked truth from the heart. 3. This is properly termed simplicity, which
implies—(1) Not only the speaking no known falsehood; (2) not only designedly
deceiving no one; but (3) speaking plainly and artlessly to every one in & childlike
though not in a childish manner. This excludes the using of empty compliments.
4, This sincerity and simplicity has an influence on the whole behaviour which,
though it be far enough remote from clownishness, ill-breeding, roughness, and
gurlincas, is plain and free from disguise. Conclusion: This, then, is real solid
virtue. Not truth alone, nor conformity with truth; not love alone, but truth and
love united. (John Wesley.) Christian simplicity :—Several bishops once asked
Bishop Atterbury : ‘‘ Why will you not suffer your servants to deny you when you
do not care to see company? It is not a lie for them to say your lordship is not at
home; for it deceives no one: every one knows it means only, your lordship is
busy.” He replied: “My lords, if it is (which I doubt) consistent with sincerity,
yet I am sure it is not consistent with that simplicity which becomes a Christian
bishop. (Ibid.) An Israelite indeed:—I. His portrait. 1. He is a converted
character. 2. His profession and his conduct agree. 8. His words and his heart
harmonize. 4. He is known by his zeal for God’s glory. 5. He is distinguished
by his compassion for souls. IJ. Tue aDVANTAGES OF BEING AN ISRAELITE INDEED.
The advantages are great—1. To his family, 2. To the sphere in which he moves,
whether high or low. 3. To the Church of Christ. 4. To himself. III. In con-
ouuston: 1. ‘Behold an Israelite indeed.” ‘Mark the perfect man,” &. 2


=
138 THH BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (omar. 1.


Admire him—admire Christ in him. 3. Be thankful for him. 4. Imitate him in
life. 5. Rejoice in his blessedness in heaven. (A. Fletcher, D.D.) The true
Israelite is:—I. A TRUE son or ABranAM. Nathanael was so called not because he
was a descendant of Abraham, but because he resembled the patriarch in his faith
and piety. ‘If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham’s seed.” ‘They who are of
faith are the children of Abraham.” Faith, then, is the characteristic of the true
Israelite. Nathanael was ready to believe. Faith is the primary virtue of the
Christian life. II. ky covenant with Gop. The Jews were ever ready to boast of
this, but the Baptist and our Lord corrected them. Whoever cordially and unre-
servedly takes God for his God, Christ for his Redeemer, the Holy Spirit for his
Sanctifier, is in covenant with God. III. A worsHiPPER oF THE TRUE Gop. All
other nations worshipped idols. Every true Israelite is a temple of God. From the
altar of his heart he offers the incense of sincerity and affection. To God he gives
the best of his services. The worship of God is not formal and burdensome, but
delightful. He shows his sincerity also by his secret worship. IV. Lixe THE
PATRIARCH FROM WHOM HE TAKES HIS NAME; a wrestler with God. V. Has THE
PROMISE OF AN INHERITANCE, only not an earthly, but a heavenly. Conclusion: 1.
The conduct of Philip must be highly approved, and should beimitated. 2. Although
good men are subject to be prejudiced, when they have the opportunity of being
better instructed the prejudices give way to cordial attachment. 3. Our Lord is the
witness of every action of our lives, and especially of every exercise of devotion. 4.
Sincerity in religion is essential. (J. A. Alexander, D.D.) Of sincerity toward
God and man:—I. Towarp Gop. Our piety is, then, sincere—l. When the chief
reasons and predominant motives are religious. A religious or rational motive is
that which regards God and another world in opposition to men and present
temporal advantages. 2. When it is rooted in the heart, and is a living principle
within us. 8. When men are religious in secret as well as in public. 4. When
there is a constant tenor of goodness in the general course of life. 5. When our
obedience to God is uniform and universal. 6. When it holds out against persecu-
tion.and the fiery trial. II. Towarps man; and so it signifies a simplicity of mind
and manners in our conversation and carriage towards each other; singleness of
heart discovering itself in honest openness; speaking as we think, performing what
we promise, and being what we seem to be. III. Conctuston. Let us be sincere in
our religion, never making use of_it to serve any base or unworthy ends; and be
straightforward in speech and conduct in our intercourse with men. To this end
the following considerations are offered :—1. That sincerity is the highest commen-
dation and the very best character that can be given of any man (Josh. xxiv. 14;
1 Chron. xix.17; Psa, xv. 1, 2, xxxii. 2). 2. That this virtueis rare. 38. That the
want of it will quite spoil the virtue and acceptance of our piety and deprive us of
its reward. 4. Insincerity is a vain and foolish thing. It is designed to cheat
others; it really deceives ourselves. 5. Truth and reality have all the advantages
of appearance, and many more. It is hard to act a part long. A dissembler must
be always on his guard. Insincerity is very troublesome to manage. 6. That it is
not worth while to dissemble, considering the shortness and uncertainty of our
lives. (Abp. Tillotson.) Nathanael :—Finest paintings or portraits are those
which fill the eye and fix it by their natural unadorned simplicity; in which
there is nothing superfluous, nothing to call the attention away from the dis-
tinctly defined character marked in the features. Inferior courtly artists, such
as Lawrence, spend much time in haberdashery, in dress, in attitude, in the
studious introduction of the scenery in the background. Vandyke, Velasquez,
Reynolds, care usually only for feature, form, character. We have such a
portrait here. It arrests us. ‘Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no
guile!” one of the first and foremost of the little group in which the human
manifestation of the Church had its origin. I. I would make some preliminary
remarks on the first impressions given to us by this story and character of Nathanael.
1, In spite of the high eulogy of our Lord, I cannot but say what a bad impression
in fact he makes upon us at first. He seems to come before us as a narrow mind,
a mind influenced by prejudices. Qualities are mixed in all, even as a beech has
beautiful qualities and grave defects—it is very graceful, but it is more subject to
the worm, it has little strength, and it shrinks. Let us do justice, even often, to
the narrow mind. If it cannot receive us, let us receive it; if it will not contain us,
let us retain it, Let us, whenever we can, form affectionate sentiments of nations,
of communities, of men; if they are true, you only do them justice; and, if they
are false, though your opinion does not alter and make them lovely, at least you are


il el i al a ll bla os


om. 1.] ST. JOHN. 139


the more lovely for holding such sentiments. Being with Jesus ought to enlarge
the most narrow mind: it enlarged Nathanael’s, he was certainly narrow. 2. Pre-
liminary remark, _ it is obvious that Christ knows some who do not know Him.
‘* Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig-tree I saw thee.” II.
But it is time we turn from these merely negative, from what some may regard as,
at best, these doubtful aspects of the character of Nathanael, to the positive
encomium of our Lord, I may even say the splendid designation of our Lord.
That designation, I need not say, comprehends two developments of the man. An
Israelite indeed—his Church character. That narrow suspiciousness which pro-
claimed the J ew, does not prevent his right here—an Israelite indeed; ‘‘ for he is
not a Jew which is one outwardly.” 1. In the first place he was one, as we have
in some measure already seen, who was not merely by birth a Jew; his heart was
interested in the destiny of Israel; he had entered into the mystery of the Divine
separation. Israel led a separated life, and that is the idea of consecrated life;
‘* Lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned amongst the nations ” ;
that is the first idea of Israel—sequestration, separation. 2. The life beneath the
fig-tree, whatever it might be, justifies the idea that he was an earnestly holy man.
Our Lord’s designation implies that he had some divinely secluded life, in which he
realized the origin of the term Israel. That term is indeed somewhat dark, but it
no doubt speaks of one who had seen God face to face—it had its origin when the
name of Jacob was changed, and he was called Israel, in the night of Peniel.
Nathanael itself was a fine name; like so many of the Hebrew names it spoke of
God. The affix, HJ—the hallowing, consecrating name of God—how often we find
it in the Hebrew names! Eliab, God of my Father; Elizur, God my Rock ;
Shelumiel, God my Peace; Eliasaph, God will increase ; Elishama, God will hear ;
Gamaliel, God will recompense; Pagiel, Son of God my Interceder; Nathanael,
God hath given. So the Israelites, we may believe in no light spirit, honoured God
in conferring names; and Peniel, or the Face of God, was the place where the old
patriarch believed he had seen God face to face; and Nathanael had his Peniel.
3. Once more, this Israelite indeed was such, not only by his isolation, his sacred
sequestration, his earnest wrestling, his Divine communions, but by his hopes. As
I have said, promises can only avail to those who can use them. No Israelite
indeed can rest in his heart without the fulfilment of the Divine promise that the
Son shall have the “ uttermost parts of the earth for His possession.” Let us turn
to the foundation of all this in his personal individual character. He was pure in


heart, he was a guileless man, ‘in whom is no guile.” He solved his prejudices


against Christ by immediately going to Him. Oh that all hearts prejudiced against
Christ would do so! This is magnanimity, this is conduct of which only a great
and pure and guileless mind is capable. I think it was also to this temper of mind
the splendid designation of our Lord was addressed. Behold he comes—the man
incapable of doubting, and turning, and duplicity, and sophistry; incapable of
attempting to make the white appear black, or the black white, or the worst best, or
the best worst. Here is a man who can dare to be true. Weare to believe that it
was beneath the fig-tree’s shade that such Divine purity and guilelessness were
attained and studied. (EH. Paxton Hood.)


Ver. 48. When thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee.—What was he doing
there? Something good evidently. The following suggestions have been made:
I. THAT HE WAS THERE FOR GRATEFUL CONTEMPLATION. A tradition says that at
the massacre of the innocents he was hidden by his mother beneath the fig-tree in
her garden at Bethlehem. ‘This is too remote a reference, having occurred thirty
years before. II. THarT HE FIRST HEARD OF CHRIST BENEATH THE FIG-TREE. When
Philip fownd him he was seated beneath his own fig-tree. But this was known
to Philip and perbaps to others. Our Lord’s allusion was obviously to some
circumstance understood only by Nathanael. III. Tuar 1r was FOR PRAYER WITH
RESPECT TO SOME SPECIAL DIFFICULTY. No doubt Nathanael’s devotions were the
reverse of those of the Pharisees. But this suggestion is too vague. IV. Tuar rr
WAS FOR THE SPECIAL sTUDY or Gop’s Worp. No doubt Nathanael was waiting for
the consolation of Israel. On one memorable occasion, as he sat there with the
sacred roll spread out on his knee, light suddenly dawned. The scripture was
Genesis, the life was that of Jacob, the passage the vision of the ladder (ver. 51),
and above all a voice speaking of. a seed in which all the families of the earth
should be blessed. On that day perhaps Philip summoned him to the presence of
the Master. Conclusion: 1. How do you spend your hours of privacy? Some in


oN ,
140 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cnar. 1


ae
sinful thoughts, shameful deeds. Let the sinner know that God sees him. 2.
Experience proves the worth of meditative prayer (Matt. vi. 6). 3. Resort to your
fig-tree frequently, (S. Buss, LL.B.)  Christ’s knowledge of His people :—I. Their
onaracters He understands. II. Their conpuct He observes. II. Their raoveuts
He discerns. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) Christ the Witness of our secret hours :—
I. Waar vais INncIDENT TEACHES Us oF Curist. His Divinity. Let us leave the
trite and well-trodden method of proving this, and try a simpler way. Jesus demands
our adoration as more than man, and on the ground that He alone of all the
minds that have lifted up the world with intelligence has the power of reading all
men’s thoughts and hearts and experiences through and through. The leaders of
thought have never been equal to this. Had they even pretended to it they would
have been set down as miserable jugglers. A general knowledge of human nature
is all that the acutest have attained. The limit of this is soon attained and is not
always accurate. But here isa man who all through life knew what is in man.
He wanted no information about the diseases He cured. He saw the lack of self-
sacrifice in the young man. He judged faultlessly the Pharisees, Judas, Pilate, the
faithless wife, the woman that was a sinner. How could He be a Saviour without
knowing our real state? the Light of the world without its lying open to His
inspection ? the Judge without comprehending every secret motive, error, sin? II.
WHAT THIS INCIDENT TEACHES US OF NATHANAEL AND OF THE BLESSING HE RECEIVED.
1. He was nota faultless character, but genuine, lowly, teachable, having a soul
open to receive spiritual light. 2. The blessing imports—(1) That which falls on
all genuine unconscions goodness that hides itself from men, and therefore is more
precious to God. This is one of those new gracious ideas which the gospel brings
into the world. Not only is righteousness independent of station or publicity, but
it is acceptable to God and a sign of spiritual purity in the degree that it turns to
God alone for its Approver. (2) Attainments are of slow growth. It needs time to
form habits. But sincerity in the religious life is indispensable at the very outset.
This was Nathanael’s one promising, solid grace. Hence the encouragement held
out to genuine repentance and the unsparing condemnation of hypocrisy. (3) The
modest and faithful performance of a lower duty prepares the soul for the higher
services and privileges. The man that was true under the fig tree afterwards sees
angels of God, &c. (Bp. Huntington.) Nathanael under the fig-tree; or,
religion in secret :—I. Ir 18 IN SECRET THAT TRUE RELIGION HAS ITS ORIGIN. Thus
we perceive that the rise of religion in the soul must necessarily be out of
sight. The new creation is accomplished by the secret agency of the Holy
Spirit. The origin of great rivers is sometimes wrapped mystery; they rise
in some inaccessible regions on which human eye has never gazed. For
centuries the sources of the Nile were unknown; to discover them was the
highest ambition of many an adventurous explorer; but till very recently every
attempt had been of no avail. Indeed, the fountain-heads of some of our own
rivers lie far away from the haunts of men. If you would trace the Severn to its
source, you must ascend the height of Plinlimmon, and there, in a dreary, wild,
secluded region, you will find the obscure fountain, where the noble river rises.
Truly, this is not an unapt representation of the beginning of the Divine life in the
soul. II. Ir 1s IN SECRET THAT TRUE RELIGION IS MOST IMPORTANT. This is manifest
when we consider that—l. Man is a lonely being. It may be a startling statement,
but it is profoundly true. Between man and man there lies a wide distance; beyond
a certain point they cannot approach each other; thus every,one stands emphatically
by himself. A casual visitor to a large town is frequently overwhelmed with a
painful sense of loneliness. Man is alone in most of those circumstances which
make up the sum of his existence. His thoughts and reflections, his hopes and
fears, are for the most part unknown to his bosom friends. The stage of a theatre
is generally so decorated as to presenta very gorgeous appearance. You might
imagine that those who move and talk upon it live in a kind of fairy land. Beau-
tiful forms chatter and dance, amidst sunny groves and laughing streams. All this,
however, gives you but a very erroneous idea of what those men and women
are in real life. Still, were you allowed to go behind the scenes, where they retire
after having played their parts, you might form a sounder estimate of their actual
character ; but the proceedings there are never beheld by the crowd of spectators
who fill the house. But aman’s religion follows him into the most retired plages ;
it leaves its impress upon his most private actions ; it forms and fashions his most
secret meditations. 2. Religious declension invariably begins in secret. This shows
how jealous we should always be of the integrity of our inner life. Think of a


cmap. 1.] ST. JOHN. 141


stream, which, as it winds its way along the meadow, supplies man and beast with
its crystal waters. But one day it becomes suddenly thick and troubled. Whatcan
be the cause? Somebody has been tampering with the fountain-head. It is in
secret that the foundation of our religion is laid. And if the foundation be not
firm, the superstructure must be in danger. 3. We can form a more accurate judg-
ment of our religion from our secret life than from anything else. There are two
distinct spheres wherein a man’s religion may be tested; namely, in public and in
secret. Some profess religion from the love of praise—some from a baser motive
still, the love of gain. But such motives as these can have no possible influence
upon us in secret. III. TRUE RELIGION IN SECRET IS ACCOMPANIED BY TRUE RELIGION
IN PUBLIC. We have a remarkable instance of this in the case of Nathanael. When
called upon to act in public, he practised the principles which he cherished in secret.
1. He who has God’s love in his heart cannot altogether hide the fact from others.
Religion is not a latent principle, buried up in the depths of the soul; for it displays
itself in works of righteousness before the world. 2. The secret life of man cannot but
tell on his public life. If a man commune much with God in secret, he cannot be
otherwisethan God-likein public. Unconsciously to himself, he sheds abroad a power-
fulinfluence wherever he goes. (A. Rowlands, B.A.) The secret side of religion -—I.
RELIGION HAS A SECRET SIDE TOWARDS GOD, AS WELL AS AN OPEN SIDE TOWARDS MAN.
There is a part of religion thatis strictly privateand personal. From the secret good
in Nathanael we may draw the conclusion that there is more good in the world than
we know, more good in men than we can see. II. THE SECRET SIDE OF RELIGION IS
THE SURE TEST AND SIGN OF ITS REALITY. From Christ’s words to Nathanael we
may gather—1. Christ bases His estimate of men upon what is inward rather than
what is outward, upon what is secret and private rather than upon what is public
and open. 2. Christ pursues a method of judgment with men far different from that
taken by the world. 3. The secret side of religion is the surest sign of its reality,
because free from many evils which often are associated with the public and open.
III. THE SECRET SIDE OF RELIGION HERE SHALL BECOME THE OPEN SIDE HEREAFTER,
Christ honoured it in Nathanael, and, to the amazement of the man, made it known.
He will recognize and honour and make known the secret goodness of all His servants
by and by. Sometimes the secret life of religion becomes openly known here. Here-
after comes the grand and complete revelation. ‘‘ Your Father, that seeth in secret,
shall reward you openly.” In religion, and in the service of Christ, let every man
be true to his own nature. Let no man despise his brother because his brother is
not as himself. Let Nathanael be Nathanael, and let Peter be Peter. Behind our open
life and public duties let there be a secret life with God, of thought and prayer.
(Homiletic Magazine.) The Old Testament and the New :—There is an analogy
between what is here said at the opening of the Gospel and what is written
at the opening of the Old Testament of the law in the Book of Genesis. I.
The two portions of Scripture REPRESENT THE REIGNING PRINCIPLES OF THE TWO
DISPENSATIONS, EACH BY A TYPICAL OCCURRENCE ON ITS THRESHOLD. 1. There, at the
garden of Eden, man a transgressor, conscious of his guilt, hides himself under the
leaves of a tree to escape the punishment he deserves and dreads, and there the eye
of the Almighty searches him out with a summons to judgment. 2. Here, at the
introduction of the Gospel, just when the Lamb of God appears to take away the
world’s sin, man seeks the same covering, not to hide himself from God, but to draw
near to Him for communion; and here the same searching eye discovers him, not
for rebuke, but for encouragement and blessing. Adam was ashamed and hid him-
self; in Nathanael there was no shame needing to be hid. II. Tae two cHanacTER-
ISTIO MOTIVE POWERS OF THE TWO PARTS OF REVELATION, both necessary, the terror
of the law, alarming and rousing the conscience, and the attraction of grace moving
and melting the heart. Not a jot or a tittle passes from the law till all is fulfilled,
because conscience burns in us with its perpetual fire, and in his weakness and self-
love every man needs to know that “the soul that sinneth, it shall die,” yet none
the less are we Christians to be mindful that we live under the new dominion of
mercy, when no faintest movement of faith is forgotten, and no retiring act of holy
obedience is unnoticed and unrewarded. (Zbid.) The fig tree :—The advantages
of the fig tree as a shade are shown in the following: ‘‘ As we approached, one of
the camel-drivers, pointing to a cluster of six large fig trees, cried out, ‘Tacht et-
teen,’—under the fig tree? And soon we felt the pleasantness of this shade; for
there is something peculiarly delightful in the shade of the fig tree. It is far
superior to the shade of a tent, and perhaps even to the shadow of a rock, since not
only does the mass of heavy foliage completely exclude the rays of the sun, but the


ios
142 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. &


traveller finds under it a peculiar coolness, arising from the air gently creeping
through the branches. Hence the force of the Scripture expression, ‘ When thou
wast under the fig tree.’”? (Mission to the Jews from Scotland.)


Ver. 49. Rabbi, Thou art the Son of God; Thou art the King of Israel.—The
earliest creed :—Remarkable as not being formulated by an ecumenical council, a
learned rabbi, a matured and educated Christian, but by a simple guileless Jew who
had only his Old Testament to learn from, and at his first interview with Christ.
Acquaintance with the Bible and communion with Christ the best qualifications
for a creed maker. Would that all had learned this—would that all would learn
it. Concerning this creed, notice—I. Its Breviry. Compare it with its successors:
the Apostles’, the Nicene, the Athanasian, and the more modern Confessions of parti-
cular Churches: each adding something to its predecessor, until the mind is burdened
and confused by the multiplicity of propositions. 1. This growth is accounted for
by the rise of successive heresies against whose denials or affirmations the Church
has protected itself by successive negative or positive articles. 2. This growth is
only an expansion of and deduction from the primitive statement: an evolution
of what has been involved in germ. 3. This growth has not always been a safeguard
against the errors condemned. Churches with the most elaborate creeds have
widely departed from the truth. 4. This growth adds nothing to the saving power
of the simple confession of the text. All who with guileless heart profess Christ
in the words of Nathanael will without doubt be saved everlastingly. II. Irs surri-
ciency. 1. Rabbi. Christ is the Supreme Teacher. (1) Inspiring prophets and
apostles. (2) Imparting instruction personally. His teaching is simple, profound,
beautiful, vivifying. (3) Giving the Spirit of Truth to guide into all truth. 2. Sor
of God who became the Son of man to redeem. (1) His Divinity. (2) His Atone-
ment. (3) His brotherly sympathy. 3. King of Israel. (1) To reign. (2) To
rule. (3) To conquer. (4) To reward His servants and punish His enemies.
III. Irs perinirEness. 1. Most creeds are made up of a number of abstract
propositions, and are a general testimony of the confessor’s theological souncaess
to the world. Hence their feeble moral effect on the confessor. His mind may be
sound, but his heart maybe heretical. 2. This creed was a brief statement of faith
in Christ made to Christ Himself. The Te Deum is a better confession than the
Athanasian or Nicene symbols. It touches and inspires while it gives expression
to the feelings of the heart. IV. THr merHop oF ITs DELIvERY. 1. Prompt,
without study or reluctance. 2. Positive, without misgiving about it or specula-
tion beyondit. 8. Final; Nathanael never outgrew it, although he doubtless filled
up the outline. V. Tue opiicaTion Ir mNvoLvES. 1. Viscipleship: (1) Docility.
(2) Study. (3) Continuous proficiency. 2. Saintship: (1) Trust. (2) Affection.
(3) Reverence. (4) Holiness. 38. Loyalty: (1) Obedience. (2) Active service.
(3) Fidelity unto death. VI. Tum rewarp it sEecurses. 1. Instruction from the
Rabbi. 2. Salvation from the Son of God. 3. Everlasting blessedness from the
King of Israel. (J. W. Burn.)


Vers. 50-51. Greater things than these.—I. Tu1s ravourrD man. 1. He wasa
man who honestly made inquiries which fairly suggested themselves. He did not
invent doubts and raise questions. When Philip said Nazareth his mind went tothe
prophecy about Bethlehem; hence his question. When Christ read him he
naturally asked for the sources of Christ’s knowledge. 2. A man who honestly
yielded to the force of truth, Christ’s omniscient knowledge he felt to be an
irresistible proof of His Messiahship, 38. A man who in simple honesty believes
much upon the evidence of one assured fact. From Christ’s knowledge he infers
His teachership; His Divine Sonship; His sovereignty. Such is the man who
obtains the blessing of the text. II. Tm aractous rEwarD. ‘The words imply—l.
That his perceptions would be more vivid. ‘ Believest thou... thou shalt see.”
Faith develops into experience, experience into actual vision. 2. That other
truths should be discovered. (1) More of Christ’s Godhead. From omniscience to
omnipotence; from knowledge of the heart to power to change the heart. (2)
Christ’s human sonship. Godhead not half so wonderful as when it comes to be
united to humanity. (3) An opened heaven. He who knew the secrets of his heart
would establish relations between his heart and heaven. These blessings are for
guileless believers only. Christ cannot do mighty works because of unbelief. III,
Tue sprciaL sicHT. Intercourse between earth and heaven by way of the
Mediator. 1. The angels ascend first to carry Christ’s upward messages and our


eS a)


CHAP. 1.) ST. JOHN. 143
prayers and praisos. 2. Angels descend with blessings to man through Christ.
C. H. Spurgeon.) The first promise :—Notice this incident—I. As a GLORIOUS END
WHICH MERGES INTO A STILL MORE GLORIOUS BEGINNING. 1. The Lord who receives
His disciples. He first appears as ‘‘ walking alone,” waiting for the Father’s first
gift. The preparations for the kingdom are complete, but as yet He is without an
avowed disciple. How will He win them? (1) The first announcement which sent
men to Christ was “Behold the Lamb of God.” This is the sovereign secret of
our Lord’s attraction all through time. (2) But He who takes away our sins also
seeks. Two disciples follow Him, but find Him not till He turns with the searching
question: then He finds Philip. 2. Those who come to Him. (1) They are
representatives of the devout in Israel waiting for His coming. (2) They represent
those who are prepared by repentance and faith. (3) They illustrate the manner in
which His disciples come to Him. Two by the preaching of another. Two seek
their fellows and communicate the glad tidings. One is directly sought by Himself.
3. The communion between Christ and His disciples that day begun. It was
reserved for the last to declare on behalf of all what Jesus was to their devotion:
Divine Son, Supreme Lord. This, however, to them was but the beginning of joys,
and the Redeemer promises greater things. II. Tis rrrst pRomisE is an encourage-
ment to the faith of these humble disciples, and a prologue to all the wonders of
redemption. 1. Our Lord here utters in figurative language the mystery of His
mediation between heaven and earth. Christ here gives us in His first exposition of
those Scriptures which testify of Him the meaning of Jacob’s vision. The disciples
were to see the Son of Man opening heaven and earth. 2. But though the Son of
Man is the great word here, the angels have their specific meaning, viz., that
heaven is always open to earth, that abundant blessing answers to abundant prayer,
and that Christ’s servants have all heaven ministering to their good. Both worlds
are thus made one, and earth to us, as to Jacob, becomes the gate of heaven. What
an eneouragement to expect larger communications! We need not make the angels
the bearers of our prayer: that office Christ appropriates -We need not make them
bearers of the Divine response: that office the Holy Spirit appropriates. They are
nevertheless the symbols and instruments of the providence of God. Their ministry
to Christ he has transferred to us. 3. This glorious introductory saying which
passed from prophecy to promise now returns to pure prophecy again, and our Lord
fore-announces the day when heaven and earth shall in the fullest sense be made
one, (W.B. Pope, D.D.) Believing and seeing :—I. Our Lorn’s PRomisE to His
NEW DISCIPLES. The words may be translated either as a question or an affirmation.
In either case they are a solemn and glad recognition of Nathanael’s belief. Here is
the first time that Christ uses the word. It was the epoch in history when Christ
first claimed and then accepted a man’s faith. The “ greater things ” have a proper
fulfilment in the gradual manifestation of Christ’s person and character which lay
all unrevealed yet. ‘If you continue to trust in Me,” you shall see unrolled before
your eyes the great facts which will make the manifestation of God to the world.
Light is here thrown upon—1. The relation between faith and discipleship, (1)
The two terms are synonymous. (2) Our Lord uses the word without any definition
of what they were to believe : He Himself, and not thoughts about Him, is the true
object of faith. (3) Nathanael’s creed was widely different from ours, and yet his
faith and ours are identical. 2; The connection between faith and sight. There
is a great deal about seeing in the context. A double antithesis: (1) ‘‘I saw thee”
—‘‘thou shalt see Me.” (2) ‘Thou believest”—‘ thou shalt see; ” i.e., in the
loftiest region of spiritual experience you must believe first in order that you may
see, (a) Unless we trust Christ and take our illumination from Him, we shall never
behold a whole set of truths which when once we trust Him are all plain to us:
God, man, yourselves, duty, destiny. (b) If we trust Him we get light on things which
are mist and darkness except tofaith. The world says, “‘ Seeing is believing,” —which
is true in regard to outward things. Believing is seeing in regard to God and
spiritual truth. 38. The connection between faith and progress. Christ like a wise
Teacher stimulates His disciples with the promise of ‘greater things.” Here is
something which will give you ever new powers and acquirements, and ensure you
against stagnation. Everything else gets worn out sooner or later, II. Our Lorp’s
witness To Himseur. Mark how with superbly autocratic lips He bases this great
utterance upon nothing else but His own word. ‘From henceforth,” i.e., from the
first hour of His official work. The promise is that in no vision of the night like
Jacob, but in practical, working reality ye shall see that ladder again, and the angels
moving upon it in their errands of mercy. The ladder is Christ; He is the sole


ie


144 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cmar,


medium of communication between earth and heaven, the ladder with its foot on
the earth, in His humanity, and its top in the heavens. (1) Christ is the medium
of all revelation, (2) In Him the sense and reality of separation between heaven
and earth through sin are swept away. (3) By Him all Divine blessings angel-like
descend. (4) By Him prayers and desires rise to God. (5) If we ever enter
heaven at all we shall enter it through Him alone. (A. Maclaren, D.D.) The
glory of the Mediator :—I. Tae omniscreNnce oF His INTELLECT. Il. THE WONDER-
FULNESS oF His piscuosurEs. 1. The heavenly world. 2. This world in connection
with angelic agency. 3. This angelic agency is rendered through His mediation.
IIl. Tue PROGRESSIVENESS oF His causz. ‘“ Hereafter,” &c. Because:—1. Time
develops prophetic truth concerning Him. 2. Time affords opportunity to execute
the mighty plan on which every victory is sketched. 3. It is future time that must
and will unfold the results of His great undertaking. (J. H. Hill.) The dawn of
faith and its consummation :—Christianity is not a mere set of doctrines, but a life of
faith in and through Christ. This is well illustrated in this chapter. These early
disciples differed in temperament and in their methods of reaching Christ, but they
had one faith in common. Men have been ever asking, How does this faith begin?
To what doesit lead? These questions are answered here. I. THE DAWN oF FAITH.
Christ’s words imply the great fact of experience from which faith rises. 1. What
was that fact? (1) Not the proof of Christ’s miraculous power contained in the
fact that Christ saw him although unseen. This might prove Christ to bea teacher
sent from God, but no such miracle could prove Him to be the Redeemer and object
of saving trust. Christ rejected belief founded exclusively on miracles.
Miracles were imperative in the case of the Jews. (2) But the fact that Christ saw
into him and penetrated the deep necessities of his heart. Nathanael had probably
been praying under the fig-tree. Prayer unveiling the soul before the heart-
searching glance of God reveals the real man. Nathanael knew therefore at once
that Christ was acquainted with his doubts, sorrows, aspirations. He therefore
who thus knew him could deliver him. The same heart-searching glance rests upon
us. Here, then, faith begins. ‘‘ Lord, Thou knowest all things,” ‘‘ Thou art the Son
of God.” 2. That fact is the dawning of a faith that must continually grow. Two
things necessary to the strengthening of belief. (1) Its evidence must be certain.
Faith in Christ rests upon the deepest of all kinds of certainty—experimental
evidence. The evidence of testimony may fail, the certainty of reasoning may be
destroyed. But when we know whom we have believed nothing can overturn our
conviction. Here is the only cure for doubt. (2) Its power must advance with
advancing life. When faith in Christ as the only satisfier of the soul’s need is
reached, every new experience in life brings new prooff of its power. II. Tue
CONSUMMATION OF FaITH. Christ declares Jacob’s dream to be fulfilledin Him. The
greater things are those which Jacob dimly realized. 1. The felt presence of God.
2. The sacredness of life. ‘ How dreadful is this place!” &c, 8. Union with the
angelic world. (HE. L. Hull, B.A.) Israel and the Israelite :—1. THE NARRATIVE
IN EVERY LINE THROWS US BACK ON NATHANAEL’S GREAT ANCESTOR. 1, We may
learn how hard it is for a life to get rid of moral stain. Jacob’s life was purified
by hard afflictions ere it was changed to Israel, the prince that prevailed with God.
2. A character may be so cleansed from moral stain that opposite virtues may be
associated with the life. Jacob the supplanter was recovered from his guile, 3.
The reflection cast upon the old patriarchal life is full of grace when one is welcomed
to the love of Christ by the words, ‘‘ Behold an Israclite indeed.” II. NarHanarn.
1. His requirements. We are apt to have no great thoughts of a simple guileless
life. We associate it with a kind of weakness, and think of it as likely to be
imposed upon and led astray. No doubt there is danger. This, like every other
grace, wants cultivating; pruning as well as developing. And Christ expects
cultivating in this disciple just as in the zealous Peter, the ambitious James, the
thoughtful Andrew and Philip. 2. The promise that met that requirement. How
helpful the vision was to Jacob! The reality was still more helpful to Nathanael.
(i) Literally it was fulfilled at the baptism, after the temptation, in the agony, and
at the resurrection and ascension. (2) Morally it was fulfilled in the establishment
of relations with heaven through the Lamb of God. 38. Circumstantially it was
fulfilled in the fruits of Nathanael’s missionary life. (T. Gasquoine, B.A.)


Ver. 51, Hereafter ye shall see the heaven open.—The verilies of Christ :—1.
Nothing is more characteristic of our age than its questioning and doubt, (1)
Science has opened many fields in all of which much is yet unsolved. (2) Philo-


ee


SS ee ee


car. I.} ST. JOHN. 145


ee ee dS RT OEE, CN PLE WO ey ae nT ee
sophy has unsettled much that was once believed. (3) The growing complications
of society force upon us questions to every one of which jarring answers are returned,
(4) The Church is so divided that she is unable to guide herself, much less the world.
Hence thousands are asking whether there can be any certaintyfor man. 2. There
was another age which resembled ours—the age when the old-world civilizations
broke up: when Greece and Rome were bankrupt, and when Israel’s sun turned
in¢o darkness, In that dark age He came who could meet doubt with certain truth.
3. The Truth still lives who had and still has a message for a doubting age, and for
those who received Him there was and is now certainty and rest. 4. This amen
has altered some memorable amens—amens which He has marked with reiterated
affirmations; the unusual form showing us—(1) That we need light; and (2) That
He will not withhold the light we need. 5. The “ Verily, verily ” is only employed
by John because he sets forth Christ in His higher relations, and therefore conveys
transcendent truth that requires emphasis. 6. Not one of the verilies refers to
the Church, but all refer to the peculiar forms of eternal life which are only out-
wardly manifested in the Church; and will survive its failure. 7, This revelation
of eternal life is distinctive of St. John. The other apostles have each their special
truth suited to some stage of the Church and individual. (1) Paul’s comes first,
meeting us with words relative to our ruin and the righteousness which is by faith.
(2) James meets our advancing needs touching the moralities which belong to Chris-
tian doctrine. (3) Peter comes next with words of our present suffering and future
glory. (4) Once more we advance and come to John’s witness to the new life which
the sons of God are called to manifest. 8. It is this teaching of John’s which the
reiterated amens sum up, showing us the course and stages of eternal life in Christ.
Twelve of these are distinguished. (1) The home of the new man: heaven, long
shut, is reopened (i. 51). (2) We enter this home by a new birth (iii. 3, 5). (3) The
law of the life of the new man (v. 19-22). (4) His meat (vi. 26-58). (5) His liberty
(viii. 31-35). (6) His divinity (viii. 48-58). (7) His service (x. 1-18). (8) His
sacrifice and its results (xii. 24-26). (9) His lowliness (xiii. 1-32). (10) His glory
(xiv. 8-14). (11) His sorrow and Joy (xvi. 16-25). (12) His perfecting (xxi. 15-23).
(A. Jukes, M.A.) The verilies of Christ teach us three lessons:—I. AS TO THE
AUTHORITY OF THE TEacHER. The Jews were astonished at His doctrine, for He
taught as one having authority, and not as the scribes, ‘‘ which suggests a contrast
with other teachers.” 1, Put side by side with the autocratic ring of this ‘ Verily,
verily I say unto you,” the formula of the prophets—‘ Thus saith the Lord.” 2.
Contrast again the bare utterance of His own word as a reason for our acceptance
of His sayings with the teaching that was busy around Him. One rabbi says this
and another that, and so on through all the wearisome Talmud, They drew their
authority from their faithfulness to tradition. Christ steps forward as a fresh foun-
tain of certitude. 38. Contrast His teaching with the tone of modesty suitable to
mere thinkers who have learned their truths. The philosopher may argue, Christ
asserts. Now, what business has Christ to talk in this fashion and demand that I
should take from His lips anything He chooses to say? The only answer is, that
He is the Word, the Truth of God. II. As To THE CERTITUDE AND IMPORTANCE OF
THE LESSON. Other teachers have to say, ‘‘Peradventure,” ‘‘This I deem to be
true.” Jesus says, ‘‘ Most assuredly.” 1. In our day of uncertainties and unsolved
problems the world wants more than ever to listen to that voice. Much is dark
and doubtful, but here at least is a central core of hard rock that no pressure can
grind nor any force shift. 2. Think of the difference between the freshness and
adaptation of Christ’s words and the film of old-fashioned untimeliness which has
crept over all other ancient utterances, and say what is the secret of this immortal
youth, Itis because they are free from all admixture of human limitation and
transitoriness, and so fit every generation, and are to every generation the source
of certitude. 3. Classify the utterances to which this formula is attached. First,
those which refer to Himself. He asserts—(1) His Divine nature (John viii, 58).
(2) His absolute unity of being and identity of action with the Father (v. 19). (3)
His place as the medium of all communication between earth and heaven (i. 51).
(4) That He is the way by which all men enter the fold of God (x. 7). (5) That He
is the infallible Teacher (iii. 11). (6) That He is the God-given source of life es
82). (7) The certain granting of all prayers offered in His name (xvi. 23). of )
The necessity for His death, that His mission may be accomplished eerie Vy
Secondly, those which refer to us. (1) Union by faith with Him is the condition
of our life (vi. 53, viii. 51, v. 24). (2) The necessity of @ new nature ere we can see
or enter the kingdom (iii. 3, 6). (3) The promise of our complete assimilation and


igs
146 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. f.


iid ee anh oe
conformity with Him on condition of our faith (xiii. 16, 20; xiv. 12), Thirdly,
those which contain predictions of a near or remote future which could only be made
from supernatural knowledge (xiii. 21, xvi. 20, xiii. 38, xxi. 18). Fourthly, those
which lay bare to men the hidden foulness of their nature (vi. 26, viii. 34). Ill.
As TO THE BACKWARDNESS OF THE scHoLaRS. 1. Verily implies that they to whom it
was addressed had dull ears, whose languid attention needed to be stimulated, or
that the words which He was going to utter were too great to ke easily believed, or
too unwelcome to be swiftly accepted. 2. It is a warning against prejudice and
sluggish apathy. 3. It is a solemn appeal to us to permit no indifference to come
between us and His Word. ‘Two things are required of usas Hisscholars, 1.That
which it is degradation to give to man, but which is blasphemy to withhold from
Christ. ‘‘Speak, Lord, for Thy servant heareth.” 2. The absolute certitude of
His message has for its correlative our unwavering steadfastness. (A. Maclaren,
D.D.) The first * Verily, verily ”—the home of the new man:—1. The first ques-
tion of the Old Testament is, ‘‘ Where art thou?’’—God’s question to fallen man.
The first of the New is, ‘‘ Where is He?’’—asked by men who have just been
awakened to feel their need of a Saviour. God’s question reveals man’s state that
he is not where God placed him ; man’s question draws forth the purpose of God’s
heart, that, fallen as we are, He is with us, our Tabernacle. 2. This first verily
teaches both these truths. Heaven, man’s proper home, long shut, is now opened,
and that all man has lost shall be restored through the Heir, ‘‘the Son of man.”
The old man by disobedience lost his home; the New Man comes back again to the
opened heavens as His dwelling-place. 8. These words were spoken by one who had
just had heaven open to Him, and He comes forth to tell men how they are to enter.
4. Heaven is not far off; it is the spirit-world which is lost or shut only to the
natural man. What will be manifested at death may be anticipated here. 5. Take
some examples of this “‘opened heaven.” (1) That which took place at Christ’s
baptism. This is fulfilled to Christ’s members. The Spirit like a dove abides on
them ; for the mark of the beast is gone, and the voice from heaven proclaims
their sonship. (2) Christ’s transfiguration is recorded to teach a communion with
saints who are not far from us. But this blessing is not without its peril, inasmuch
as it awakens in imperfect disciples thoughts which if followed out would give to
creatures a place and honour which belongs to God alone. Hence Peter wanted
three tabernacles; but is called back to ‘‘ Jesus only’? by the voice, “This is My
beloved Son,” &c. (3) Peter’s vision (Acts x. 9-16), which taught him that we
should call no man common or unclean. (4) John’s visions in the Apocalypse,
revealing the glory of the Son of man and the endless bliss of His brethren. 6.
Whenever man’s true home is opened the servants (angels) also are seen, ever near.
(1) Ministering to man’s wants (1 Kings xix. 5,6). (2) Directing his steps (Gen.
xvi. 9). (3) Barring his way if he turns aside from God (Numb. xxii. 24-26). (4)
Present in the assemblies of believers (1 Cor. xi, 10). (5) Specially related to little
children (Matt. xviii. 10). (6) Rejoicing over repenting sinners (Luke xv. 10). (7)
Ministering to the heirs of salvation (Heb.i. 14). (4. Jukes, M.A.) The positiveness
of Jesus :—This expression is one of the signs and evidences of the originality of
Jesus Christ. It occurs more than seventy times, and was a characteristic which
separated His conversation from that of other men, There were and are examples
enough of mere dogmatism. 1. The scribes, whether of theology or science, will
open their books and say, “ It is written,” and that is the end of all controversy. 2.
The bigot will hold fast to the letter of his creed and anathematize all who do not
hold it. 38. Ignorance will stand firm upon tradition and swear to all passers by, ‘I
know.” Everywhere there has lived the man who could not be mistaken. But the
assurance of Jesus Christ was wholly different. 1. Nor was it like the positiveness
of the prophets of old who proclaimed, ‘Thus saith the Lord.” 2. Nor like the
confidence of the philosopher in his reasonings, the naturalist in his verifications.
Christ’s verilies precede rather than conclude His teachings. He gave no demon-
strations. 8, Nor with the religious faiths of His disciples. Faith is for us an
achievement, and after the struggle Jesus comes and says “believe.” But no Christ
came to Jesus, nor is there in His positiveness any trace of conflict. He believed
spontaneously and directly out of His own consciousness of God. This positiveness
marked Christ’s teaching from the beginning when He spoke to His mother in the
Temple; and never afterwards was there a hesitating note. This peculiar quality
appears when we reflect on the subjects on which He was absolutely sure. They are
those on which other men are not sure. (1) His verilies have nothing to do with
natural truths which we can discover or demonstrate. (2) Nor with matters of


i ila ol tc


=e


oie


Dip or a


CHAP. I1.] ST. JOHN. 147


history which scholars may search out. (3) Nor with such things as Sanhedrims
wrangle over. (4) But with vital, spiritual, eternal truths not otherwise discover-
able by man. Learn, then: 1. That over against all our human ignorance, sinful-
ness, and need, the gospel is one grand affirmation of God; an assertion of those things
of which we most need to be made sure. 2. If we want true hearts and strength to
do and dare ; if we would learn the secret of cheerful, patient lives; if we wish to
live with all our souls for noble purpose, and with great faiths and immortal hope,
there is a verily waiting to impart to us its power and its peace. 3. Christian unity
is only to be realized upon the high plane of this positiveness, and along the lines of
these great spiritual affirmations. 4. There is some verily speaking to each at all
times and everywhere. (Newman Smyth, D.D.) Heaven opened:—I. A cuRTAIN
Fact : Christ has come forth. II. A sLEssED cospEL : Christ’s appearing a manifes-
tation of Divine grace. III. A soyous Hore: Christ’s coming forth suggests the
possibility of man’s going in. IV. A GiLorious PREDICTION: the reinstitution of
fellowship between earth and heaven predicts the assimilation of the former to the
latter. (T. Whitelaw,D.D.) Verwly is simply the familiar ‘‘amen!”’ which properly
is an adjective meaning ‘‘ firm or steadfast,’’ and is used in two connections. Some-
times it precedes an assertion which it confirms, in which case it may be paraphrased
by “‘ Thus it certainly is.” Sometimes it follows a prayer which it sums up and
reiterates, and in that case it may be paraphrased by ‘‘ So may it be.” Doubled it
has the force of a superlative, ‘‘ Most assuredly.’’ It is heard only from the lips of
Christ. It becomes no other lips. (Ad. Maclaren, D.D.) Angels ascending and
descending :—Some of these angelic appearances had already taken place. An
angel announced the conception of Christ to His mother. An angel, accompanied
by a multitude of the heavenly host, proclaimed His birth to the shepherds, and
after His temptation angels came and ministeredto Him. These instances of angels
descending on the Son of man had taken place before this period, and Nathanacl
knew them not; but there remained other manifestations of the same kind, which
were yet to be afforded. An angel appeared to Him, and strengthened Him in His
agony. At His resurrection an angel rolled away the stone from His sepulchre,
and two angels sat, the one at the head, the other at the feet where the Lord
had lain. And, lastly, angels attended His ascension, and as an angel had an-
nounced His first coming, so angels foretold to the witnesses of this great event
that the same Jesus who had been parted from them should come again in like
manner as they had seen Him go up into heaven. (J. Fawcett, M.A.) Jesus a
ladder to heaven :—To the north of Scotland lies an island called Bressay. Itis one
of the Shetland Islands, and its shores are very rocky. On the south coast of
Bressay is a slate-quarry. The workmen had to descend the cliff to it by means of
a ladder. One evening, a violent and sudden storm drove the quarrymen from their
work. The ladder was left fastened to the cliff. The night was very dark and stormy.
A ship which was struggling with the waves was driven close to the island. Her
crew beheld with terror the white foam of the breakers as they dashed against the
rocks. They knew that, if their ship were stranded, they must be wrecked. Still
the howling winds drove her forward. The waves dashed over her, filled the cabin
with water, and drowned the wife of the captain. The sailors now climbed into the
rigging. They were at the mercy of the furious wind and of the raging sea. They
gave themselves up for lost. Many prayers and cries for deliverance were uttered.
On came the ship, and struck against the shore. The poor seamen felt that death
was almost certain. On the summit of the cliff was safety; but how could they
reach it, who were helplessly dashed at its foot? But just as the ship struck near
the rock, their terror was changed to joy. Close beside them, on the steep face of
the cliff, was a ladder. It seemed as if placed there on purpose for them. In haste
they sprang from the rigging, mounted the ladder, and reached the top of the cliff
in safety. The vessel went to pieces so quickly that, by the next morning, hardly
a trace of her was left.


CHAPTER II.


Vers. 1-11. The third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee. The
miracle at Cana:—I. THE OCCASION ON WHICH THE MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT. 1. The
time. The third day after the interview with Nathanael. 2. The place. Cana,


148 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [oHar. 1.
BSE a wil aN seh ws = 8s ey Say aS

about nine miles from Nazareth. Called Cana of Galilee to distinguish it from
another town of the same name in Ephraim. 8. The company. (1) The mother
of Jesus there probably on the ground of relationship. {+ has been supposed that
the wedding was in the family of Cleopas or Alpheus, whose wife was Mary’s sister.
(2) The most interesting and instructive fact is that Jesus was there. In Him
the social element was prominent. In this respect He differed totally from His
forerunner. He may have meant to teach those of His disciples, who had been
followers of the Baptist, the great lessons of human intercourse, marriage, &e.
(3) Jesus’ disciples Andrew, Peter, Philip, Nathanael and John. Il. Tue crrcum-
STANCES WHICH LED ToIT, 1. The fact stated ‘‘They wanted wine;” Mary called Him
aside and told Him go. 2. The manner in which the announcement was received.
(1) Not disrespectfully. (2) Yet in the way of mild censure which rebukes
Mariolatry. (3) Because the proper season for the exercise of His Divine power
had not arrived. 3. The appropriate advice that was given. Christ requires
universal and prompt obedience. III. Tue FEATURES BY WHICH IT WAS DISTIN-
auisHED. 1. Nothing could be more simple. There was no pomp or parade.
2. Nothing could be more extraordinary. No means were used. 3. Nothing could
be more convincing. Deception was impossible. IV. THE coNSEQUENCES WHICH
ENSUED. 1. The display of Christ’s glory. 2. The confirmation of the disciple’s
faith. (The miracles of the Lord Jesus.) The miracle at Cana:—1l. After all
those years of quiet and obscurity Jesus manifested Himself not as the Son of
Mary, but as the Son of God. 2. He showed His power not to a hermit of the
desert, but to a social gathering, teaching us the sanctity and blessedness of domestic
life. 8. He commenced His ministerial life not as a stern preacher of righteousness
‘beside the sea which covered the sins of Sodom, but as a helper of innocent
rejoicings at a marriage feast. While we love our sins our place is by the Dead
Sea; but if we heed the call to repentance, we pass from the desert to the feast.
The narrative teaches us important lessons. I. NEVER ACCEPT A FORM OF RELIGION
WHICH MAKES PEOPLE GLOOMY AND MOoROSE. ‘The people who would shut all the
sunshine out of life and stifle its innocent laugh, and hush the happy song, have not
read the gospel of Jesus aright. There are times for separation, but as a rule it is
in the midst of our daily round that Jesvs works His miracles of mercy. Il. Tue
SANCTITY OF CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE. No marriage can be blessed unless Jesus and
His disciples are invited. It is quite possible to go through a form of marriage
which is quite legal, but which is a mere contract, and has no mark of holy matri-
mony about it. When we see marriage contracts for money, or position, or to hide
the results of sin, we may be sure that Jesus has not been invited, and that there can
be no blessing. III, Jesus 1s EVER WORKING THE SAME WONDERFUL CHANGE AND I9
SHOWING FoRTH His powER. All nature is a miracle lesson. 1. The seed sown in
weakness is raised in power, and we learn that as God gives us our daily bread so
He gives us the True Bread from heaven. 2. Every growing vine with its clustering
grapes shows us the miracle of water made wine, telling us that Jesus is the True
Vine, and that we are the branches, and that without Him we cannot live. 3. The
thorn receives the rains of winter and returns them glorified in the rose of summer;
the helpless chrysalis takes unto itself wings, and flies as the beautiful butterfly.
And the same miracle is shown in our Lord’s dealings with men. He came to raise
and put new strength into fallen humanity. The miracle was wrought on the first
disciples—on Peter who denied his Master, but was changed into a pillar of the
Church, &. (H. J. W. Buxton, M.A.) The miracle at Cana :—In three points
of view this miracle seems strange. 1. It has not that visible stamp of Divinity
which is the peculiar glory of most of Christ’s miracles, They do not disturb, but
restore the true order of nature. In these we see the victims of disorder emanci-
pated, and disorderly forces remedied. They show the Son of God engaged in a
conflict with physical as well as moral disorder, and exhibit on a small scale what
the cross exhibits on a large. 2. Christ’s treatment of His mother seems contrary to
the tender spirit we should have expected. 3. The other miracles recorded by John
were in connection with discourses to which they led and revealed the inner glory
of His grace and truth. But the fact that it was wrought in connection with a
domestic scene will help us to clear up these difficulties. It was fitting—(1) That
He should here break away from His mere earthly relationship to mother and home.
(2) That He should here inaugurate that ministry which differed. from His wilder-
ness experience and the habits of the Baptist. His object was to hallow the
legitimate enjoyments of life, and conquer the world, not turn His back upon it.
4, The particular form of the miracle illustrates—(1) The enriching power of


cuaP. 11] ST, JOHN. 149


Christ, His power to improve and perfect the sources of human gratification.
Though not repeated in form, the miracle is constantly repeated.in spirit in the
greater sweetness of the poor man’s morsel and the poor man’s life when flavoured
with God’s blessing. (2) The generosity of Christ who giveth liberally and
upbraideth not: afterwards shown in the miracle of the loaves and fishes, and fore-
shadowed in prophecy (Isa. ly. 1). 5. Itis in thorough harmony with the Johan-
nine miracles. Of the eight, three bear on the elements of bodily nourishment,
and spiritually on the nourishment of the soul. It is also in harmony with Christ’s
_ teaching in John: the parable of the living bread and of the vine: the vision of
heavenly refreshment through Christ in the Apocalypse. (W.G. Blaikie, D.D.)
The miracle at Cana:—I. THE PLACE WHICH THIS MIRAOLE HOLDS AMONG THE MIRACLES
or Curist. The first. 1. As indicative of the general character of those which
followed. The product of Christ’s omnipotence and good will. 2. As the
beginning of those wonders which had as their object to manifest forth Christ’s
glory. II. Tae crRcUMSTANCES IN WHICH THE MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT. 1. The failure
of the wine perhaps through the unexpected advent of Jesus and His disciples.
2. Mary’s appeal based upon her anxiety for the credit of the entertainers and
comfort of the guests. 8. Mary’s faith in Jesus not merely as her Son, but as the
Son of God. 4, Mary’s modesty and humility: she demands nothing, and pre-
scribes nothing. 5. The displeasure of Jesus tenderly teaching Mary—(1) That
her relatiqnship was no ground on which she might make application, and that her
former claims on this ground had passed away. (2) That in all matters connected
with His great work she was no more to Him than other believers. (3) That as He
was David’s Lord so was He hers. (4) That what He was about to do was not to
be done for the reason for which she desired it. 6. Christ’s announcement of His
hour: His, not Mary’s; the time of the total failure of the wine, III. Tue mrracnz
ITsELF, 1. Expected by Mary. 2. The preparation and co-operation of the
servants. 3. The arrival of the hour. 4. The drawing forth of the water made
wine. 5. The surprise of the governor. IV.'THE THINGS IN WHICH WE ARE INSTRUCTED
BY THE minAcLE. 1. The anticipation of ecclesiastical corruptions. (1) The
Roman depreciation of marriage.. (2) The Romish distinction of meats; that a
man is holier for what he eats or from what he abstains. (3) Mariolatry. 2. The
duty of temperance and self-denial amidst the profusion of temporal mercy. The
great abundance tested self-restraint. The same principle applies to all enjoyments—
dress, furniture, reading. 3. The superior excellency of the Gospel’s dispensation.
(1) As contrasted with Moses’ first miracle turning water into blood. (2) The
kingdom of God is not meat and drink. 4. The sanctifying influence of Christ’s
presence. (A. Beith,D.D.) The miracle at Cana :—Notice—I. Tar RELIGION EN-
LARGES THE PLEASURES OF SOCIAL Lire, Christ’s presence did not interfere with the
ordinary proceedings. There was no look on His face that chilled the company.
He made no protest against the glad music of the nuptial chant. No one expressed
the wish that Jesus had stayed at home. The wedding feast would have been a
wretched failure had He stayed away. And religion is misunderstood if it is
supposed to lessen the happiness of life. A good deal of worldly pleasure ig
feverish, delirium which religion condemns, but it rules out no innocent pleasure.
It commands men to rejoice always. What untold miseries it has swept away.
There is more happiness in the Christian cottage than there was in Cwsar’s Palace.
Il. Tuar soctAl LIFE IS THE MOST PROMISING SPHERE FOR RELIGIOUS USEFULNESS.
Christ did not feel out of place here, although a careless observer might think it
better for Him to be in the Temple teaching. He was here because of His perfect
sympathy and to do good. Social life furnishes the Christian with his great oppor-
tunities, Faithfulness in religious exercise not the whole of duty. The Christian
in society is the foremost preacher. He is there to bear witness to the sympathy of
religion with everything that is wholesome, and to protest against everything that
is pernicious. (Sermons by the Monday Club.) Lhe relaxation of Jesus Christ :—
I. Our Lord had passed through the conflict of the wilderness and the initial stages
of His work as the caller of men, and had, moreover, come off a long journey.
He therefore NEEDED RELAXATION and found it at a wedding feast, and in the
company of his friends, Showing us that no man can or ought to be inces-
santly engaged in strife or labour. If he does he will prematurely wear out or
break down. Time for rest and unbending is urgently required after any severe
strain to body or mind. II. The previous work and conflict was PROFOUNDLY
RELIGIOUS; so was the relaxation. The danger in our relaxations is to accumulate
other burdens by forgetfulness of self or God. ‘ Whether therefore ye eat or


a
150 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. rz,
oo ee
drink do all to the glory of God.” III. Cunisr uTIlizED TH HOURS AND MEANS OF
RELAXATION FOR DISTINCTLY RELIGIOUS ENDS. His aim is ever to leaven society
religiously. 1. By the manifestation of His glory, so that—2. His disciples may
believeon Him. IV. Curist EMPLOYED IN His RELAXATION THOSE INFINITE RESOURCES
or Hts FoR THE Goop oF oTHERS, which even in the wilderness He could not be
induced to exert on His own behalf. He declared to Nicodemus that He could do
exceeding abundantly above all he could ask or think ; here He fulfilled the declara-
tion. (J. W. Burn.) Christ at a feast:—Learn: I. How HoNoURABLE IN THE
SIGHT OF CHRIST IS THE ESTATE oF MATRIMONY. 1. Society is never in a healthy
condition, and true religion never flourishes where marriage is lightly esteemed. 2.
Christ’s blessing and presence are essential to a happy wedding. Il. THERE anE
TIMES WHEN IT I8 LAWFUL TO BE MERRY AND REJOICE. 1. True religion was never
meant to make men melancholy, but the contrary. The Christian has no place at
races, balls, theatres, &c., but he has no right to hand over to the devil innocent
recreations. 2. It is not easy to hit the mean between the lawful and the unlawful.
But the golden rule is Luke ii. 49. 3. While we should take our gladness into
religion we should take our religion into the world. II. Taz AtmigHTy POWER oF
Jesus Curist. 1. An act of will without any visible means. 2. The same power
is at the disposal of His people. (Bp. Ryle.) The wedding feast:—1. ATTENDED
BY CHRIST’S FRIENDS; those connected through blood and by grace, Marriage
though not a Christian sacrament is a religious ordinance (Gen. li. 24; Matt. xix.
5; Mark x. 7; Eph. v. 31); honourable in all (Heb. xiii. 5), and when the parties
are well matched by affection and religion, a matter for hearty congratulation.
Ordained for the happiness of the individual and the development of the race, it is
calculated, when undertaken ‘‘ solemnly, advisedly, and in the fear of God,” to
promote the welfare of husband and wife, and to secure a home for godly upbring-
ing of children (Mal. ii. 15). II. Gracep sy Curist’s presence. The first
wedding on earth attended by God (Gen. ii. 25). Notstrange, therefore, that Christ
should have set a mark of honour on His Father’s institution; while it was
peculiarly appropriate that He should inaugurate His mission by placing His hand
on the springs of humanity, lifting up this holy ordinance which perhaps had
suffered more than any other by the fall and restoring it to its pristine dignity and
beauty. (TZ. Whitelaw, D.D.) The wedding feast :—I. CHRIST’s MINISTRY OPENS
ON A SCENE OF HUMAN HAPPINESS 1. God Himeelf is essential happiness and would
have us happy. 2. We are disposed to make God the sharer of our sorrows; He
here teaches us to make Him the partner of our joys, II. Curist’s FrrsT APPEAR-
ANCE TO THE WORLD WAS ATA WEDDING. A standing protest against the tendency
to make it a virtue to abstain from marriage. This tendency was denounced by
Paul as one of the most pernicious doctrines of false teachers. JII. Our Lorn’s
FIRST MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT IN CONNECTION WITH AN EVENT, THE BRIGHTEST AND
MOST INNOCENT IN HUMAN LIFE. Itwas not to the sinful outcasts of society that
He gave His first and special manifestation of Himself, but to those who were
keeping His laws and exercising aright the natural affections He had given them.
Heaven always comes nearest to the purest home. The gospel prefers to receive
men af their best, not at their worst, and to gather into its treasury of grace, not
the wrecks of human life, but the rich spoils of its youth and strength. IV. Tus
MIRACLE TOOK PLACE AT THE VILLAGE OF THE IsRAELITE, INDEED IN WHOM THERE
was No Gute. This disciple had the blessedness of the pure in heart who see
God. He who manifested Himself to the sleeping patriarch in a dream at the top
of the ladder, revealed Himself to Nathanael in waking reality at the foot, as a
servant ministering to the necessities of others, and enriching the enjoyments of
human life by His blessing. He who appeared to Jacob in a fleeting vision for the
purpose of establishing a covenant relationship with a particular family and nation,
has opened up by His Incarnation a free intercourse between God and man. (A.
Macmillan, LL.D.) Human feasts :—I. WHat THEY ARE BY NATURE. II, Wuat
THEY BECOME BY SIN. III. WHat THEY AGAIN BECOME ONLY BY THE GRACE oF
Cunist. (J. P. Lange, D.D.) Marks of the grace of Christ :—I. Tuat Curisr
GIVES US THE MOST PRECIOUS FOR NOTHING. II. MAKES A GLORIOUS THING OUT oF
common. III. Gives THE Best Last. IV. Gives accorpine to His own TIME,
NOT ACCORDING TO OUR IDEAS. (Harless.) The water, the wine, and the wedding :
—-I. THE PATHETIC VALUE THERE 18 IN THE SIMPLEST FORMS OF HUMAN LIFE. A
little village mentioned four times in the Bible, and then only by one writer, now
extinct, and yet having a sweet, bright fame throughout Christendom, so that Pil-
grims go to look up its ruins, A common wedding has made it immortal, while


ye ee ae


ree


couse. 1.] ST. JOHN. 151
a
the names of great cities have perished. 1. A most significant sanction of the
marriage relation. The New Testament scheme of faith and practice was inaugu-
rated in direct sympathy with human hearts and established in the centre of the
family institutions. II. Jesus our Lorp 1s No RESPECTER oF PERSONS, or if of any
of the poor. Jesus is present at every true marriage. III. Jusus never ser His
MOTHER UP TO BE A MADONNA. He deeply respected her, but did not allow her to
dictate to Him. In ‘“‘ Woman” there is no reproach. It is the same word as that
addressed to her on the cross. But in ‘‘ What is there now which is common to you
and me,” He intends to suggest His independence. IV. A NoBLE MOTTO FOR EVERY
SINCERE CHRISTIAN (ver. 5). Mary was neither humbled nor discouraged. V. Tae
SOVEREIGNTY OF THE Son or Gop ovER NATURE. Three characteristics of this miracle :
its mystery, its magnitude, its morality. (C. S. Robinson, D.D.) Christ and
society :—Christ here at the outset exemplifies one great rule of His self-manifesta-
tion, “The Son of man came eating and drinking,’’ regardless if cavillers say,
“ Behold a man gluttenous and a wine bibber.” His very miracle was a multipli-
cation of the materials of feasting, acting Himself on what afterwards became the
law of the gospel. “ Use hospitality one toanother without judging,” &c. Christ
came not to take a few out of the world, but to transform the world itself; and
presented Himself at a marriage feast to redeem things ‘“ which should be for our
health ” from being turned, through godless abuse into ‘‘ occasions of falling.” I.
Observe how RELIGION BEFORE AND WITHOUT CHRIST HAS DEALT WITH socizTy. Its
effort and prayer has been to be ‘‘taken out” of it to save itself. But this instinct,
right in itself, has been shown in ways suicidal. Selfishness bad in nature, is
worse in religion. Christ’s Epiphany to society was an original idea among the
religious. The dream of every religion but the Christian was celebate monasticism.
Even Christianity has relapsed into it literally, and also morally in the selfishness
which marks out certain persons, phrases, recreations as signs of a world lying in
wickedness. Far less difficult would Christian duty be if we might quit the world
and have done with it, but we cannot and dare not. This parable of our Master’s
life shows us this. II. How Curist peas witH society. He finds in the world
homes beautiful with natural affection, and tables spread with God’s bounties.
Into this, with the treacherous ashes above and the latent fires below, Christ comes
and gays, ‘‘ Use this world as not abusing it,” and by His presence helps us to obey
His precept. Realize, then, this sanctifying presence in business, é.g., or pleasure,
and we shall realize that which will quicken both with Divine life. We shall then
be there to exert the same helpfulness to others through Christ, as Christ exerted
at this feast. 1. Jesus was there with His disciples, not asolitary Messiah. 2. Let
the disciples now take the Master with them. Forsome, alas! this would beirksome,
and so they either go without Christ, or else stay away. The former is sinful, the
latter faithless. (Dean Vaughan.) Christian festivity :—Some people think that
the age of miracles has passed ; everybody knows that that of marriages has not.
I. Jesus NoT ONLY TOLERATES THE SOCIAL USAGES OF LIFE—its festivities among the
rest—-BUT ENCOURAGES AND SANCTIFIEs THEM. Some gloomy people frown upon the
common signs of cheerfulness, but for this habit we have here the eternal antidote,
II. We NEED CHRIST AT SEASONS OF SOCIAL FESTIVITY AS MUCH, OR EVEN MORE,
THAN AT OTHER TImes. Pure religion is never unseasonable. If we think we give
our worship to God, and stop the devil’s mouth by an occasional indulgence, the
devil will soon get our worship too. There is no more fatal mistake than to think
that if we pay our dues in the House of God, we may please ourselves in the house
of man. Jesus should be always bidden at our seasons of joy; for be sure that if
we do not send Him our invitation, the devil will come without one. III. Torr:
18 AN EXQUISITE TENDERNESS IN 0UR LorD’s BINDING His piscrptes to Him at this
marriage feast. He does not speak to them of the cross as yet. He speaks as
they are able to bear it. Coming after His long fast in the wilderness, He breathes
no asceticism. He who had been so hardly pressed for bread, turns water into wine.
Hoe will train us as we need to be trained. IV. Ir CHRIST IS SHUT OUT FROM THE
HOUSE OF FEASTING, WE MUST NOT WONDER AT His ABSENCE FROM THE HOUSE OF
wourning. (Harry Jones, M.A.) The ministry began at a marriage festival
which ended on Calvary, and its glory was manifested by both. I. Tax rUNDAMENTAL,
ORIGINAL, AND ULTIMATE CONDITION OF LIFE 18 BLESSING. Life begins in Eden, passes
by Gethsemane and Calvary, and ends in heaven, It is God’s will that man should
be everywhere and always blessed. Misery lies not in God’s making, but in the
devil’s marring. II. Our Lorp sovGHT To SEVER HIMSELF AT ONCE AND ABSOLUTELY
FROM THE Ascetic sPirit. He came to add to the mirth of all feasts, the brightnesa


et die


152 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. ma.


of all homes, the gladness of all songs. He was absolutely free from the monkish
idolatry of sorrow. He simply went about His Father’s work in whatever direction
it might be. III. CuristT REVERSED THE DEVIL'S UNIFORM METHOD AT FESTIVALS.
Did ever any one get the best of the world’s wine, or the devil’s, at the end of the
banquet? But whatever He gives has an infinite store behind it. Hence we are
saved by hope. The pain and toil are for the moment, the joy grows into eternity
IV. CHRist SHOWED THE TRUE SPIRIT OF SELF-sacriFIcE. The joy sympathetic
with the joy of the Lord. (J. Baldwin Brown, B.A.) Lessons of the incident :—


1. Temperance amidst plenty. 2. The profusion of Divine gifts. 3. Christ’s ;
presence changes the circumstances of His people. 4. Christ turns the lower into :
the higher; the common to the valuable. 5. Christ does not work till the necessity F
is felt. 6. Christ works according to His own will, without human interference.
(Family Churchman.) General analysis and illustrations of the Cana miracle :—


The company at this wedding may represent the Church of Christ, which is often
represented as the guests called together to a marriage feast. Jesus, and His
mother, and His disciples were there ; thus it is in the Church. The former circum-
stances of the marriage, wherein they wanted wine, represent the state of the
Church before Christ came; or rather, before the evangelical dispensation was
established. ‘The latter circumstances of the wedding, wherein they had plenty of
wine, represent the latter state of the Church, after the pouring out of the Spirit at
Pentecost, and especially after the fall of Antichrist. The wine represents the
spiritual supplies of His Church, the grace and comforts of the Holy Spirit, which
are often represented by wine in Scripture. Their wine ran low, and was just out;
so formerly the Old Testament Church had a supply of wine; but when Christ
came into the world it was just out—they had in a manner no wine. But when
Christ came and ascended up to heaven, He soon gave His Church plenty of wine,
and much better wine than ever the Jewish Church had enjoyed; as it is said,
“Thou hast kept the good wine until now.”’ So again, before the glorious times of
the Church commence, the Church’s wine rung very low, and is almost out; what
they alloy with is water—human learning, sapless speculations and disputations,
and dead morality. Formerly the Christian Church had wine, as in the times of the
primitive Church, and in the times of the Reformation; but now their wine is
almost gone. But after the beginning of these glorious times their water shall be
turned into wine, and much better wine than ever they had before, The mother of
Jesus may represent the more eminent ministers of the gospel, or the public ecclesi-
astical authority, as exercised in synods, public schools, &e, They, in a dark and
dead time of the Church, complain to Christ of their unsuccessfulness, of the want
of wine in the Church, and look to Him for a supply. But they must not expect an
answer till Christ’s time is come; their prayersare not answered till then, and then
they shall be fully answered ; their prayers are not rejected, they are offered up
with incense. The cries of the souls under the altar, that cry, ‘‘ How long, Lord,
holy and true?” are not rejected; but yet it is said to them that they should wait
till God’s time comes. The servants represent gospel ministers; they have a com-
mand from Jesus’ mother, i.e., from the Church in her public authority, to do what-
soever Jesus commands. Whence we may note, that the way to have a plentiful
effusion of the Spirit with His Word and ordinances, is for ministers to be faithful
in their work. They are to fill up the water-pots of purification with water; that is
all they can do. They can, in the use of the ordinances of God’s house "and the
appointed means of grace and purification, be instant in season and out of season ;
they can fill the water-pots up to the brim; they can be abundant in preaching the
Word—which, as it comes from them, is only water—a dead letter, a sapless, taste-
less, spiritless thing—but this is what Christ will bless for the supplying of His
Church with wine. (Jonathan Edwards.) The popularity of this Cana miracle :—
From a very early period the Church has recognized the importance and signifi-
cance of the miracle. Of the fifty-two marble sarcophagi originally found in the
catacombs of Rome, and now preserved in the Museum of St. John Lateran, no less
than sixteen have carved upon them a rude representation of Jesus touching with
a rod two, three, four, five, or six water-pots standing on the ground—the number
varying according to the skill of the artist, or the space at his disposal. In the
frescoes and mosaics of numerous churches and consecrated buildings the incident
has been depicted in a great variety of ways; and Tintoretto exhausted his enius
im giving expression to its wonderful beauty, in his great picture in the shureh ‘
Santa Maria della Salute in Venice. With commentators in all ages, the miracle *
Cana has been a favourite and fertile theme for exposition. No miracle will more


a


CHAP, I1,] ST. JOHN. 153


thoroughly reward a careful study than that which meets the inquirer at the very
threshold, It is the “gate beautiful” by which he enters the sacred temple of
Divine truth. It is the illuminated initial which represents, in a pictorial form, the


‘nature and design of the kingdom of heaven as revealed unto men. It is an


acted parable of the whole gospel; a type and image of all the work of Jesus,
opening up a vista of light far into the ways of God. (H. Macmillan, LL.D.)
Cana.—Two places claim the distinction of being the Cana of the gospel—
the one a ruined and deserted village, called Khurbet Cana, about half-a-day’s
journey to the north-west of Nazareth; and the other, called Kefr Kenna, lying
much nearer, on the present main road from that town to Tiberias and the
lake district. The great weight of evidence derived from name, site, history,
and present remains, is on the side of the latter place, which is still one of
the most prosperous villages in Galilee. Like Nain, its situation is exceedingly
picturesque. It is perched on the slope of a low hill, at the head of several
valleys forming natural roadways leading down on the one side to the sea-coast, and
on the other to the Lake of Galilee. In front is a rich bottom, which becomes a
lake or a swamp in the rainy season. In this respect Cana resembles the villages
of Italy, which are nearly all built upon isolated heights, rising up from extensive
marshy plains, not only for the sake of security, but also for the purer air and
wider outlook. Its Greek name, which has no Hebrew, Chaldee, or Aramaic form,
means a reed; and was doubtless derived from the reeds which still grow in
abundance in the marshy plain below, and utter their mournful wail as the winds
pass through them. Several well-known places are similarly named for the same
reason, as Canne, Canneto, Cannossa, and Cannes. The houses of the modern
village are embosomed among orchards of pomegranate trees, whose dark-green
foliage and scarlet blossoms form in April a scene of enchantment. The fig-tree
still casts its grateful shadow over the white roadway, and at the foot of the hill
there is a deep, cool well, the only one in the neighbourhood, from which the water
used at the marriage feast must have been drawn, Remains of ancient edifices
testify to the hoary antiquity of the site and its former importance. The founda-
tions of an early church and monastery, erected by Syrian Christians in com-
memoration of the marriage feast, may still be traced. The buildings were entire
long before the Moselm power was established in Galilee; and various pil-
grims from the West visited them from time to time during a period of
nine hundred years. Our own English St. Willibald, who was a palmer in
722, stayed one day in Cana, and prayed in the church; and, four hundred
years later, another English pilgrim, Sawulf, saw and reported regarding
the convent, called after the ruler of the feast, ‘‘ Holy Architriclinos,” the
only building in-Cana then that was not wholly destroyed. (H. Macmillan, LL.D.)
Eastern marriage customs:—An Oriental wedding is very different from an
Occidental one; and there is as much variety of usage in the accompaniments of
this ceremony in the East as in the West. In all cases, however, the marriage
ceremonies are among the most prominent ceremonies of private life, as much
display being made as the circumstances of the contracting parties will allow.
Among the wealthy inhabitants of towns, however, the ceremonies of marriage are
both protracted and complicated. Six or seven days after the conclusion of the
betrothal contract, the well-to-do bridegroom begins to illuminate the street in
which he lives with swinging lamps and flying flags in token of the coming
festivities. During the evenings of these days festivals are held at the bridegroom’s
house. The chief entertainment is given by the bridegroom the evening before the
marriage. On the day of the marriage the bride goes in procession to the bride-
groom’s house, preceded by music, dancers, mountebanks, and walking beneath a
canopy. The procession seeks a circuitous route, and takes several hours before it
reaches the bridegroom’s house. Here the party is entertained with a repast. At
sunset the bridegroom leaves the house, and goes in procession to a mosque to say
the proper ceremonial prayers. Then the procession returns slowly, preceded by
music and lanterns. When the procession reaches the house, pipes, coffee, and
sherbert (sweetened water, for the Mohammedans do not drink wine) are set before
the company. The bridegroom then visits his bride, whose face he now sees for the
first time. Upon his announcement that he is satisfied with his bride, the women
without raise the zaghareet, or shrill cries of joy, which announce the happy event
to the whole neighbourhood. The bridegroom then returns, for a little while, to
his friends who are feasting below, to receive their felicitations on the completion
of the marriage. (S,S. Times.) Marriage happy where Christ is acknowledged :—


154 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHar. II,


When Philip Henry was settled at Worthenbury, he sought the hand of the only
daughter and heiress of Mr. Matthews, of Broad Oak. The father demurred, saying
that, though Mr. Henry was an excellent preacher and a gentleman, yet he did not
know from whence he came. ‘ True,” said the daughter ; “but I know where he is
going, andI should like to go with him.” Mr. Henry records in his diary long after
the happiness of tho union, which was soon after consummated : “ April 26th, 1680.
This day we have been married twenty years, in which time we have received of
the Lord twenty thousand mercies—to God be glory!” Sometimes he writes, ‘We
have been so long married, and never reconciled, i.e., there never was any occasion
for it.” His advice to his children with respect to their marriage was, “ Please
God, and please yourselves, and you will please me”; and his usual compliment
to his newly-married friends, ‘‘ Others wish you all happiness. I wish you all holi-
ness, and then there is no doubt but you will have all happiness.” (Life of Philip
Henry.) The blessing of marriage:—That is the great blessing of marriage,
that it delivers us from the tyranny of Meum and Tuum. Converting each into
the other, it endears them both, and turns a slavish, deadening drudgery into a free
and joyous service. And by bringing home to every one’s heart that he is something
better than a mere self, that he is the part of a higher and more precious whole, it
becomes a type of the union between the Church and her Lord. (J. C. Hare.)
Religion for joy as well as for sorrow :—Religion is just as necessary for prosperity
as for adversity. There is no happiness so happy but His presence can make it
happier; and they who seek to have Him at their bridals can count more confidently
on Him in their sufferings and at their death-beds. (J. A. Seiss, D.D.) The
miracles of nature and the miracles of Christ :—He that made wine on that day at
the marriage feast in those six water-pots, which He commanded to be filled with
water, the same does every year the like in vines. For as what the servants put
into the water-pots was changed into wine by the operation of the Lord, just so
what the clouds pour forth is changed into wine by the operation of the same Lord.
But at the latter we do not marvel, because it happens every year; by constant use
it hath lost its wonder. And yet it suggests a greater consideration. But since
men, intent on a different matier, have lost the consideration of the works of God
by which they should daily praise Him as the Creator, God has reserved to Himself
the doing of certain extraordinary actions, that, by striking them with wonder, He
might rouse men as from sleep to worship Him. A dead man rises again; men
marvel: so many are born daily, and none marvel. If we reflect more consider-
ately, it is a matter of greater wonder for one to be who was not before, than for
one who was to come to life again, (Augustine.) The transformation of the
mean :—He made wine of water ; not wine without water. It is not the nature of
His work to make a new order of creatures for saints, or ® new order of faculties
for religion, or a new planet for that future world wherein dwelleth righteousness ;
but it is His office to take the common man as he is, and the heavens and earth
which now are, and by a new and supernatural putting forth of power upon them,
to evolve from the one a pure, holy, and royal being, and for the other a fitting
home and dominion for him for ever. Precious as are those living jewels of His
which the Saviour eventually gathers into the glorious cabinet of the world to come,
they are in their origin mere men and women, of like passions with ourselves—
ordinary humanity ennobled and transformed by supernatural grace into eternal
kings and priests, Christianity, in its highest achievements and results, is simply
the miraculous power of Jesus made effective in and upon the common elements of
nature—the gladdening transfiguration of the common into the noble, the sinful
into the holy, the earthly into the heavenly, (J. 4: Seiss, D.D.)


Ver. 3. When they wanted wine.—I. The wine supplied was in ACCORDANCE
WITH THE CUSTOM OF THE CouNTRY. ‘The produce probably of their own industry in
the vineyards around. Wine in Bible lands was not an occasional luxury as with us
but a part of the daily food of the people. A simple, natural beverage, very
different to the branded wines of this country, but intoxicating, nevertheless. Such
wine was among the first oblations to the Divinity (Gen. xiv, 18). Wine and bread
in conformity with this principle, are the essential elements of the Holy Supper,
because they are the essential elements in the support of life in the Fast. II.
THERE IS A NATURAL HARMONY BETWFEN THE FRUIT OF THE VINE AND THE BRIDAL
restiviry. The richest juices of the vine plant are prepared and stored up in those
parts which are specially associated with the propagation of the species. For
aught we know, the reproduction of the vine might be accomplished without the


a ak


oh ade Soe Rie en ee


af


onAP, 11.) ST. JOHN. 155


exquisite goblets of the grape cluster; and so the marriage rite can take place
without any festivity. But God loves not a mere utilitarianism; and it is as
natural that wine should form part of the festivities of marriage as that beauty and
gladness should crown the accomplishment of the common purposes of the world.
III. Understanding the importance attached to wine on such an occasion, we can
realize THE CALAMITY OF ITS FAILURE. ‘ Without wine there is no joy,” a common
Jewish saying. It may have been caused by the poverty of the host, or through the
unexpected arrival of Jesus and His disciples. Anyhow it was an intense mortifi-
cation. Why? Because we all desire to appear prosperous. Poverty is hard to
bear; but its disclosure is a thousand times worse. Not because poverty is a
disgrace ; but because man was made for happiness, and without it he feels that he
has fallen from his natural place. This is owing to sin. There was no scarcity in
Eden. IV. Viewed in this light, it is a most striking coincidence that our Lorp’s
FIRST MIRACLE SHOULD BE WROUGHT TO RELIEVE wANT. The kingdom of heaven
meets humanity where the law has left it stripped and destitute. V. This failure
teaches US THE FAILURE OF THE WORLD’s Joy. It was the highest and happiest
occasion on which want intruded itself. What a testimony to the insufficiency of
even the richest feast of worldly attainment or experience. Marriage, the crowning
bliss of life, with all its dear ties and affections, comes to a close. VI. Jesus
COMES TO US AT EVERY CRISIS OF WANT, and provides for us what we ourselves can-
not supply. Christ, received as guest, becomes host, and out of His fulness
supplies all our need. (H. Macmillan, LL.D.) What kind of wine was it 2—The
miracle took place a few days before the Passover, and this festival usually fell on
the 30th of March. The wine that was drunk at the feast must therefore have
been kept for six or seven months from the previous vintage. It must, in conse-
quence, have undergone the process of fermentation, for, without this, no organic
juice could have been preserved for such a length of time. Fermentation is a
natural process, which takes place in all watery solutions of vegetable substances
containing saccharine matters; and depends entirely upon the growth of a micro-
scopic fungus called the yeast-plant, which develops with extreme rapidity into
myriads of minute cells or vesicles, and while doing so resolves the sugar in solu-
tion into alcohol and carbonic acid gas. The spores, or seeds, of this fungus exist
in enormous quantities everywhere; and no vegetable juice can be exposed to the
air for however short a time without receiving some of them ; and if the tempera-
ture and other conditions be suitable, they begin at once to grow and multiply,
thereby producing fermentation and liberating alcohol. Even in ripe grapes, while
they are hanging on the vine, this yeast-fungus is often developed, causing vinous
fermentation. It is impossible, therefore, to produce an infusion of grapes from
which these ubiquitous germs are absent—unless the juice is boiled and the vessel
hermetically sealed; and even then, so tenacious are they of life, we cannot be sure
that we have got rid of them, as Pasteur’s recent researches abundantly testify.
And wherever these germs are-present, the process of fermentation begins, and is
carried on with greater or less rapidity according to the temperature. In a warm
climate it goes on with extraordinary vigour. There is no such thing, therefore, as
unfermented wine. The juice of the grape when immediately squeezed out may be
so called; but if it is kept for a few days under ordinary conditions it inevitably
undergoes the vinous fermentation. (Ibid.) God honours our leaning upon
Him:—A circumstance happened to me yesterday. I cannot help telling it to you.
I received a note from one of the trustees of the Orphanage to say that the
running account was so low that, when the cheques were paid on Friday morn-
ing, we should have overdrawn our banking account. I did not like that state of
things; but I did not fret about it. I breathed a prayer to God that He would
send money to put into the bank to keep the account right. Last night, at nearly
ten o’clock, I opened a letter that came from Belfast, and it had in it a cheque for
£200, being the amount left.as a legacy. I wrote across my acknowledgment, ‘‘ O
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His name together!” That amount
put the account square for the time being; and although the Orphanage has no
ready money to go on with, still that does not matter, God will send more means
during the week, and at all other times when the expenditure calls for it. _ At the
moment when I opened the letter, and found the £200, I felt as if my hair stood
on end, because of the conscious nearness of the Lord my God. My brother,
Hugh Hanna, when he sent that cheque, and sent it on that particular day, did
not know that it would come just when I was praying to God for help in a time
of trouble; yet it came exactly when it. was sought for. (C. H. Spurgeon.)


ee
a


156 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {onar. I.


Trouble carried to Christ :—‘ What do you do without a mother to tell all your
troubles to?” asked a child who had a mother of one who had none.“ Mother
told me whom to go to before she died,” answered the little orphan. “T go to the
Lord Jesus; He was mother’s friend, and He’s mine.” ‘Jesus Christ is in the sky;
He is a way off, and He has a great many things to attend to in heaven, it is not
likely He can stop to mind you.” ‘I do not know anything about that,” said the
orphan; “all I know, He says He will; and that’s enough for me.”


Vers. 3,4. The mother of Jesus saith unto Him they have no wine.—I. Tus
MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT AT THE SUGGESTION OF A MOTHER, and was the result of the
promptings of human affection. The first influence that reaches the senses of &
child is from the mother; and whatever miracles of blessing have been done in the
world may be traced to her. ‘‘ She who rocks the cradle sways the world.” Jesus
was like all human beings in this respect. And now He has entered on His life’s
work, it ig fitting that He should receive the first call to the exercise of His power
from His mother. II. Tue mort of THE worps or Mary. Some regard them
as a passing remark; others as a delicate hint that they should retire. These
explanations inadequate, Mary expected some unusual manifestations of Christ’s
power, and drew attention to the want of wine to excite His sympathy and help.
She knew that there were no ordinary means of procuring wine, and that a crisis
had happened in His life which was in keeping with what she knew about Him.
Now, therefore, was the time to show to the world who He was. But mingled
with this there were selfish elements: personal pride in the expectation of His
achievements, and anxiety to keep her old motherly influence over Him.
Jesus’ REPLY. Just as He assured her in the Temple that He must be about His
Father’s business, so now He told her that. a higher motiye than a mother’s
authority must regulate the manifestation of His glory. The blessings of heaven
are bestowed, not according to a capricious favouritism, but according to a fixed
principle of Divine government. At first sight the reply seems repellent; but—1.
In those days “‘ woman” was a title of respect. When the true dignity of woman
is recognized, that is the best name by which she can be known. Emperors have
called their queens by this name, and Jesus used it in His tenderest message on
the cross. 2. Christ avoided calling Mary His mother for the same reason that He
refused to acknowledge David as His Father. Henceforth He was not to be known
as her Son, but as the Son of the Kternal Father. 3. ‘‘ What have I to do with thee,”
a common phrase indicating the conclusion of all debate. It has no severity in
it, and may have been uttered in a tone and with a gesture that could not be
reported. Anyhow, Mary’s feelings were not hurt, as is seen from her expectant
words to the servants. IV. THe Son wap Now BECOME LorD EVEN oF His own
moTHER, ,and her happiness could only be secured by obedience to Him. (H.
Macmillan, LL.D.) The anxious mother :—I. THE SOLICITUDE SHE FELT. While
it becomes the friends of Jesus to be careful for nothing (Phil. iv. 6; Matt. vi. 31;
Luke x. 41), Mary’s distress was—1, Natural, seeing that the wine failed through
the arrival of her Son and His companions. 2. Beautiful, inasmuch as it was
sympathy with others. 3. Permissible, because a habit enjoined by Christ (Mark
xii, 31; Luke vi. 31, x. 36; John xv. 17; Rom. xii. 10; Phil. ii, 4). IL Tus
REQUEST SHE MADE. That Christ should establish His Messiahship by miracle. 1.
In turning to Christ in her emergency, Mary acted with propriety, teaching us
where to go with our troubles as they arise (Heb. iv. 15; 1 Pet. v. 7). 2. In pre-
scribing to Christ the manner of His help, her example must be eschewed; Christ
then, as now, regulating all His movements by the will of the Father (Eph. i. 11)
3. In failing to grasp the character of Christ’s mission, she represents the dulness
of the natural heart (1 Cor. ii. 14). III. Tae neproor sue RECEIVED. 1. Inconceiv-
able that there was any contempt in it (1 John iii. 5; 1 Peter ii. 22). In this let
Christ be our exemplar (Eph. vi. 2). 2. A respectful reminder that henceforth He
had passed beyond His earthly home, and had entered upon engagements in which
the will of God was supreme (chap. iv. 34, vi. 38). (1) Whom Christ loves He
reproves when they go astray (Heb. xii. 6; Rev. iii. 19). (2) There are higher
obligations than those due to parents (Acts. iv. 19). (3) In all matters connected
with religion and conscience (James iv. 12), IV. THe comrorr sHE OBTAINED
Repelling the suggestion of a public demonstration, He intimated by some explained
sign that His assistance would not be wanting. So it is ever His custom to mingle
mercy with judgment (Psa, ci. 1). V. Tum rrust sxe pispLayep, With quiet
confidence she directed the servants to hold themselves in readiness to execute


Ate


Lege ele


-”A


cmap. 11.] ST. JOHN. 157


any instructions He might give, symbolizing the faith which is ready to interpret
and cling to Christ’s hints of favour, whether found in His Word or Providence.
(T. Whitelaw, D.D.) Mine hour is not yet come.—Christ’s hour :—I. Cunist’s
HOUR WAS THE TIME FIXED BY THE FatTHER. No outward event or motive could decide
when it was right for Him to do a mighty work. He waited obscure and inactive
for thirty years, until the hour appointed had come for beginning His public ministry ;
and when He entered on its career, all its incidents were regulated by the Father's
predetermined purpose. II. THE ULTIMATE REFERENCE Is TO THAT POINT oF His
LIFE MOST DECISIVE OF ALL, THE HOUR oF His gLoriFication. But the way lay through
the valley of the shadow of death. The hour when He was glorified was the hour
when His -work was finished. Jesus, therefore, connected the hour of His greatest
triumph with the hour of His greatest defeat : and everything that promoted His glory
made sure His death. The converse on the Transfiguration Mount was about His
decease (see also chap. xii. 23-29). All this was realized here in anticipation. He
saw the inevitable connection between the miracle and His hourof doom. Weneed
not wonder, therefore, that He should hesitate before performing an act involving
such tremendous issues. His mother knew nothing of all this, and His gentle words
of rebuke struck a note which He meant to vibrate in her heart like the memor-
able word of Simeon in the Temple. It is striking that we hear no more of Mary
in St. John until she stands beside the cross. III. This foreshadowing of the cross
by the first manifestation of Christ’s glory is TYPICAL OF A COMMON HUMAN EXPERIENCE.
The marriage indicated the commencement of the most serious part in the drama of
life, in which self-sacrifice is continually necessary. Marriage is nature’s preparation
for death. Death empties the world and marriage is ordained to replenishit, The
happiest hour of life is thus intimately connected with the saddest. And so
with all the glories of man. Triumph and success come late in life and are associ-
ated with ebbing strength and failing desire, which rob them of nearly all their
pleasure. IV. WiITH PURIFIED FAITH AND SPIRITUAL INSIGHT Mary ENTERED INTO HER
Son’s pesian. Her command to the servants proves the greatness of her faith.
(H. Macmillan, LL.D.) The supreme hour (of. John xvii. 1) :—I, A DESTINY FORE-
sEEN. It has been maintained that there is a fixed plan and destiny for each life.
What then about the multitude of wicked and suffering lives? And yet it is im-
possible that God should not have some plan and purpose for all: for Divine Provi-
dence is the care for the whole and for each part. Otherwise chance and accident
would be governors of the world. To get out of this order and follow our own blind
wills, however, is possible. We are ever treated as creatures to whom choice is
offered. God will not compel us; but He will guide our lives if we will trust Him.
But we can choose to stand in antagonism to His purposes. All sin does this, Yet
there is a Sovereignty which is able to see all contingencies and provide for every
catastrophe. Therefore there is a work for each to do and atime to doitin. We
come into life for a purpose. What that is seems hidden. We learn by experience.
Christ’s mission, of course, was of transcendant importance; but He comes pos-
sessed of a conviction that He is sent to do a special work in a special hour. This
is constantly on His lips. There was to be nothing accidental. He completely
foresaw and foretold His destiny, What that was stands out clearin its own light—
death for our salvation. Take that away and what is left? Like music without
the leading part, the air, there may be harmony, but there is no meaning. So as
Christ knows it is coming He prepares Himself and His disciples for it. And when
it comes He cries ‘‘It is finished.” II. A FoRESEEN DESTINY TRIUMPHING OVER ALL
OBSTACLES. What wonderful preservations there were which prevented any failure.
The thought of Christ’s possible failure is overwhelmingly terrible. Yet He was
tried in every possible way. The devil tried Him by his temptations ; His friends
by their endeavours to seize Him as a madman; the Pharisees by their invitations ;
the people by their attempt to crown Him; His townsmen by their attempt to
assassinate Him. ‘Twice the reason is said to be “because His hour was not yet
come.” The hour came, not a moment too soon or too late, but at the appointed
time. Conclusion: 1. A word of comfort to His servants in times of anxiety about
their lives and work. If we have surrendered ourselves to God let us accept our lot
and place without fear. 2. A word of encouragement to workers whose results seem
go meagre. Be still, live on, every pulse beat brings the hour of glory nearer. 3.
Let no man fear premature death, ‘A man is immortal till his work is done.” (W.
Braden.) Our hour :—1. THE HOUR THAT STRIKES WHEN GoD CALLS TO HIGHER
purty, better thoughts, purer purposes, more unworldly aims than are common in
this lower life. Neglect that and you have lost a great possession. You may


158 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cHAP. ff.


nn  —.


succeed elsewhere, but you have suffered the supreme loss. You are not watching
for it: it may come and go and leave you a wreck. II. THE HOUR CALLS IN SPECIAL
MOMENTS OF TEMPTATION. Every soul has in it its special strand of sin. We find it
out by contemplating what is hardest for us to give up, what we most like, what we
least like to do. The call comes and our hour approaches. III. Then there is
THE LAST HOUR WHICH BELONGS TO US ALL, about which it is impossible to speak since
none of us have died. Butitis coming quickly. Prepare for it. (Canon Knox-
Little.) Our hour :—I. No HouR Is uNIMPoRTANT. It may seem to be, and be
treated as trivial. But an architect will tell you that every stone in a building is
necessary for the strength and symmetry of the whole. So with life. Its hours
are of untold value in relation to each other and the great whole. II. Any HOUR
MAY BE TO US THE MOST MOMENTOUS HOUR OF ALL. ‘There may come quite unex-
pectedly some solemn event which may change the whole purpose and eurrent of
ourlife. A letter, a friend}s call, a casual visit to a stranger’s house, may result in
beginning a business or finding a wife. This may not be the supreme hour, but it
assuredly leads to it. It is one link in the chain of hours; take away that one and
all ‘the possibilities of the future are gone. The present hour contains the germ of
our destiny. III, To EVERY LIFE SOME GREAT AND SOLEMN PERIOD COMES, a decisive
period, a turning point, one which condenses in itself all others, and for which all
others have prepared—just as the hundred years of patient culture have prepared
the aloe for the single year in which it flowers. It may come in youth of middle
age. Then what we are is proved and what we shall be decided. (W. Braden.)
Christ’s treatment of His mother :—The phrase re oi yai oot is a literal translation


of the Hebrew qb bn (Jos. xxii. 24; Judges xi. 12; 2Sam. xvi. 10; 1 Kings
xviii. 18; 2 Kings iii. 18; Matt. viii. 29, xxvii. 19; Marki. 24). Itis also foundin
the classics. The radical idea appears to be: ‘‘ What have we in common? Our
relations are wholly different.”” The formula there is used to express unwillingness
to be disturbed or hindered by any one. It always implies reproof, although some-
times a friendly one merely (2 Sam. xvi, 10), here, ‘‘ Mingle not thyself in my con-
cerns; we pursue different aims and thou comprehendest me not.” If Christ, then,
did not consider this as a suitable occasion for the performance of a miracle, why
does He, nevertheless, follow His mother’s suggestion? Because it could not, on
the other hand be regarded as an unsuitable one, for it offered Him an occasion for
proving His philanthropic disposition. As Messiah He uttered the reproof, asa son
He complied with the request. The address yivaris not disrespectful, but solemn,
(cf. the address from the cross xix. 26). Augustus thus addresses Cleopatra: ‘‘ Take
courage, O woman, and keep a good heart.” That the look of Jesus expressed more
than His words convey, may be gathered from the address of His mother to the
servants, (Ad. Tholuck,D.D.) The sense is what haveI as God to do with thee a
woman?’ Dost thou suppose that the Divine power by which I work miracles can be
set in motion by thee because thou art the mother of My humanity? Hence Christ
who loved and revered His earthly mother (Luke ii. 51; John xix. 26) teaches us to
begin with love and reverence to our Heavenly Father. ‘The hour of My weakness
derived from thee has not yet come ; butit will come, and when that hour of human
infirmity arrives, and when that infirmity of which thou art the mother, hangs on
the cross, then will I own thee.” John xix. 26, 27 is the best comment on this
text. (Bp. Wordsworth.) Mary catches at the little unobtrusive word, not yet,
and with great penetration infers from it, then it will come! (Herberger.) The
reasonableness of this incident :—If this miracle was one of the manifestations of
Jesus asthe Son of God, can anything be more natural or consistent than that it
should be introduced by words which declare that He could not be in subjection to
any earthly authority, while yet the act itself was an act of ministry to even the
commonest necessities of the sons of Earth? Is not this apparent contradiction
accomplishment of His work, the exhibition of Him in His complete character?
He will not be the servant of His creatures, not even of His mother; He obeys the
will which all are created to obey. He will be the servant of His creatures. He is
come into the world for that end. He is doing the will of His Father when He is
stooping to the lowest of all. (F. D. Maurice, M.A. Mariolatry :—Jesus Christ
Himeelf is the expression of the fatherly and motherly nature in God. But this
great truth was lost sight of in the dark ages; and the strange idea arose that even
Christ Himself was what God was formerly conceived to be—a stern and angry
judge, needing intercession and appeased with difficulty, The manhood in Him,
from its very sinlessness, was supposed to be implacable; and therefore the pitying,


”


onaP. 11.) ST. JOHN. 159


sompassionate womanhood was personified by His mother, who acted the part of
intercessor between Him and a guilty world. She was a human being, having all a
human being’s experience of sin, its temptations, trials, and sorrows ; having the
consciousness of weakness in herself, teaching her how hard it is not to sin, which
would necessarily make her compassionate towards others. We all know how, step
by step, she has been raised from that position of participation in human sin and
sorrow to an exemption from it. We can trace this gradual ascent in the pictures
of her which represent her first as alone; then with the infant Saviour in herarms ;
then with Christ crowning her; then kneeling before Him; then sitting a little
lower; then on a level with Him. And now there is a tendency to place her above
Him ; for there are more churches dedicated to her than to Him. In Rome God
the Father is almost unknown, and God the Son has ceased to be an object of adora-
tion. The Father is pictorially represented as an old man, and tie Saviour as a
little child ; and both are made subservient to the Virgin. But there is a Nemesis
in this last monstrous development. By the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception,
thus paying Divine honours to her, she is removed further from the sympathies of
men, and the attraction of her intercession will ultimately be weakened. What
made her worship so alluring was the mistaken idea that just because she was a
tender human being-—a loving, sainted mother—having the knowledge of sin, she
would be less severe towards the frailties of men, But this charm she will lose by
her deification. She will come to be regarded asa stern and implacable judge,
having no sympathy with men, because she is herself withdrawn from the possi-
bilities of their frailties; and the confiding trustfulness with which prayers are now
offered to her will cease to be felt. Indeed, the change has already taken place, and
the supposed mother of the Virgin, called St. Anne, is now invoked to entreat her
daughter to ask her Son to be propitious to the suppliant. Where is to be the end
of such meditatorship? May not the Virgin’s grandmother be also brought in?
And if the Virgin is to be regarded as conceived without sin, must not her mother
also—and so on—back to Adam; and thus the doctrine of the Fall and of original
sin be done away with altogether, and with it the standing-ground and necessity of
the Church? Howsimple and satisfactory the truth itself which is thus so strangely
perverted! (H. Macmillan, LL.D.)


Ver. 5. Whatsoever He saith unto you, do it.—Implicit obedience to Christ :—
That is a remarkable claim. It is almost startling to be told that, without leaving
room for our own opinion, whatever a certain voice says to us we are to do. That
claim can be made for no created intelligence. But it can be made for Christ. And
this is the language of one who, so far, knew Him best on earth. Never before, nor
since, has mother been able to say of son that ’tis well to do whatever he requires.
Nor is our personal witness wanting ; it is evident that the world’s miseries are due
to disobedience to Him; and it acquires a more extraordinary significance when we
remember that He hath something to say about everything we door ought todo. He
not only assumes to guide at crises, but at every step. I, WHAT MUST PRECEDE THIS
OBEDIENCE. 1. Subjection: Ye are not your own; He has a right to me by His
redemption. I cannot take my own course or follow my own will without robbing Him.
2. A listening for His voice, a training our ear to recognize Him. For though He may
have something to say, and indeed may say it, it does not follow that we hear. How
can we hear whenever He speaks, how be sure that it is He? It is easy to follow
caprice or self-will, and think we are following Him. Whatever He says is in ha:-
mony with this Divine Book; to know what He says we must come here, and if
coming here we sincerely say, ‘‘ Speak Lord, for ‘thy servant heareth!” He will
speak. But we cannot always retire to search the Book, nor even pause to consider
what is right—how can He control us then? Obey ; obey.and you will come instine-
tively to know your Lord’s will, as (as one has said) ‘‘by copying perpetually a
master painter’s works, we can at last recognize his touch unerringly.” 3. A deter-
mination to trust Him. For it demands courage to eommit ourselves blindly to
another. It were easy to do something that He tells us, but— whatsoever At
many a time He will say do this, go there, lay down that joy, take up that burden,
when it will seem to be wrong; then it is when the text comes home to us, that we
need courage to obey, and may fail through fear. Courage is wanted to take the
first bold plunge into the sea, but when we find its sustaining power 1s trustworthy,
we fear no more: so with the will of Christ. But how can we bring ourselves to
that abandonment. Only by remembering that Christ cannot lead us wrong.
Infinite wisdom! Infinite love! IL. Wat THIS OBEDIENCE INVOLVES. 1. It is con-


160 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (CHAP. Tt. —


trary to questioning. We may not discover it at once; for gracious purpose He
may keep us waiting, but ere the time for action comes He will reveal enough. Then
questioning should end. He will not debate with us. It is not unlikely that He may call
us to strange things—things as strange as when He called Abram, or Moses, or
Jonah, or Peter. Now, when those strange commands come, which seem to involve
so much risk, and which lead into the dark—then is the time to recall this word, and
to act uponit, 2. Itiscontrary to delay. Delay is disobedience, When we dare not
reply “I will not,” we sometimes reply “I will, but not now,” and quiet our con-
science with the idea that this is not refusal. Jesus said, ‘‘ Follow Me!” and he
answered, “ Lord, suffer me first,” &c., and the Lord said ‘‘ No.” So we respond to
some of His commands, “Lord, suffer me first to do something else,” “* Seek ye first
the kingdom,” &c, 3. It is contrary to consideration of cost. Itis well to settle with
ourselves that we cannot follow Christ without soon, and often, coming to whatis hard.
“ If any man will come afte Me, let him take up his cross,” &c. 4. Itis contrary to in-
quiry about other matters. For it isone of our most dangerous temptations to neglect
clear duty because of what is not clear. What is clear may be but little, a mere

foothold on “a pavement of mist,” but plant the foot there if so Christ bids, and
He will show more, at length bringing him that obeys as far as He knows to the
rock and the day. We are apt to confuse others’ tasks with ours. ‘‘ Whatsoever
He saith unto you, do it.” UI. Waar FoLnLows THIS OBEDIENCE. 1. It prevents
hardness of heart. Young men and women with whom Jesus pleads, there are old
men here who would tell you that once Christ’s voice was clear to them, but that

now they catch but murmurs of a voice far off, and who would entreat you to res-

pond to Him now. Hardness is the certain result of refusal. 2. It proves that we
are Christ’s. What is Obedience—(1) Is the mark of a Christian. ‘ Hereby we

do know that we know Him,” &. (2) The test of service: Why call ye
Me Lord, Lord, and do not what I say?” (3) The test of love: ‘If ye love
Me,” &c. 3. The way to success. You have heard it said that religious principles will
not do for business. But can anything be more hopeless than to go against the

God of Providence on whose side all things work. But let the text guide you
in the office and the workshop, in public life and the social circle, and this will be
the issue—judge if it be success or no! A peaceful conscience repose in the Divine
care, unclouded fellowship with God, and at last, ‘‘ Well done,” &. (C. New.)
Perfect obedience :—To obey God in some things of religion, and not in others, shows
an unsound heart ; like Esau, who obeyed his father in bringing him venison, but
not in a greater matter, viz., the choice of his wife. Child-like obedience moves
towards every command of God, as the needle points that way which the loadstone
draws. (T. Watson.) Obedience must be cheerful:—A musician is not recom-

mended for playing long but for playing well; it is obeying God willingly that is
accepted; the Lord hates that which is forced, it is rather paying a tax than an
offering. Good duties must not be pressed nor beaten out of us, as the waters came
out of the rock when Moses smote it with his rod; but must freely drop from us
as myrrh from the tree, or honey from the comb. If a willing mind be wanting,
there wants that flower which should perfume our obedience, and make it a sweet
smelling savour to God. (Ibid.) Submission without reasoning :—Payson was
asked, when under great bodily affliction, if he could see any particular reason for
this dispensation. ‘ No,” replied he, ‘but I'am as well satisfied as if I could see
ten thousand ; God’s will is the very perfection of allreason.”” Implicit obedience :—
Manton says that, ‘John Cassian makes mention of one, who willingly fetched
water near two miles every day for a whole year together, to pour it untoa dead dry
stick, at the command of his superior, when no reason else could be given for it.”
And of another it is recorded, that he professed that if he were enjoined by his
superior to put to sea in a ship which had neither mast, tackling, nor any other
furniture, he would do it; and when he was asked how he could do this without
hazard ef his discretion, he answered, “The wisdom must be in him that hath
power to command, not in him that hath power to obey.” ‘These are instances of
implicit obedience to a poor fallible human authority, and are by no means to be
imitated. But when it is God who gives the command, we cannot carry a blind
obedience too far, since there can be no room for questioning the wisdom and good-
ness of any of His precepts, At Christ’s command it is wise to let down the net at
the very spot where we have toiled in vain all the night. If God bids us, we can
sweeten water with salt, and destroy poison with meat, yea, we may walk the waves
of the sea, or the flames of a furnace. Well, said the Blessed Virgin, “ Whatsoever
He saith unto you, do it.” My heart, I charge thee follow thy Lord’s command


si


cHaP. 11.] ST. JOHN. 161


rr


- without a moment's question, though He bid thee go forward into the Red Sea, or


onward into a howling wilderness. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Obedience to Christ :—I.
THE RIGHT THAT Many HAD TO SPEAK. The right of—1. Experience. Without this
speech the history of Christ’s life would be sadly incomplete. Omit it, and what
would our position be? (1) We should hear the voice of heaven saying, ‘ This is
My beloved Son;” (2) The voice of the Herald, ‘* Behold the Lamb of God!” (3)
The voice of the Church, ‘‘ Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God; (4)
The voice of the world, “ Never man spake like this man ; ” (5) The voice of friends,


_ “The holy one of God ;” (6) The voice of Justice, “I find no fault in Him.” But


we want to hear another voice, that of home. And here we have it from her whose
lips kissed Him, whose hands caressed Him, who had Him under her eye from child-
hood to manhood, and her testimony is, “ Whatsoever He saith,” &. 2.
Modesty: What gives point and force to her words is that she is no garrulous
woman, making her son the subject of constant commendation. Only this once
does she testify to Him. And there was a strong callin her to speak now. Up to
this time Jesus had been a private man and had belonged to herself. But hence-
forth He was to be the public Messiah, and her Sonnolonger. Mary here renounces
her exclusive right to Christ, and in parting from him says, ‘‘ Whatsoever,” &e. 3.
The tacit approval of Christ. Mothers are partial. Was, then, Mary’s love too strong
for her judgment? The best answer is that Christ, who was least open to flattery, did
not chide her: but afterwards, in laying down the terms of discipleship, used His
mother’s words, ‘‘ Ye are My friends if ye do whatsoeverI command you.” II. Tus
ADVICE THAT Mary erves. 1. It is not enough to have Christ’s words. TheBibleasa
mere possession is either neglected altogether or treated as a charm. 2. It is not
enough to study Christ’s words, even with the closest attention and the firmest belief ;
although that is a blessed privilege. 38.-The whole duty and creed of man is to do
whatsoever Christ commands. ‘To this we are pledged by the pattern prayer, and
in this we have a supreme example in Christ Himself. III, How are we To opey?
1. By loving Him. 2. By aiming at the perfection that isin Him. (P. Robertson.)
Obedience to Christ :—I, THis ADVICE MEETS A FELT WANT. There are times in life
when we want the responsibility of decision divided—times of utter bafflement and
perplexity. A friendly recommendation is sometimes helpful, but what is wanted
is supreme dictation. Christ steps in here as the commander of the people and
says, ‘‘Lo,” ‘*Come,” “Do,” “Stand.” IJ. Tais apvick was GIVEN BY CHRIST'S
MOTHER, who had lived with Him a whole generation, and after all that experience
felt warranted in offering it—the most magnificent tribute to Christ that was ever
offered : that He was worthy of perfect obedience. III. Tis apvicr Hz ENrorces Him-
SELF. 1. His commands are imperative and final. He never prefers a request or revises
a decision. 2. His commands brook no emendation, diminution, or enlargement.
3. His commands require prompt and implicit obedience. IV. Tais commanpMENT
IS EXCEEDING BROAD. 1. Follow Me. 2, Love oneanother. 3. Wash ye one another's
feet. 4. Go ye into all the world. 5. Do this in remembrance of Me. (J. Parker, D.D.)
Instant obedience :—The right path into the meaning of this saying is found in an
interior view of the three states of mind represented in the little group. 1. That of
Mary, who speaks. 2. Of the servants to whom she speaks. 3. And of the Saviour
for whose decisive word she and they are waiting. On the part of Mary there was
evidently a mixture of perplexity, impatience, reverence, and trust. The impatience
was sufficiently reproved and restrained. His ‘‘ woman,” &c., dispelled her rising
complacency, and placed her on that level of human dependence where, with all her
loveliness, beauty, and sanctity, she must ever remain, Christ’s word was a call for
increased faith. For thirty years Mary had carried in her soul the memory of the
strange events which signalized His birth, &c. As yet He had given no supernatural
sign, Was it not almost the ‘“‘hour?” Just at this point of uncertainty she stood,
but when she looked at Him all her doubts fled, and all fears sank to rest in one
resolution of trusting obedience. ‘ Whatsoever,” &c. I. Whatsoever Hu saith.
One voice is singled out, and that has supreme authority. Some master every
human being has. There are as many masters as there are interests, tastes,
passions, &c. When we come to the moral life, men are at liberty to choose as they
will. ‘Choose now this day,” &c. Choose Christ and live for ever, choose any other
master and you will die. ‘No man can choose two masters.” IJ. As there is but
one voice of supreme authority, 80 THERE IS BUT ONE PRINCIPLE OF CHRISTIAN
puty—instant, active obedience. 1. How many of the failures and miseries of
life creep in between the hearing of God’s command and the doing of ry
Men mistake speculative for practical truth; put matters of feeling in place of


ae


162 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. I


action. Some problem of Providence is conjured up as if a man had a right to
keep his repentance and faith waiting till he can fathom it; some obscure dogma
which should be left to clear itself is set up as a stumbling-block ; moods of
depression and discontent; conflicting claims of family or friends, or between
action and contemplation. These must be cast off and left behind, not by thinking
over them, or spasmodic efforts to manufacture feeling, but by a more prompt,
unremitting doing of Christ’s will. Jesus saith “ fill the water-pots,” &c, Our
homely opportunities are our water-pots. Fill them with such water as you have.
Whether the water shall be made wine is for Him to decide, not us. Be about the
Master’s business. Go to the nearest duty. 2. Another kind of difficulty is cured
by prompt obedience—indecision as to begining to serve Christ. It is not till our
part is done that the firkins are filled, that the supernatural energy will change the
heart into the new creature. Believe: faith is the power: but the proof and fruit of
faith is not separated from it—“ Arise, and wash away thy sins; ” bring forth fruit meet
for repentance; bear witness to the Redeemer; have charity for one another.
III. ONE OTHER WORD COMPLETES THE SCOPE OF THE LESSON. ‘* Whatsoever.”
1. What it should be, His mother and the servants did not know. It turned out
no very difficult task, although it might have been. But it was a great trial of
their faith. How was the water to remedy the want of wine? How are our prayers
to move the Everlasting Arm? How shall bread and wine feed the heart, &c.
And then there are other trials which need this bread ‘‘ whatsoever ”’ to cover them.
When you begin to calculate the consequences of your obedience, when your flesh
cries out that the sacrifice hurts—1. You will want this ‘“‘ whatsoever.” 2. Whata
holy power and beauty this obedience will yield in our dwellings. Draw out and
bear to every guest in the Father’s house. Christ takes these old and common
water-pots of our mortal relationships, our household affairs and every day disposi-
tions and employments, and then, if only we are ready with our obedience, fills them
with that new wine to which He so often compares His gift of life. (Bp. Huntington.)
Prompt obedience :—A story is told of a great captain, who, after a battle, was
talking over the events of the day with his officers. He asked them who had done
the best that day. Some spoke of one man who had fought very bravely, and some
of another. ‘No,’ he said, ‘“‘ you are all mistaken. The best man in the field to-
day was a soldier who was just lifting up his arm to strike an enemy, but, when he
heard the trumpet sound a retreat, checked himself, dropped his arm and without
striking the blow. That perfect and ready obedience to the will of his general is
the noblest thing that has been done to-day.” (Pulpit Treasury.) Christ’s
orders :—‘* Sir,” said the Duke of Wellington to an officer who urged the impos-
sibility of executing the directions he had received, ‘“‘I did not ask your opinion;
I gave you my orders, and I expect to have them obeyed.” Such should be
the obedience of every follower of Jesus Christ. The words which He hath spoken
are our faw, not our judgments or fancies. Even if death were in the way, it is
“Not ours to reason why, ours but to do or die.” (Ibid.) A word for everybody :—
I. The universatity of the command “whatsoever” II. Its aurnoriry, ‘He
saith.’ Who? 1, Our Creator. 2. Our Preserver. 3. Our Redeemer. 4. Our
Master. I1I. Its rnpivipuanrry. “You.” Masters, servants; parents, children;
ministers, hearers; the aged, the young; the man of many talents, the man of
one ; doctors, artists, poets, labourers. IV. Its spirrr, ‘‘ Do it” thoroughly, cheer-
fully, at all times, everywhere. (Dr. Jarbo.) “Ye are not your own,” &.;
therefore “‘ Whatsoever He saith,” &c. What does He say ?—I. Lasour nor To By
RICH (Prov. xxiii. 4, 5, xxviii, 20; 1 Tim. vi. 9, 10). Yet the sin of the age is over
anxiety to be rich. He saith by St. Paul (Col. iii, 2). II, Bz nor conrormEp To THIS
WORLD (2 Cor, vi. 17; Isa. lii, 11). What a falling off from this command there is in
dress, amusement, &c. III. Go work THis DAY IN MY VINEYARD. There are so-called
Christians who are quite satisfied if there are no great blots in their lives, without
caring about the blanks; indeed their life may be called one great blank, Each
one, however, is expected to cultivate his talent. To this end it is not necessary to
be a minister. While there are young to teach, sick to visit, poor to be relieved,
institutions to be supported, Christ to witness, no special vocation is required.
IV, Love as pretHren. “By this shall all men know,” &c. (John xvii. 20, 21).
And yet see how the different regiments of the Christian army, instead of fighting
against the common foe, are turned against each other, and the world says deridingly,
* Settle it first among yourselves, and then we will listen to your claims.” Weare not
likely to see eye to eye on all subjects; let us therefore be tolerant of each
another’s opinions and feelings, V. Hiraerro yz HAVE ASKED NOTHING IN My NAME;


See ee ee a


Ly eee


CHAP. IL] ST, JOHN. 163
ASK AND YE SIIALL RECEIVE. How remiss we are in the duty of prayer, public, social,
private, family. VI. Puim.1v. 8. (Ibid.)


Vers. 6-9. Six water-pots of stone. The significance of the water-pots:—I. Tur
USE OF OLD MATERIAL FOR NEW PunposEs. In the natural word vegetable life grows
out of the mould of vegetable decay. The tabernacle was constructed of Egyptian
materials and many of the laws and customs had an Egyptian form. Prophecy
took shape from political circumstances. When Christianity became the dominant
religion, it absorbed all that was excellent in previous religions, In Rome every
church is built out of heathenrnins. In short, itis an universal principle in religion
to make a heavenly use of ordinary things, just as Christ used the water-pots of the
law for the first blessing of Christianity. II. THE cLosE CONNECTION BETWEEN ALL
PARTS OF REVELATION aS one harmonious scheme of grace. The old and new
covenants are not antagonistic but complimentary. Jesus was foretold by Jewish
prophecy, born under the law, lived a Jew, choose Jews for His disciples, and
conformed to Jewish customs. And when the two roads diverged through Jewish un-
belief it was Christianity that maintained the true tradition as is shown-in the Epistle
to the Hebrews. IIL. ue INSUFFICIENCY OF THE OUTWARD AND THE SUFFICIENCY OF
THE INWARD. These people were keeping the natural ordinance of God in all its
purity and also doing what the law required for their purification. The water-pots
represented the best side of Jewish faith and life; but their emptiness declared
their insufficiency and their number and size, their unsatisfyingness. However
frequent and copious their ablutions, they could not remove sin. The law
could make nothing perfect. It did not touch the heart, The wine of grace
imparts an inward life and thoroughly cleanses moral impurity. IV. Tne nrEps
AND PROVISION OF ATONEMENT. The wine with which the water-pots were filled
spoke eloquently in its origin—being the sacrifice of the vine, the life-blood
of the grape, crushed out of it when trodden under foot of man in the wine-
press—of that atoning blood of Him who is the True’Vine poured forth on the
cross, which cleanses from all sin. (H. Macmillan, LL.D.) The water-pots :—
We are struck with several peculiarities of these water-pots. They were not
made by the potter out of clay, but were hewn by the carver out of the compact
limestone of which the rocks in the neighbourhood were formed. They were
constructed of stone, as the ecclesiastical canon enjoins fonts to be, since that
material is less liable to impurity. In all likelihood, therefore, they were not closed-
up jars with a narrow orifice, as they are usually represented in paintings, like the
wine amphoras of clay which we see among the ruins of ancient cities, such as
Pompeii and Rome ; but large massive stone basins or tazzas, with wide mouths,
like those which the Greeks and Romans constructcd of marble, alabaster, or
porphyry for their numerous lustrations, of which we sce splendid specimens in our
great art museums, and especially in the Vatican sculpture gallery. This shape
would approximate more closely to that of the sacred laver in the Temple, which
they would doubtless take as a model for these domestic utensils, intended to form
a link of connection between the ceremonies of public and private worship. Owing
to their large size and great weight they were not movable, but were fixed in one
spot, in the hall or vestibule, or near the entrance of the house, in a position
analogous to that of the laver in the Temple, which was also a fixture. Another
thing that strikes us is the enormous capacity of these water-pots, which were capable
of containing from sixteen to twenty-four gallons each. The frequent ablutions of
the Mosaic and of the subsequent traditional law required a large supply of water.
Vessels so massive as these must have lasted for many generations ; and there is a
probability that some trace of them, or of others like them, of the same date, may
have survived down to a comparatively late period. They were placed in the vesti-
bule of the house and each guest as he arrived removed his travel stains with their
contents; and large as was the quantity of water which they held, the company
was so numerous that the whole six were emptied. (Ibid. ) The water-pots in
the way of Christ :—An artist was painting a large picture of this marriage feast.
A friend came to see his work and his first remark was, “ What lovely water-pots!”
The painter immediately blotted them out, saying, “I want you to look at Christ,
not at the water-pots.” What a lesson for the teacher, ‘“‘ I am determined to know
nothing among you but Jesus Christ and Him crucified.” What a lesson for the
disciple, ‘‘ Consider Jesus the Apostle and High Priest of our profession.” What a
lesson to the penitent sinner, ‘Looking unto Jesus”’: not His beautiful Church,
nor His learned ministers, but Him. Fill the water-pots with water.—About the


164 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. — [onaP, He
ji Mcrae Ee


miracle generally, note—1. The wine was harmless, or Christ would not have
made it, ig 2. The ‘great quantity is accounted for by the great number of guests. At
Eastern weddings often an open house is kept, and they last several days. The
- miracle was simple and unostentatious, as near the course of nature as the super-
natural can go. Learn from this to do good works quietly and naturally. I, Tux
PRINCIPLES INVOLVED IN OUR LoRD’s MODE OF PROCEDURE. 1. Asa rule, when Christ
is about to bestow a blessing He gives a command. The blind man was sent to
Siloam ; the palsied man had to stretch forth his hand ; Jairus’ daughter was com-
manded to arise; and Lazarus to come forth. The same principle holds good in
grace. The sinner must repent and believe, to be saved : Zion must awake and arise
before she can be blessed and multiplied. 2. Christ’s commands are not to be ques-
tioned, but to be obeyed. Had the servants been like modern captious critics they
would have objected: that what was wanted was not water but wine. And sometimes
Christ’s command does not seem pertinent to the point in hand. The connection
between faith and salvation not always apparent. Sometimes the command may
seem trivial and some other duty preferred. But the connection and importance
must be left with the Commander. 3. Whenever we get a command it is always
wisdom to carry it out zealously ‘up to the brim.” Do not be afraid of an over-

lus. 4. Our earnest obedience is not contrary but necessary to our dependence on
Christ. Faith without works is dead, being alone. To leave all to Christ is not faith
but laziness. 5. One action alone is not sufficient. The water was only water
although the water-pots were full. Even so after sinners and saints have done all
they could, nothing is done till Christ speaks the word of power. 6. Although
human action in itself falls short of the desired end, yet it has its place, and God
has made it necessary by His appointment. (1) It was not necessary in itself that
the water-pots should be filled, but it was necessary that all should be open and
above board. It was just the same with Elijah, who filled the trenches with water
to show that there was no concealed fire, (2) It was instructive to the servants.
The master did not know, but the servants did. So earnest believers who do the work
now are those who know about it. II. Tum aPPLIcATION OF THESE PRINCIPLES. Let
us see how to carry out the command. 1. Use in the service of Christ such abilities
as you have. Jesus chose what was ready to hand. The pots and the water. So
Christ employs men, not angels. If those He chooses have no golden chalices let
them fill their earthen vessels. The servants improved what they had: for the
water-pots were empty and they filled them. Let the preacher improve his gift of
learning, fill his intellect to the brim, and expect Christ to turn the water into wine.
2. Use such means of blessing as God appoints: Scripture study ; attendance at the
means of grace, &c. 3, Use the means heartily. What is worth doing at all is
worth doing well. 4. Remember when you have done all you can there is a great
deficiency left behind. . After the most strenuous industry water is still water. 5.
Trust in Christ to do themiracle. (C.H. Spurgeon.) Filling the water-pots :—I.
Tue servants. 1. Their faith was kindled by Mary’s. It was apparently a foolish
and capricious thing they were asked to do. Why should they be taken away from
a useful work to one of supererogation? The guests had washed, and no more water
was required. The first miracle thus brought out the necessity of faith for the work
of Christ, 2, Their effort was needed also; just as much in its way as the power
of Jesus: viz., to fill the water-pots, and to draw, and to bear. The first miracle,
therefore, was wrought in accordance with God’s law of labour, in which man co-
operates with Himself. II. Tur commanp or Jesus. Notice—1. The emptiness of
the vessels, significant of—(1) The emptiness of Jewish rites which had no efficacy
in themselves. (2) The induced insufficiency occasioned by Pharisaism which
emptied the institutions of the Law of all their meaning by their abuse of them. As
a man by pouring water into a full cup displaces some of the water already there,
so by their works of supererogation they made the Law of noneeffect. (3) The empti-
ness of the institutions of Judaism of the significance they once possessed. They
had served their purpose. The fulness of time had come. 2. The word of Jesus
indicates—(1) That He came not to destroy the Law but to fulfilit. (2) As He Him.
self did so He commands others to do: fill the water-pots, invest the latter with its
significance, put the element of truth into the empty form, teaching and doing what
it requires. (H. Macmillan, LL.D.) Human effort the necessary condition of Divine
help :—I. THE EXTREMITY INTO WHICH THE GUESTS WERE LIKELY TO BE BROUGHT. 1,
Under this extremity the servants did not give way to foolish speculation or gloomy
forebodings. They made Jesus acquainted with it. 2. Having obtained instruction
from Christ they rendered a prompt and absolute obedience. They offered no sug-


CHAP, II.) ST, JOHN. 165
Se ee a pe shee hit Be I ay ee
gestion. Had the thought occurred to them they would have dismissed it. Christ
is ever ready to guide the perplexed, but demands their obedience. Had the servants
partially or wholly disobeyed there would have been no relief. II. Tur neLp wnicw
WAS AFFORDED IN THEIR EXTREMITY. The aid rendered was—1. Appropriate. Wine
was needed and wine was made. 2. Opportune. Christ did not wait until the wine
had failed and the host humbled. 8. Abundant. 4. Secured the commendation of
those who were unconscious of it. (J. S. Exell, M.A.) Why the water-pots were
filled :—I. To REMOVE ALL APPEARANCE OF DECEPTION. It was not a small quantity
down at the bottom where it might have been mixed with the dregs of wine by
sleight of hand. The quantity was so great that there was no possibility of collusion.
The water was seen in the mouth of the vessels. II. To arForD A WEDDING PRESENT
TO THE YOUNG COUPLE, Jesus was no mean, niggardly giver. He did things in a
royal way, and symbolised here both the qualitative and quantitative excellence of
the gospel, the plenteousness as well as the power of His redemption. (H.
Macmillan, LL.D.) Surplus wine :—The quantity of water changed into wine
was very great—about 135 gallons—and the true reason of the large surplus beyond
present need was that there might be in this residue—as in the twelve baskets re-
maining over and above the barley loaves after the miraculous feeding—a visible
and abiding proof and record of this mighty work; and that whenever the wedded
pair brought forth any of this wine from time to time, to welcome and regale any
of their friends, they themselves might be reminded and speak to others of His
divine love and power which produced it; so that the effects of the miracle might
extend far beyond the time and place and circumstances of its first operation; and
that the water made wine might diffuse the knowledge of the Gospel and become
& fountain of living water for the salvation of souls. The bread of the loaves
could not be kept long; and, therefore, in that case the surplus produced was less.
But the good wine of Cana might be preserved for many years. (Bp. Wordsworth.)
The secret nature of our Lord’s work:—Jesus did not even speak. There was no
pomp of circumstance. The attention of the guests was not arrested. The wine
took its place among the ordinary refreshment of the table, I. Curisr’s unIFoRM
WORK WAS 80 QUIET AS NEVER TO STARTLE THE SPECTATORS. It was so with His
Incarnation ; His early life; His ministry, in which He did not cry or lift up His
voice; His wonderful works, which were done in humble villages for the benetit of
poor persons. II. Tae xrNepom or CHRIST CAME AND COMETH WITHOUT OBSERVA-
TION, as an artic summer steals into the very bosom of winter, and ere the ice and
snow have passed away, bright verdure creeps over the earth, and hosts of brilliant
flowers laugh in the sunshine as if by magic. The very essence of God’s kingdom
is secrecy. Itis the kingdom of Him whose glory is to conceal a matter. The
dawning of the day and of the year cometh without observation, III. Taz mzetHop
OF THIS MIRACLE AFFORDS US MUCH COMFORT AMIDST THE ANXIETIES CAUSED BY THE
DISCOVERIES AND SPECULATIONS OF screNcE. What though science is showing us
that God is working in nature by uniformitarian methods, and not by cataclysms!
What though it should reduce the field of the miraculous, and bring much of what
we thought were the wonders of God’s supernatural dispensations within the cycle
of natural law! Such a conclusion, satisfactorily established, ought not to shake
faith, because such a method would be in entire harmony with what Jesus has
revealed of the kingdom of God in nature and in grace. (H. Macmillan, LL.D.)
The naturalness of the miracle:—There are many speculative difficulties about
miracles. We are used to reasoning up from them to Christ; may we not reason
from Him down to them? Given a Being like Christ, and the miracles are but the
fitting framework of that Divine picture. The sick healed, the bread multiplied,
the water turned into wine, the winds hushed, the dead raised, all these cease to be
unnatural—“ His name is wonderful.” Therefore the supernatural is His natural
element; supernatural works are natural to Him. For the believer the Person of
Christ witnesses to His miracles. For the unbeliever, the miracles witnessed to
His Person. (Bp. Alexander.) The governor of the feast.—In primitive times
the person at whose charge an entertainment was given, was chief manager of it.
He distributed to every guest his portion. Those to whom particular respect was
due were helped to the best parts, and to a larger share, as in the case of the mess
of Benjamin. In after times this custom was laid aside as illiberal and invidious,
and the guests were allowed to help themselves. But at these entertainments of a
later age a master or governor was usually elected by the guests, whose business it
was to determine the laws of good-fellowship, and to see that every man was duly
supplied. The guests were obliged to be in all things conformable to the commands


os


166 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHAP. It.
J Ee eae
of this important functionary. He was called an architriclinos, meaning literally
one who presided over an entertainment, where there were three sets of cushions
arranged for the guests to recline upon at table. He was not a servant who had
charge of dishes and provisions, and appointed to serve the guests, but a friend of
the bridegroom, and was appointed by him as the chairman of the banquet, to insure
that all things should be done properly and in order. This is clearly proved by the
authority which he is seen to possess, the freedom of his conduct at the feast, and
the terms of equality and intimacy upon which he stood to the bridegroom. The
name of his office was given to the Christian convent, erected in Cana by the
Empress Helena, which was known far on in the Middle Ages as the “ Holy Archi-
triclinos.” (H. Macmillan, LL.D.) They bear it.—At what precise point the
wonderful transubstantiation took place—whether it was in the filling of the water-
pots with water, or in the transferring of their contents into smaller vessels—we
are not told. There is a veil over this as over all creative acts, and we cannot trace
beginnings. Severn, the friend of Keats, painted in Rome a picture of the Mar-
riage of Cana; but he did not complete it. He represents the servants in it pouring
the water out of one vessel inte another. The water issues from the vessel clear as
crystal ; but in the arc formed by its descent it is refracted intoared colour. There
can be no doubt that the painter caught the true idea of the transformation. What
the servants drew out as water they received into their vessels as wine. (JIbid.)
The governor of the feast:—A vessel was let down into the pitcher, and was then
carried to the ruler of the feast, who would distribute the wine in it to the guests.
Ruler rather than “ governor.”” The same English word should be used through-
out the two verses. What exact office is denoted by the Greek word is uncertain,
as it occurs nowhere else in the Bible, and is very rare in the classical authors.
The chief English commentators (Alford, Wordsworth, Trench) are agreed that he
was chosen by the guests from among their own number, but this opinion has not
commanded the general assent of scholars; and there seems more reason to think
that the person intended is what we should call the “ head-waiter,” whose duty it
was to taste the viands and wines, to arrange the tables and couches, and to be
generally responsible for the feast. (H. W. Watkins, D.D.) Tasted.—This word
supplies a strong incidental argument against the Romish doctrine of transubstan-
tiation. The occasion before us is the only known occasion on which our Lord
changed one liquid into another. When He did so change it, the reality of the
change was at once proved by the “ taste.”” Why is it, then, that in the pretended
change of the sacramental wine in the Lord’s Supper into Christ’s blood the change
cannot be detected by the senses? Why does the wine after consecration taste like
wine, just as it did before? The pretended change of the bread and wine is con-
tradicted by the senses of every communicant, and that which contradicts our
senses we are nowhere required in God’s Word to believe, (Bp. Ryle.) The
servants knew.—The guests took no part in the preparation for these miracles,
did not contribute their own shares of faith and labour, and consequently were not
aware that the heavens had been opened, and the ladder of communication between
heaven and earth set up in the midst of them. Their hands were idle, and there-
fore their eyes were veiled. Only the servants knew, and they knew because they
had helped Christ to perform the miracle by drawing the water, by doing what they
had todo, The revelation came to them through their work, and was the reward
ofit. The-secret of the Lord was with them because they had done the will of
God. Andis not this true of all work which is a revelation? It is not in idle
speculation, in mere theorizing and musing, in standing looking on with folded
hands, that we understand the plans and purposes of God, but when we enter into
the field and work along with Him. It is in doing the will of God that we know
the doctrine that it is of God. Doing God’s will puts a spiritual telescope into our
hand, whereby we can see the things that are unseen and eternal, which the mere
eye of speculation could never see; or a spiritual microscope, which enables us to
see wonderful things in God’s law, which the mere eye of curiosity could never
discern. The teacher who instructs others becomes wiser himself by so doing.
Engaging in the work of converting souls, we can sympathize with the Divine Son,
who left the Father’s house and came to seek and save that which was lost. (H.
Macmillan, LL.D.)


Ver. 10. Thou hast kept the good wine until now.—We learn—I. Tuat Curist
HAS SYMPATHY WITH HOUSEKEEPERS. ‘The wine gave out and Jesus came to the
rescue, Don’t fret when there is a scant supply in your household, but trust in


——s


i a i i i


oN a


God and do the best you can and He will help you. Christ is the best adviser and
most efficient aid. II. Curist poms THINGS IN ABUNDANCE, A small supply would
have been enough, but Christ gave one hundred and thirty gallons of the very best
wine. Everything God does He does plenteously. 1. In nature. %. In grace, — III.
CuRisr DOES NOT SHADOW THE JOYS OF OTHERS WITH His own GRizFs. Christ knew
what was coming for Himself, but He hid His own grief to kindle their joy. So
don’t you infuse your own griefs into yourchildren. They will have trouble enough
by and by. Be glad that they cannot appreciate yours. Keep back the sorrows as
long as you can. Let them enjoy life while they may. IV. CurisT IS NOT IM-
PATIENT WITH THE LUXURIES OF LIFE. The wine, that could have been dispensed with,
ran short, and yet Christ replenished it. There is no more harm in honest luxury
than honest poverty. There is no more religion in a new coat than in an old one.
The world was once a paradise and will be one again, V. Curist HAS NO IM-
PATIENCE WITH FESTAL Joy the very miracle augmented it. The children of God
have more right to laugh than others: no joy is denied them. VI. Curist comMES
TO US IN OUREXTREMITY. When the wine had given out, and before there was any
embarrassment thereupon, He came to the aid of these people. 1. So often in
extreme poverty Christ has come to the relief of His people. 2. In the despair of
conscious guilt. 3. In death. VII. Curisr ives His pest nast. 1, In Christian
experience. 2.Inglory. (T. De Witt Talmage, D.D.) Infinite resources :—Notice—
J. Tuat Gop Moves BY A HIGHER LAW THAN MAN UNDERSTANDS (Isa. lv. 8, 9).
1. Men give their best first, but God adopts the principle of gradual development.
2. Men give sparingly, God gives abundantly. TI. THAT MAN IS SOMETIMES PRAISED
FOR BLESSINGS THAT COME DIRECTLY FROM THE DIVINE HAND. 1. In legislation the
politician is praised, and few ascribe the blessing to the Great Fountain of govern-
ment. 2. In social life men have praised parental discipline, or scholastic educa-
tion for a high tone of morality, whereas few acknowledge the Source of Purity.
(1) It is here that infidelity has erred; it has stopped at second causes and paused
at the bridegroom, instead of inquiring for Christ. (2) So with science ; but science
is only an agent. It may be a botanist, but who started the vital fluid? A
geologist, but who wrote the rocky page? An astronomer, but who built the
world? (3) So with professing Christians. III. THat GoD SOMETIMES PRESENTS
THE RESULT WITHOUT REVEALING THE PROCESS. In some departments of the moral
universe processes belong exclusively to God, and results to man. In the discipline
of our nature God conducts the mysterious process ; whereas in the dissemination
of the gospel man is required to undertake the agency. These three great principles
may teach us—l. To recognize the Divine hand in every advancement. What
have we that we did not receive. We should be humble, therefore. 2. Never
to distrust the resources of God. You have never drunk the best wine which
God can provide. He has unsearchable riches. 3. To repress inquisitiveness, and
cultivate gratitude. Take thankfully what God provides. (Joseph Parker, D.D.)
Five characteristics of Christ’s working :—I. APPROPRIATENESS. Christ does the
right thing, in the right place, at the right time. The people did not want bread,
nor clothes, nor health. Had they been rich the miracle would have been un-
necessary ; at an earlier period it would have been premature. And in His provi-
dence over our life Christ does nothing out of place or superfluously. II. MystEryY.
Christ simply willed and the water was made wine: no one knows how. 1. Soin
physical life. 2. Human life. 3. Spiritual life. III. Smur-aBNEGATION. The
bridegroom received the credit for Christ’s act. 1. So in life the employer gets the
credit for the skill and strength of the employee. 2. So in morals human clever-
ness and power get the credit for successes which should be given to the goodness
of God. 3. So in the Church the means of grace are allowed to usurp the place of
the Giver of grace. IV. Proarzss. The best last. This is the law by which Christ
governs men. 1. By His providence. 2. Through His Spirit. V. UnostenTaTrous
GENnERosITY. The need of which the guests were ignorant was anticipated by Christ.
J. W. Burn.) Satan’s banquet and Christ’s ;—I. THE HOUSE OF SATAN, in which are
four tables. 1. The table of the profligate—a gay table. The governor comesin. He
has a bland smile and a robe of many colours. He brings—(1) The wine-cup of
pleasure. The young man takes it, and sips at first cautiously. He does not intend to
indulge much. But how sweet itis! He drinks a deeper draught, and the wine1s hot
in his veins. How blestis he! He drinks and drinks again, till his brain begins to
reel with the sinful delight. This is the first course. (2) Now, with a leer, the
subtle governor riseth. His victim has had enough of the best wine. He brings in
another, all flat and insipid—the cup of satiety. ‘‘ Who hath woe? who hath


168 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. 1.
eC


redness of the eyes? They that tarry long at the wine,” figuratively and literally.

The profligate soon discovers that all the rounds of pleasure end in satiety. ‘Give
me something fresh,” he cries; and gaiety itself grows flat and dull, (3) The governor
commandeth another liquor to be broached. ‘his time the fiend bears the black
goblet of suffering. He who rebels against the laws of God must reap the harvest
in his own body here, (4) The last course remains—-the grave. The profligate dies, 3
and descends from disease to damnation, 2. There is another table, all clean and i
comely. ‘The wine on it seems to have no intoxication in it. How contented are
the guests! It is the table of self-righteousness. Satan, like an angel of light,
brings forth a golden goblet containing the wine of—(1) Self-satisfaction. This
wine makes the drinker swell with self-important dignity. (2) This cup is eventually
replaced by that of discontent and unquietness of mind. As confidence is wanted,
it is found wanting. (3) This is removed, and the cup of dismay is brought in.
How many a man who has been self-righteous all his life has, at the last, discovered
that the basis of his hope has gone. (4) The last course must be the same as that
of the profligate, inasmuch as Christ has been rejected. 3. The third table is
crowded with most honourable guests—kings, princes, mayors, aldermen, and
great merchants. (1) Satan brings in a flowing cup, and says: “ Young man, you
are starting in business; get rich as fast as you can.” The youth drinks, and says:
‘“‘T have abundance now: my hopes are indeed realized.” (2) But next comes the
nauseous cup of care. Riches canker his heart, (3) After this comes the cup of
avarice, which increases the burning thirst of which many have died clutching their
money-bags. (4) Then there is the cup of loss, in which money and the satisfaction
it once gave perish. 4. The fourth table is set up in a very secluded corner for secret
sinners. Satan steps in noiselessly (1) with the cup of secret sin. ‘ Stolen waters
are sweet.’”? (2) After that he brings the wine of an unquiet conscience. (3) A
massy bowl filled with black mixture, the fear of detection, next has to be quafied.
(4) Discovery is the last cup. ‘* Be sure your sin will find you out,” if not in this
world, in the next. II. Tue House or THE Saviour. 1. Come and sit at the table
of Christ’s outward providences, (1) The first cup is often one of bitterness—the
worst wine first. Christ seeks no disciples who are dazzled with first appearances.
(2) After the cup of affliction comes the cup of consolation. (3) The cup of glory.
2. The table of inward experience. (1) The first cup is the bitter cup of conviction.
(2) This gives place to the cup of forgiving love. (3) The cup of everlasting bliss,
3. The table of communion, (1) The cup of communion with Christ in His sufferings.
(2) The cup of His labours. (3) The cup of good wine, communion with Christ in
His resurrection and triumphs. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The feast of the Lord :—I.
FoR THE BELIEVER CHRIST KEEPS THE BEST WINE TILL THE LAST. 1. There are
some of God’s best beloved who have never known what itis to get out of the depths
of poverty, affliction, profitless toil, to whom it will indeed be true, when death gives
them their discharge, that Christ has kept the good wine till the last—riches, happi-
ness, rest. 2. This will be equally true of God’s favoured ones. The most highly
favoured, who had been caught up to the third heaven, declared that he only saw
through a glass darkly, and that there was a higher heaven yet. There are many
aspects of the heavenly state, and in each of these the principle of the text holds
good. 1. Here on earth the believer enters into rest by faith, and enjoys the peace
which passeth all understanding. But drink of that as we may, the good wine has
yet tocome, The present peace is dashed by cares and doubts and disquietudes.
2, Heaven is a place of holy company. Here we have some of that wine, but our
companions are compassed with infirmity, There the just are made perfect. 3.
In heaven there is perfect knowledge, On earth we know much that makes us
happy, but heaven is a place of complete and endless manifestations and joys. II.
CHRIST’S REASONS FOR DOING THIS, 1. To make a broad distinction between His
dealings and Satan’s, 2. Because it is His good pleasure. 3. That He may give
us an appetite for the good wine, 4. That He may be glorified by the trial of your
faith. III, Lessons: 1. Hasten towards the place where the good wine is kept.
2. If the best things are to come, let us not be discontented. 3. Why should we
envy the worldling? (Ibid.) Christ’s method and the world’s :—I, THE worup’s
METHOD IS TO GIVE THE GOOD WINE First. 1. The gay world, to the young, presents
the appearance of a feast where everything is provided that can please the eye and
gratify the taste. But experience strips off the disguise. Enjoyment brings satiety,
and long ere the cup is drained the soul turns from it in dislike. There is nota
more miserable creature than the man to whom the world has given all its blessings
and has nothing more to promise. The novelty of this world’s pleasures is their


te ai to ala


onAP. 11.) ST. JOHN. 169


greatest charm. 2. Take the case of the drunkard. He is dissatisfied with the low
life of drudgery he leads, and pants after a higher life and a freer atmosphere.
So he drinks to drown his sorrows and to promote his joy. But the hour of elation
passes, and leaves a grievous sense of bodily discomfort and a profound sense of
self-contempt. More so with the confirmed drunkard. It is long since he drank
all the good wine which his lust could give him; and now he is drinking the bitter
dregs of the wretched wine which “ biteth like a serpent,” &c. There was a time
when the tottering frame was instinct with health and vigour, and the palsied hand
had 4 grip of iron, and the bloated face was full of comeliness and intelligence. 3.
Nor is it otherwise with the avaricious man. How precious was the first piece of
money that came long ago as a reward of industry. But as he drank deep of the
golden cup of wealth the first fresh glow of happiness disappeared. Care and
anxiety grew with fortune, and wants with the means of gratifying them. 4. So
with the ambitious man. The first draught of ambition’s cup is indeed the
sweetest; all that follows is often bitterness and loneliness, The fruit is fair to
the eye; but in the mouth it crumbles into ashes. It lures but to disappoint; it
tempts but to betray, II. Our Lonp’s meruop Is To GIVE THE BEST WINE Last. 1.
This is illustrated in His own life. He drank the poorest wine first and then the
best. Hehumbled Himself and became obedient unto death, even the cursed death
of the cross; wherefore God hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a name
which is above every name. 2. So with the disciples; they drink of His cup and
are baptized with His baptism. The law of His kingdom is first the cross, and then
the crown; first suffering, and therefore glory. His blessings are not like random
sunbursts through the clouds, or the irregular overflowing of an intermittent spring,
but form parts of a gradually unfolding series. They are bestowed in proportion
as our necessities arise and our faculties expand. (H. Macmillan, LL.D.) The
best last :—The world presents us with fair language, promising hopes, convenient
fortunes, pompous honours, and these are the outside of the bowl; but when it is
swallowed, these dissolve in an instant. Every sin smiles in the first address, and
carries light in the face, and honey in the lips, but when we ‘have well drunk,”
then comes “that which is worse,” a whip with six strings, fears and terrors of
conscience, and shame and displeasure, and a caitiff disposition, and diffidence in
the day of death. But when, after the manner of purifying of the Christians, we
fill our waterpots with water, watering our couch with our tears, then Christ turns
our water into wine—first penitents and then communicants—first waters of sorrow
and then the wine of the chalice; for Jesus keeps the best wine to the last, not
only because of the direct reservation of the highest joys till the nearer approaches
of glory, but also because our relishes are higher after a long fruition than at the
first essays, such being the nature of grace, that it increases in relish as it does in
fruition, every part of grace being new duty and new reward. (Jeremy Taylor.)
Well drunk.— Taste educated: —At first the palate distinguishes with the utmost nicety
the quality of the wine ; but afterwards, as more of it is drunk, the keen edge of the
taste is blunted, and it cannot distinguish between the different kinds, so that an
inferior wine at this stage might be substituted for a superior one without the guests
being any the wiser. The extraordinary pitch of perfection to which the sense of
taste may be educated is shown by the experience of those who are employed, in
docks and warehouses, to discriminate between samples of different kinds of wine
and tea; but these men use the utmost caution in the exercise of their peculiar gift.
They are careful only to employ a very small quantity of the article experimented
upon; and they confine their trials within very narrow limits. Excess or fami-
liarity destroys the sensitiveness of the nerves, and tends to deaden the impressions
produced upon them. So alive are some musicians to this physiological fact, that
they will not touch an instrument that is out of tune, lest their sense of harmony
should be impaired. (H. Macmilian, LL.D.)


Ver. 11. This beginning of miracles.—The miracles of Christ :—Miracles are
not only a proof but a part of revelation, and carry their own weight of truth quite
independent of their testimony to the authority of the whole. Christ’s miracles—
I. Ipentiry THE Gop OF NATURE WITH THE CHRIST OF THE GOSPEL, and show that
the Word was God, and that all things were made by Him. Believers in Christ do
not need their witness, but should follow up their teaching, and study in nature the
wisdom and power and goodness of Christ, Il. InuusTRaTE THE WIDE BENEFIOENCE
oF THE GosPEL, They would have been equally cogent as proofs of His Divine
authority if there had been no element of mercy in them ; and it is humiliating to


—
aN


170 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [ovap. 11.
a
reflect that had they been miracles of judgment the people would have been more
willing to listen to His words. As it was, they were the outcome of the wealth of
compassion that filled His heart, and teach us something of the present range of His
love. ILI. Prove THE ILLIMITABLE POWER BY WHICH EVERY GOSPEL PURPOSE WILL BE
accompiissED. ‘The words, the promise, and the power that performs are eternally
linked together. No power, therefore, can prevent the accomplishment of the great
purposes of salvation, All fears, then, should be banished. There is no danger
that the miracles of Christ do not prove to be under His control. IV. SHow THE
DIvINE EARNESTNESS WITH WHICH GOD PRESSES UPON THE ATTENTION OF SINFUL MEN
THE CLAIMS AND MERCY OF His Gospen. (W. H. King.) The miracles of nature :—
Men ery out for signs, but we may see miracles enough every day. I read that
Aaron’s rod budded, and I am astonished. But last spring I saw a cause of greater
astonishment—thousands of bare rods budding and blooming blossoms in the hedges.
I saw no one do it, and yet the trees were being daily clothed with thicker foliage.
Was not that wonderful? I read that the manna came down daily from heaven
to the wilderness, and I am amazed. But I see a cause of greater amazement
every year: I see your bread coming, not down from heaven, but up from the earth,
a much more unlikely place, every day in the spring. Is not that wonderful? I
read that Elijah, hiding by the brook Cherith, was daily fed by two carnivorous
ravens, and I am filled with wonder. But there is a cause of much greater wonder-
ment in the fact that millions upon millions are daily fed with abundance of bread
and meat, without a single raven under God’s sun to cater for them. I read that
Jesus Christ multiplied the loaves and fishes, and that the fragments that remained
filled twelve baskets full—there was more at the end of the meal than at the
beginning. But this year I witnessed a greater miracle: I saw the barley and the
wheat increasing, “ some thirty, some sixty, and some a hundred fold”; and the
loaves and the fishes, notwithstanding the enormous consumption, are more numerous
to-day than they have ever been before. Natureis a standing miracle. (J. C. Jones,
D.D.) The beginning of miracles :—There are five reasons why this should be the
first. 1. As marriage was the first institution ordained by God, so at a marriage was
Christ’s first miracle. 2. As Christ had showed Himself miraculous a little while
ago by a fast, so He doth now by an extraordinary provision at a feast. When He
would not makes stones bread, it was not because He could not. 3. He would not
make stones into bread to satisfy Satan, but He was willing to turn water into wine
to show forth His glory. 4. The first miracle wrought in the world by man was
transformation (Exod. vii. 9), and the first miracle wrought by the Son of Man was
of the same nature. 5. The first time you hear of John the Baptist, you hear of his
strict diet, and so the first time you hear of Christ in His public ministry, you hear
of Him at a marriage feast. (Lightfoot.) This miracle cannot but have a repre-
sentative character. We may observe—I. Irs mssENTIAL CHARACTER. A sign of
sovereign power wrought on inorganic nature, not on a living body. II. Irs crrcum-
STANTIAL CHARACTER. ‘The change of the simpler to the richer element. In this
respect it may be contrasted with the first public miracle of Moses, which com-
mences the record of Old Testament miracles. III. Irs moran cHaRAcTER. 1. The
answer of love to faith, 2. Ministering to human joy in one of its simplest and
most natural forms (cf. Matt. xi. 18, 19). In each respect the character of the sign
answers to the general character of Christ as—1. A new creation. 2. A transfigu-
ration of the ceremonial law into a spiritual gospel. 3. An ennobling of the whole
life. In addition, notice that the scene of the sign—a marriage feast—is that under
which the accomplishment of Christ’s work is most characteristically prefigured
(chap. iii, 29; Matt. xxii, 2, xxv. 1; Rev. xix. 7, xxi. 2). (Bishop Westcott.)
The water made wine :—Let us now look at the ract, the mode, and the motive of
this miraculous act. That it was a miracle, a creation-miracle, the turning of
water into wine, stands on the face of the record. Every attempt to reconcile
belief in the record with an evasion of the creative act implied in it has been a
failure. Such suppositions as that the spiritual elevation of the guests under the
power of the Lord’s discourse made them think that to be wine which was only
water (Ewald), or that He gave to that which still remained water the force and
Sap of wine (Neander) or even that this was a supply of wine produced in the
ordinary way and providentially arriving in the nick of time at the believing prayer
or omniscient foresight of the Saviour (Weiss), will not satisfy the fact, nor the
plain and honest meaning of the recording Evangelist, an eye-witness of the wonder.
Some of those who rest in the fact of the miracle and regard it as creative have
vainly attempted to conceive and describe the mopz in which it was wrought. I¢


2


ee NG yy


ouap. 1.) ST. JOHN. 171


has long been usual to suggest that this act may be thought of on the analogy of
nature’s work; that what was done here in a moment was the same thing which is
done in countless vineyards year by year. ‘‘ The essence of the miracle,” says
Olshausen, ‘‘ consists in divinely effecting the acceleration of the natural process.”
So also Augustine long ago. The analogy is tempting, but we gain nothing by it
as an explanation. Indeed, it is impossible, and after all inept. There is no real
parallel. We can trace these processes in nature; but here we can trace no process.
We should have to imagine not only accelerated processes of nature, but also
those artificial changes, anticipated and condensed, by which the fruit of the
vine becomes a beverage—the ripening of the wine as well as of the grape.
There are no natural laws by which water in a well or in a jar will change
into wine. Nature never would do this, however long time you gave her.
Finally, for the punrosz. One of the main difficulties, according to some ex-
positors, is the absence of sufficient motive. This is a miracle, they say, without
a moral end. It is placed at the outset of the Fourth Gospel, with the evident in-
tention of showing—1. That Jesus struck a key-note to His ministry so entirely
contrasted with that of the Baptist, whose disciples these first followers of Jesus
had originally been. 2. Nor can the objection about the triviality of the occasion
justify itself, as if it were the mere relieving of a dinner-table dilemma. Rather
the reverse is the true inference. The gracious Lord has sympathy with all needs,
the finer as well as the commoner. He who multiplied the loaves for the relief of
a hungry congregation might increase the store of wine for the resolving of a
social perplexity. The minor graces and courtesies of life are taken account of, in
Christianity, as well as the stern realities. 3. But, indeed, to search for an exact
necessity as motive here is to miss the whole point. These wedding guests could
have done without more and better wine. It is a miracle of superfluity if you will.
The well-spring of grace and truth in Jesus Christ overflows at the first onset. He
is come to give life, and more abundant. It is placed in the front of the miracle-
record not merely to point a contrast between the Saviour’s ministry and that of
the Baptist, but to show how the new economy surpasses the old. This whole
transaction reveals His glory as the Bringer of the final and highest dispensation.
In Jesus Christ, God “has kept His best till last.” In fine, it is plainly meant
that we should see in this work an epitome of the Lord’s entire miraculous activity.
In it, all His glory is His grace and love. In the Nature miracles we are to note
how always He is ‘not ministered unto, but ministers.” (J. Laidlaw, D.D.)
The beginning of miracles :—All beginnings have a wonderful interest to us. There is
a peculiar pleasure in tracing a broad deep river, that bears upon its bosom the com-
merce of a nation, -to its source far up among the mountains, in a little well whose
overflowing waters a child’s hand could stop; or in going back to the origin of a
mighty nation like the Roman, in the drifting ashore, at the foot of the Palatine
Hill, of the ark that contained the infant founders. Institutions, social or benevo-
lent, that have been established for ages, derive a fresh charm from the consideration
of their first feeble commencement, and the contrast between what they were then
and what they are now. There is a mystery about a cloud coming all at once into
the blue sky, a star appearing suddenly amid the twilight shades, a spring welling up
in the midst of a sandy plain. Itseems as if something new were being created before
our eyes. A sense of awe comes over us, as if brought into contact with another
world, I have had this curious feeling when coming unexpectedly upon the habitat
of avery rare plant. This peculiar charm of novelty belongs especially to the origin
of sacred institutions—to the beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the perform-
ance of the first miracle, the formation of the Christian Church, and the production
of the New Testament writings. The thought that there was a time when these
things had no existence, that for thirty years Jesus wrought no miracle, that the first
believers in the gospel in Judea, Corinth, and Rome had no New Testament, gives a
vividness to the feelings with which we regard them, brings back the freshness that
has evaporated with long familiarity. The miracle of Cana comes into the midst of
the previous natural life of Jesus like a star out of the blue profound, like a well out
of the dry mountain side, like a rare, unknown flower appearing among the common
indigenous plants of a spot. It brings us out of the narrow wall that hems us round,
to the verge of God’s infinity, where we can look over into the fathomless gulf. It
is the first act of the new creation, in which a new life-potency entered into what
at the time existed, and called forth a new development. It gave to the stream of
the world’s course # new motion and a new direction, without which it would have
become a stagnant bog—a dead sea. It is the base of that wonderful miracle structure


we


172 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [oHaP. I.

ee
of the gospel, of which the resurrection is the pinnacle, (H. Macmillan, D.D.) The
first miracle :—How well fitted this miracle is, in its character, to introduce the
train which succeeded it; to open the wonderful order of instructions, doctrines,
and works which was afterwards developed ; to be, as it was, the first miracle. — The
glory of the natural day is not manifested forth in the morning by a blaze of meridian
splendour. The light is mild and soft which first peeps from behind the hill-tops,
or flushes from the bed of ocean. So it was with “the glorious gospel of the blessed
God.” Its first manifestation by miracle was like the spreading dawn. It blended
with the joyous accompaniments of a festive occasion and the kind sympathies of
domestic life> It came like a nuptial blessing to a young pair who were just com-
mencing the journey of life together, By-and-by we shall see it among the sick,
the maimed, and the blind, healing infirmities, and restoring the lost faculties of sense.
By-and-by we shall see it in the dark death chamber and the darker tomb, dispelling
the darkness and raising the dead. Then we shall find no want of elevation. Then
our minds will be filled and overpowered by its sublimity. Butnow let us dojustice
to its loveliness, and admire its first approach to the children of men. (F. W. P.
Greenwood, D.D.) Christ’s first miracles :—The first of a series gives the key to
the whole, The first animals or plants have been combining types, 7.e., have united
in themselves the characters of several familes now widely separated. So the
earliest human lives were typical. The first notes of a song suggest all that is
necessary to make the harmony. And the first miracle enters into all the other
miracles that Jesus did, and combines in itself the elements of them all. 1. Itis
a work of mercy. 2. Itis an emblem of a higher spiritual blessing. 3. It is a
prophecy of the new genesis. Like an illuminated initial letter, which contains in
itself an illustrated epitome of the contents of the whole chronicle, it appropiately
begins the series of Christ’s beneficent works by a beautiful picture of the nature
and design of them all. I. Iv LINKS THE WORK OF THE SECOND ADAM WITH THAT OF
THE FIRST. Adam’s disobedience turned paradise into a wilderness. Christ’s
obedience turns the wilderness into paradise. II. Ir shows THE RESTORATION OF
NATURE AS WELL AS HUMANITY. Man’s sin brought barrenness: Christ’s work
restores fruitfulness. And as nature shared the effects of the fall with man, it will
participate also in the effects of redemption. This miracle is the first step in the
process. III. Ir comBmnEs THE GOSPEL WITH THE PRECEDING DISPENSATIONS. Moses
could only sweeten the waters of Marah—only ameliorate the bitter spring of human
sin, and reform men, Jesus turns the water into wine and regenerates men. IV.
THE OCCASION WAS ONE OF TRANSOENDENT IMPORTANCE. In this respect it is the first
in order of rank as well as time. 1. As a human institution marriage stands at the
head of all others, originating in paradise and surviving the wreck of the fall. 2.
As a type of heavenly mystery it stands first in importance and significance. (1)
The union of those attributes of love and power in God, from which creation had its
birth and has its continuance. (2) The union of Divine influences and human
experiences in the soul which forms the kingdom of heaven within. (8) The union
of the Saviour and the Church. V. TH MIRACLE WAS THE MOST DIFFICULT OF ALL,
if any gradation can be allowed. There was here no co-operation of faith. I¢
was not the purification and assistance of a natural function, but a creation de
novo. (H. Macmillan, LL.D.) The miracle as a sign :—I. Or Curist’s MISSION.
It was none the less significant because wrought for a temporary purpose. Man’s
need of Christ appears in trifling as well as conspicuous ways. Food is common-
place, but it isan universal need. 1, The act was significant of the joyous and
abundant feast He was about to spread for all people. 2. The moment in which it
was wrought, when the wine had failed, is a sign of the fact that Christ waits till
man’s own powers are exhausted before giving His grace. Hence He delayed Hig
advent till the world was exhausted with its efforts to find peace and holiness. The
pagan religions were exhausted. Philosophy had failed to solve the problems of life.
So we do not receive the fulness of Christ till convinced of our helplessness and ready
to depend on Divine grace. 3. The nature of the miracle, the creation of the wine
out of water, not out of nothing, is a sign that—(1) He had come not to create a
new world, but to transform the old; (2) Not to establish a new religion, but to
transform Judaism; (3) Not to produce new characters, but to regenerate sinners.
He has poor material to work upon. Human nature is as weak and cold as water.
But as He made good and warming wine, so He will strengthen our humanity and
fill it with the love of God. Il. Or rue cHaraorer or Curist. 1. Of His grace
and glory (chap. i. 14,17). 2, Of His naturalness, He was thoroughly at home,
and revealed the natural union of a pure humanity with a Divine life; sympathizing


4
;
;
a
4
,
e
2


CHAP. 1.) ST. JOHN. 173


with human joys, as at Bethany with human griefs. Religion does not break the
sweet ties which God has formed between man and man. 3. Of His mindfulness
of His great object. We see this in His conversation with His mother, which
shows us to remember in society that the chief end of man is to glorify God, and
that no earthly joy or work must be allowed to unfit us for that. (G. 7. Purves.)


_ The miracle as a sign:—In respect of—I. Naturz. 1, It was a miracle in itself,


apart from all surrounding circumstances. What is an everyday occurrence in one
climate may be a rare wonder in another. To an inhabitant of the tropic the
freezing of water would be a miracle. The feats of a chemist would pass for super-
natural in the first, but be put down as strictly natural in the nineteenth century,
But Christ’s miracles are miracles all the world over and all the ages through. 2.
The miracle was not performed till nature was exhausted. His hour did not come
till the wine had actually failed. This always characterizes His interpositions.
All He cured were incurable. This is a sign that we may calculate on His presence
in extremity. When your earthly wine is all gone, He will come to your relief. 3.
This miracle in its results is repeated every year. Miracles are explanatory notes
revealing the secret processes of material phenomiena, signs of the power that is
everywhere and always at work. He turned the water into wine once; He does so
still. II. Socrery. 1. It was performed in a wedding. John the Baptist was an
ascetic; will Christ be one? The Jews looked for a king; will Christ then claim
the throne? Christ was not an ascetic, for He went to a wedding. He was nota
dignitary, for it was a wedding cf ordinary people. This wasa sign then that He
belonged to Society. 2. The miracle was performed at the feast. Jesus was always
the antagonist of suffering and the source of joy. The thing here signified is that
if there is a time to weep there is also a time to rejoice. 3. It was performed at a
marriage feast for the purpose of beneficence, to point out the difference between
the Old Testament miracles and those of the New, and to show the different
character of the two dispensations. 4, It was a miracle of luxury. Wine was not
needful to maintain life; loaves and fishes were. This is a sign then that man
does not live by bread alone, but is permitted to go after the beautiful in every form,
Isit sinful to have pictures whilst the heathen be unreclaimed? ‘There is no reason
why Englishmen should be half-civilized because Kaffirs are altogether barbarous.
Because the potato is the more useful plant of the two, that is not to say that the
roseis unnecessary. 5. The miracle is a sign that self-restraint should be practiced
in the midst of abundance. III. Cunisr’s person. 1. He had notto acquire glory,
but only to manifest it. He manifested it here as the Sovereign of nature, 2. Asa
consequence His disciples believed in Him. They did so before. This confirmed
them. Miracles cannot convince unbelievers. It was the disciples, not the guests,
who believed. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) The first miracle of Christ the speak-
ing expression of His life and work:—I. Or His person, in which the earthly
human nature becomes a heavenly: the essential, genuine Vine (chap. xv. 1). II.
OF THE POWER OF His Love which transformed the water of earthly need into the
wine of heavenly joy: brings forth judgment unto victory, makes blessedness out
of Divine sorrow. III. Or His Drvinz works, in which is everywhere reflected His
main work of bringing to pass the new birth of mankind from the earthly kingdom
into the heavenly. IV. Or His tast work. The glorification of the world. (J.
P. Lange.) The beginning of signs: or the sacredness of common life :—I, Curist’s
SYMPATHY WITH THE RELATIONSHIPS AND GLADNESS OF MAN’S LIFE. That was a new
thing in the world, the sign of a new spirit that was to pervade mankind. There is
a strong tendency in human nature to associate lofty morality with rigorous stern-
ness of life: the prophets; John the Baptist; monks. But here Christ mingles
with the gladness of a wedding feast, and exerts His supernatural power to supply a
festive need. This implied—1, That earthly life was to be glorified by the heavenly.
2. That human love is not to be carnalized, but made Divine. 38. That human
relationships do not clash with the love of God, but are to become powerful
instruments for aiding it. 4. That no sphere is too common for Christ to
sanctify. II, CurisT BESTOWED ON COMMON THINGS A HIGHER POWER IN ORDER TO
AWAKEN HUMAN GLADNESS. This signifies the elevation by Him of the natural into
the Divine, of the common into the uncommon. Here again was a new thing to
the world. To Christ’s eye nothing was commonplace; not the lowest man nor the
plainest life. His mission was to glorify the old and familiar. III. Combining
these two features, we see that LIVE IN ALL ITS COMMON RELATIONSHIPS AND COMMON
TOMS IS TO BE A MANIFESTATION AND SERVICE oF Curist. In human friendship we
are to serve Christ, and in our daily work to glorify Him, Life throughout, with


~ oe


174 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. It
OS eee
its joys and sorrows, is to be transformed. How is this to be done? Notice—1.
That the character of a man’s deeds is determined by their inner motive, not by
their outward form. 2. This sanctity is attained through the power of Cihrist’s
love, IV. THE RESULTS WHICH WOULD FLOW FROM THE ATTAINMENT OF THIS. 1.
Life would become a constant manifestation of Christ. 2. Life would be a constant
education for the heavenly. 3. It would give us the assurance of eternal fellowship.
(E. L. Hull, B.A.) Miracles as signs :—The term “sign” denotes in its simplest
usage—l, A means of identification (Luke ii. 12; 2 Thess. iii. 17). 2. A proof or
evidence furnished by one set of facts to the reality and genuineness of another (2
Cor. xii. 12). 3. A symbol or emblem (Ezek. iv. 3). Now the miracles of Christ
were signs in all these three senses. They identified Him as the Messiah foretold
in propuecy; they authenticated Him as the Son of God, and furnished evidence of
the truth of the claims which He put forth; and they were emblems in the material
sphere of the blessings which He came to bestow in the spiritual, and of the manner
in which they were to be received by those whom He designed to benefit. (W. M.
Taylor, D.D.) Manifested forth His glory.—The first miracle an Epiphany of
Christ :—This glory is undoubtedly Christ’s Divine glory “ full of grace and truth ” ;
the effulgence of His perfections translated so as to bring them within the reach of
sense. And when John says that Christ manifested forth His glory he implies that
although it had been almost entirely hidden for years, yet, like the sun behind the
clouds, it had all along been lying below the surface. The miracle rolled away the
clouds from the face of the sun. I. CHrist’s GLoRY WAS SEEN IN His ENTIRE CON-
TROL OVER NATURE. Power over nature always excites ouradmiration. But why is
it that the man of science, whose genius can tame or discipline steam or electri-
gity, wins so deep and universal an enthusiasm? Not because the feat hasthe charm
of novelty, nor because it is an enrichment of man’s life and an addition to his com-
fort, but because there is in him, at an immeasurable distance, an approximation
to God. And yet we can explain it by natural causes which fall within the range
of experience. But a miracle passes that line. And since we know that order is a
principle which belongs to the very life of the Creator as well as to His administra-
tion, we conclude that He will not depart from His ordinary rules without some
reason, and that no one but Himself can dispense with them. And thus in a
miracle God is actively present, not as authorizing anarchy, but suspending some
lower law to give play to some higher. The outward miracle arrests man’s reason
and imagination to behold in it the manifested glory of the Lord of Nature. Had
we witnessed it, should we have recognized it as what it was? Yes, if we can say
with the Te Deum that earth as well as heaven is full of the majesty of God’s glory.
No, if we see in nature only the operation of self-existent laws. II. Tur auory or
SPIRITUAL TRUTH, an unveiling of the laws whereby the King of the new spiritual
empire would govern His subjects. 1. Nature is ever being silently changed
into something higher and better than when Christ found it. What is Holy Scrip-
ture but the water of what might have been a human literature changed by the Spirit
of Christ into the inspired Word of God? That which was mere good-nature be-
comes Divine charity by grace: that which was only well-exercised reason or far:
sighted judgment becomes faith: all the natural virtues are transformed into the
spiritual. So it was at the first. The Sanhedrim were perplexed at the intellectual
and moral power of the illiterate apostles. ‘The Roman proconsuls were bewildered
at the majestic constancy of poor men and weak women and children. And soitis
now. 2. The law of continuous improvement from good to better and from better
to best. The real Giver of the good wine does not fascinate by the charm of His
earliest gifts and then give to the jaded faculties His poorer graces. In His service
the spiritual senses do not follow the law of bodily decay, they gain with advancing
years, and require and receive higher nutriment. II. Tue crory or His con.
DESCENDING AND TENDER CHARITY. 1. Christ here began that life of condescension
before men which was involved in His incarnation, and which He followed
heedless of slander and misconstruction. 2. Christ here shot forth a ray of that
glorious love which redeemed the world. His whole-action is marked with tender
consideration ; He saves this poor couple from the disappointment of being unable
to entertain their friends; He adds to their store, but in such a manner as to lay
them under no embarrassing obligation to Himself. So God bestows His blessings
80 unobtrusively that we forget the Giver, but here, as ever, would teach us to imi-
tate Him when we bestow ours. (Canon Liddon.) The lesson of Epiphany—
peace and plenty through Christ :—Consider this miracle in the light of the service
for the Second Sunday in Epiphany. I. Tux Conxxcr, which isa prayer for peace.


a


Ve en ae nae Ly ee


rw


CHAP. 11.] ST. JOHN. 175


The Collects are supposed to collect the subject of the Gospel and Epistle. But the
gospel is a miracle of plenty, a contrasted idea to that of peace. There may be
lavish plenty when there is no peace—there may be deep peace when there is little
plenty. And yet in the deepest, truest sense of the terms they are one. Their
separation is only temporary and accidental. For what is peace? Perfectly satis-
fied desire. Disquiet is want of satisfaction. But in spiritual and intelligent crea-
tures there must be the satisfaction of the whole nature. If man be body, spirit,
and soul, if any one of these be unsatisfied, he cannot be at rest. In vain you
satisfy animal appetite and intellectual craving, if the hunger of the spirit be un-
appeased. And men are not at peace, because of the first great mistake that man
made in his first sin when he withdrew the food for his soul. This food is God.
Man’s sin was the determination to have the feast of body and mind without this
spiritual element, and the sin and misery of man ever since has been to sit down
to a banquet from which he has banished God. And God forbid that without Him
there should ever be peace: because it is the lack of this plenty disquieting his soul
that leads him to God. God teaches this truth in—1. His Word. 2. His provi-
dence. Lest man should lose himself in sensual delights God drove him from Eden.
Sometimes God shows us how poor the gift is without the Giver; sometimes how
blessed the Giver is without the gift, and better by giving Himself with the gift.
This is the highest of all states, even heaven itself. This the true peace and plenty
our Father meant us to have. It is our sin that has set them in antagonism. II.
Now turn to the Gosprn. We see Christ giving back to men the lacking plenty of
their feasts. The wine had run. low. He renews it in lavish abundance that He
may tell as insymbol that for the renovated man the amplest enjoyment of God’s gift
is consistent with perfect peace. Christ has come to tell us that we need Him and
may have Him in all our joys. III. Tux Episriz teaches us that there is an
Epiphany amongst men as there was once an Epiphany to men. In the Gospel
Christ gave Himself and His best gift to us. In the Epistle Christ calls upon us to
show Him forth to men by giving ourselves and our gifts to others. That is the
very reason He gave Himself tous. ‘‘ Freely ye have received; freely give”; fill
to the brim the means of helping another’s need: your material, intellectual, and
spiritual wealth. (Bp. Magee.) The glory of the Virgin Mother :—1. For thirty
years Christ had done no miracle: which is itself worthy to be called a miracle.
He was content to live in obscurity till His hour was come. This is true greatness.
In all the works of God there is a conspicuous absence of haste. Six slow days
and nights of creative force before man was made. ‘Two thousand years to dis-
cipline and form a Jewish people: four thousand years of darkness, ignorance, and
crime before the fulness of the time. Whatever contradicts the Divine plan must
pay the price of haste—brief duration. 2. St. Paul speaks of the glory of woman
as distinct from that of man. Their provinces are not the same, and the qualities
which are prominent and beautiful in the one are the reverse in the other. The
glory of her who was highly favoured among women was different from that of her
Son in degree—the one was human, the other was more: in order the one mani-
festing the grace of womanhood, the other the majesty and wisdom of manhood in
which God dwelt. The glory of the Virgin consisted in—I. Her ConsIDERATENESS.
There is gentle womanly tact in the words ‘‘ They have no wine.” Unselfish
thoughtfulness about other’s comforts ; delicate anxiety to save a straitened family
from the exposure of their poverty. So in old times, with thoughtful hospitality,
Rebekah offered water to Abraham’s wayworn servant. So Martha showed her de-
votion even to excess. So the women ministered of their substance. II. Supmissron.
« Whatsoever He saith unto you, do it.” Here is the true spirit of obedience. Not
slavishness, but loyalty to and trust in a person whom we reverence. Submission
at the outset of the Bible is revealed as woman’s lot and destiny. The curse of
obedience, as that of labour, transformed by Christ into a blessing. This blessing
twofold. 1. Freedom from doubt. Mary felt no perplexity at the rebuke. A more
masculine mind would have been made sullen and sceptical. Mary could not under-
stand, but she could trust and wait. “So with the Syro-Pheenician woman. Mental
doubt rarely touches women. Soldiers and sailors do not doubt. Prompt, un-
questioning obedience is the soil for faith, 2. Prevailing power with God. The
Saviour’s look promised, probably, more than His words. Prayer is a deep mystery
to the masculine intellect. ‘‘How,” says Logic, ‘‘can man’s will modify the will
of God? Where, then, lies the use of it?” But there is something mightier than
intellect, truer than logic—the faith that works by love. JI. Purrry oF HEART
AND LIFE. 1. Gradually the recognition of this became idolatry. Why? Before


% c oe


176 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. 11
Christ the qualities honoured as Divine were probably masculine—Courage,
Wisdom, Truth, Strength. But Christ proclaimed Meekness, Obedience, Affection,
Purity—graces distinctly feminine. Men sought to give these new ideas embodi-
ment, and they found them embodied in the Virgin Mother. 2. The only corrective
for this idolatry is the perfect humanity of Jesus Christ. His heart had in it the
blended qualities of both sexes, and when we have learned that in Christ there is


all that is manly and all that is womanly, we are safe from Mariolairy. (F. W. .


Robertson, M.A.) The glory of the Divine Son:—I. TH1s GLORY DID NOT BEGIN
WITH THE MIRACLE, THE MIRACLE ONLY MANIFESTED IT. And if instead of rousing
men to see the glory of Christ the miracle merely fastened attention on itself, the
whole intention of a miracle is lost. To the wise man the lightning only mani-
fests the electric force which is everywhere, and which for one moment has become
visible. As often as he sees it it reminds him that the lightning slumbers in the
dew-drop, in the mist, and in the cloud, and binds together every atom of water
that he uses in daily life. But to the vulgar mind the lightning is unique, a some-
thing which has no existence until it appears. So to the half-believer a miracle is
the one solitary evidence of God. But to the true disciple a miracle only mani-
fests the power and love which are at work everywhere. It is not more glory,
but only glory more manifested when water at His bidding passes at once into wine.
And if you do not feel as David felt, God’s presence in the annual miracle, and that
it is God which in the vintage causeth wine to make glad the heart of man, this
miracle would not have given you conviction of His presence. “If you hear not
Moses and the prophets,” &c. This deep truth of miracles most men miss. They
believe that Jesus was Divine because He worked miracles. But it is by power less
Divine that the same Being bears witness to truth, forgives His enemies, makes it
His meat and drink to do His Father’s will? I. Ir was tHe euory or Curist
TO DECLARE THE SACREDNESS OF ALL THINGS NATURAL. 1, All natural relationships.
John the Baptist’s was the highest form of religious life known to Israel. His was
a life of solitariness. Christ goes to a marriage to declare the sacredness of feel-
ings which had been reckoned carnaland low. For it is through our human affec-
tions that the soul first yearns after God, and it is to them that the Infinite reveals
Himself: and by an earthly relationship God has typified to us the only true
espousal—the marriage of the soul to her eternal Lord. 2. The sacredness of all
natural enjoyments. To say that this was a religious ceremony is sophistry ; and to
say that although Christ was there it would not be safe for us togo, is to overlook the
fact that His disciples were there. No! the temptation was past, the ministry of John
was over; and now the Bridegroom comes into the world in the true glory of the
Messiah—not in a life of asceticism, but in a life of godliness; not separating from
life, but consecrating it. The ascetic life is more striking, easier, anid more re-
putable. But the life of Him who was called ‘‘a man gluttonous and a wine bibber, a
friend of publicans and sinners,’’ was far harder, but it was heavenlier. (Ibid.)
The manifestation of Christ’s glory :—I. The manifestation of Jesus Christ is the
only true essence of our Christianity. II. The manifestation of Jesus Christ is the
true evidence of our Christianity. III. The manifestation of Christ to others is the
one great evangelistic duty of the Christian and of the Church. (Bishop Barry.)
The peculiar glory of Christ :—Moses was not said to manifest his glory when he
turned water into blood; nor Paul, nor Peter, nor any of the apostles, to manifest
their glory in the miracles which they wrought. Why this peculiarity of language
in the case of Christ? Was it not from the peculiarity of His person—God as well
asman? (J. Fawcett, M.A.) The glory of conquest :—As the first ray of the
morning reveals the glorious light which is soon to flood heaven and earth, so the
first miracle of Jesus revealed the glory of Him who had come to subdue all things
unto Himself. (G. 7. Purves.) Christ at a wedding :—You nowhere read of His
being at afuneral. Why? Because marriage belongs to the primeval order of
creation, but funerals do not, Marriage is a part of the original programme of the
universe, but death is an intrusion. He, therefore, went to a marriage to vindicate
the Divine order; He did not attend funerals because they are incursions upon that
order. He was the Everlasting Life, and consequently could not join in the pro-
cession of death, Indeed, each time He met death in His sojourn through the
world, He could not but grapple with him and compel him to give up his prey.
(J. C. Jones.)


_ Ver. 12. After this, He went down into Capernaum.—Christ at Oapernaum :—It
is not needful to inquire what His errand was there, and upon what occasion His


4
q
z


r


a] Nt


CHAP. 11.} ST. JOHN. 177


mother and brethren went with Him; whether because Joseph was now dead, and
so He took care of His mother, or because they would convey Him on His way, or
because His brethren were to go up to Jerusalem with Him; only this voyage was
before that (Matt. iv. 13), when He came to dwell in Capernaum, for then John
was cast in prison (Matt. iv. 12), but now he was not (Joln iii. 24), I. Christ was
content to submit Himself to the wanting of a certain abode and settled dwelling in
the world, that He might sanctify our pilgrimage and tosstd condition to us, and
to invite His followers willingly to be removed from place to place, as He hath
service for them. So much are we taught by this His removal. II. Christ hath
errands in eminent places as well as obscure, and will not despise them for their
eminency more than the base for their baseness; and He can make the work of
His kingdom in a land advance from obscure beginnings and places, to be more
eminent and conspicuous. So much may we gather from Christ’s going out of
obscure Cana to Capernaum, a chief city in Galilee. III. As it is wisdom in
Christ’s own to go still in His company, so others also may be with Him so long
as His way and theirs lieth together, or when He is working gloriously and His
gospel hath credit ; for, after this miracle, we find not only His mother and dis-
ciples, but His brethren or kinsfolk with Him, who yet believed not in Him (John
vii. 5). IV. Christ may stay longer or shorter while, and do little or much in a
place, as He pleaseth; and particularly He stayeth or removeth according as may
contribute to advance the great work of His glory and of sinners’ salvation; for
io. eet there not many days, as having more to do at this time in Jerusalem.
. Dyke.


Vers. 18-17. The Jews’ passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Christ’s first passover :—I. His ATTENDANCE AT THE PASSOVER. One of the three
great annual festivals which all males were required to attend. None excused but
the sick and the disabled. God made the ordinance peremptory, to teach—(1) That
His worship and service were the chief things. (2) That God’s house was to be
the centre of the moral universe, and that all nations would flow to it. Christ’s
attendance showed—1. His fulfilling of all righteousness. He came not to destroy.
2. His communion with believers of the Old Testament. Partaking of their sacra-
ments, He declared Himself of one body and spirit with them, just as by instituting
sacraments for New Testament believers He declared Himself of one body and
spirit with them. Thus Christ is the bond of both dispensations. 3. Himself and
His mission to the nation. The promise was that He should come to His temple.
Here the people could identify Him if they chose. II. Tux conprrion In wuicH Hz
FOUND THE TEMPLE, AND His INTERFERENCE THEREWITH. The market was going on
in the outer courts of the Gentiles. The sheep, &e., were sold there to save the
inconvenience of individual Jews bringing their offerings from a distance. The
money-changers were there, to exchange foreign money for the balf-shekel of
the sanctuary. The abuse consisted in making God’s house a house of merchan-
dize, in which the priests themselves profited. Christ interfered to show His
official assumption and exercise of legitimate authority in His own house, The
cattle were driven out, the money-tables overthrown; but the doves ordered to be
taken away, so that they might not be harmed. Nothing harmful or cruel was
done. In this interference we see His glory as the “‘ Son of God” and His adminis-
trative authority as “ King of Israel.” Unsupported Himself, all fled before Him.
III, Tx convicTION WROUGHT IN THE MINDS oF His servants (ver.17). 1. We have
here the love of Christ, and His earnestness for their salvation and God’s giory:
typical of His whole work. 2. Christ’s example to us. (1) Our zeal must begin
with ourselves. (2) Must concern itself with God’s honour and man’s salvation.
(3) Must be actuated by love. (4. Beith, D.D.) The temple market :—I. THE
MARKET. 1. Described. Jerusalem was in all its glory. Its inhabitants were astir
in the early morning, enjoying the cool of the day and the excitement of the season.
The streets were blocked by crowds from all parts, who had to make their way
to the temple past flocks of sheep and droves of cattle. Sellers of all possible
wares beset the pilgrim, for the feasts were the traders’ harvests. Inside the temple
space the noise and pressure were, if possible, worse. The outer court was in part
covered with pens for sheepand oxen. It was, in fact, the yearly fair of Jerusalem,
and the crowds added to the din and tumult, till the services in the neighbouring
courts were sadly disturbed. 2. Accounted for. It seems strange that the priests
should have permitted it, but the explanation throws light on Christ’s conduct.
The priests made pecuniary profit of it. The sale of doves was almost wholly in


4


178 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cHaP. Tm
ee
their hands, and the rent for the rest was very large. The money-changers were
usurers and tricksters, and augmented the priests’ revenue out of their unlawful
gains. 38. Christ’s indignation was, therefore, natural. He had come fresh from
the manifestation of His glory, with all the enthusiasm natural to a Jewish
prophet and inspired with His Divine mission, to testify to the nation as a whole
where it could be best reached. Behold, then, His Father’s house invaded by a troop of
mercenaries and hucksters! II. THe EXHIPITION OF CHRIST’S WONDROUS MORAL POWER.
There was no physical power displayed, nor any exciting contention with the pro-
faners of the temple. ‘The scourge was only an emblem of power and chastisement,
the sight of which was sufficient, and at which they all unresistingly fled. How
could one man effect. such a clearance, unknown, a Galilean, with no formal
authority, priestly power, or following? It was perhaps due to the “ solar light”
of His countenance, behind which was the unspeakable power of perfect holiness
(Matt. xvii. 2), which made Him attractive to the virtuous and devout, but awful to
mere money-grubbers. They were dumb and helpless, because conscience-stricken,
in the presence of Incarnate Righteousness. II]. THe PROFOUND SIGNIFICANCE OF
rHIs act. Spiritual cleansing. The ‘temple may be considered as a symbol—1. Of
the heart defiled by selfishness and sin, to be cleansed by the expulsive power of
Christ’s love. 2. Of society or the world, to be cleansed by Christ’s redeeming
grace. 8. Of the Church, to be cleansed from superstition, and worldliness, and
bigotry, by truth, purity, and charity. (J. E. Flower, M.A.) The profaned
temple :—I. THE sIGN AND ITS APPLICABILITY. The temple a symbol of the temple
of humanity, built of living stones. To cleanse this He entered on His ministry;
and if He had aright to do the greater work, He had a right to do the lesser.
II. TuHovGHTs SUGGESTED BY THE siagN. 1. All men are created to form part of
God’s temple. The Divine idea of humanity is an organic whole—Christ the
centre, the shrine; human hearts grouped round Him forming the courts. Con-
trast the ideal with the actual. Yet in the midst of chaos God is working out His
purpose, and will not rest till the idea is realized. 2. Men have misused the courts
as markets. Commerce is good,-but its place is outside the heart, not inside. It
defiles when it intrudes on the sanctuary. Yet how hard even in the most sacred
seasons to exclude their profane associations. Business for most is more absorbing
than God and His will. 3. Christ has power and authority to cleanse the courts.
(1) With His scourge He may drive away the property which usurps His Father’s
place. (2) He may scatter the money-changers’ money, and leave him at leisure
to reflect withoutit. (3) He may speak His orders to those who defile the sanctuary
with lighter profanations through judgment and disease. 4. The time will come
when the temple shall be purified. In the Revelation we see the design perfected.
A city without a temple, because itself is a temple. There shall be gold there, and
all the good things of the earth shall be sanctified to Divine uses. (C. A. Goodhart,
M.A.) The purging of the temple:—I. AppropriatrE to—1. The place: the
metropolis, the centre of the Theocracy, the predicted theatre of Messiah’s self-reve-
lation (Z: ch. ii. 10, 11; ix. 9). 2. The time: at the passover, when the paschal
lamb, of which He was the antitype, was-about to be offered, and when the vast
crowd gathered afforded a favourably opportunity for impressing the national mind
and conscience. 3, The condition of the temple: whose forecourt, reserved for the
worship of proselytes, was transformed into a market and fair under the pretence
of religion—a melancholy, because faithful, picture of the secularization of the
Jewish religion by the Pharisees. 4. The character of Him who carried it through.
The Father’s Son had a right to purge His Father’s house. II. SupERNATURAL.
As much so as the turning of water into wine. The manifest insufficiency of the
means places it in the same category as John xviii. 6. Its suddenness also sur-
prised, and inward consciousness of guilt paralyzed, the traders. Natural and
supernatural causes were thus combined. III. Sianricant. Designed to be a
revelation to the ecclesiastical authorities of His Messiahship (Psa. lxix. 9; Mal
ii. 2-6). IV. Sueeusrivs. Recalling to the disciples the words of the Psalmist, it
confirmed their recently formed convictions. V. Azarmtne. It startled the Sanhe-
drim, who recognized the Messianic character of the action, but wanted to know
whether He was Messiah. Secretly they must have dreaded this. But because He
was different from what they expected, they declined to receive Him. They trified
with their consciences by asking for a sign. They preferred the darkness
although the light had now conspicuously dawned. Lessons: 1. The duty and
privileges of the ordinances of religion. Christ at the passover. 2. The need
of purity and order in the sanctuary—Christ purging the temple court. 8. The


Ee


Fy ee ee a ee a te


CHAP. 11.] ST. JOHN. 179


danger of a worldly spirit intruding into the domain of religion—the traders in the
sacred edifice. 4. The propriety of being zealously affected in Divine service—
Christ’s example, (T. Whitelaw, M.A.) Christ’s principles of action:—Had
Christ appeared as a teacher it would have been a great benevolence: but He would
hardly have had go wide-spread an influence. Teaching was only one part of His
task, the other was to ordain a fellowship. So He needed to appear as the reformer
of religion. The temple was the centre of religious life: here then the reformation
must begin. See then the principles of Christ as a religious reformer. I. Hz pip
NOT COME TO DESTROY, BUT TO PURIFY AND FINISH. But why trouble Himself about an
institution that was to pass away ? (ch. iv. 24). The answer is that Jesus did wish
to erect the new on the ruins of the old, but since so much depended on the old,
this, when reformed, should attach itself to that. We should be like Christ in this,
not to destroy but to reform and build up. II. Tue zean or tHE REDEEMER WAS IN-
TENDED TO BANISH EVERYTHING THAT MIGHT ENTANGLE MEN AGAIN IN WORLDLY THOUGHTS
AND ANXIETIES. The really devout and upright as well as the frivolous might see no
evil nor distracting influence in these things. The temple was large enough. All
these arrangements had to do with religious life. Was it not a matter of indif-
ference whether they were carried on within or in the neighbourhood of the temple.
Those whose thoughts would be disturbed by them would be disturbed without
them. But human prudence is one thing; the judgment of Christ another.
Whatever draws men to and keeps men near God must be kept pure and free from
desecration. 'The weakness of the human heart forbids the worldly and the Divine
mingling with one another. The germ of the Jewish corruption lay in the mixing
of the two. Let then our church, life ordained by that Lord who here cleared the
temple, be free from foreign admixture. III. WHat ricHT HAD CHRIST TO ACT IN
THIS wAx? Did He not overstep the bounds of His authority. No, according to
the free customs of that people and age it was competent to any one to assail any-
thing that was at variance with public law. There was ever scope for honest zeal.
Christ found it so, and would have us find it so and lift our voices for what is right
and good, to win public opinion to them. We Christians are a priestly people
called to keep pure the temple of God upon earth. (Schleiermacher.) Christ
at Jerusalem:—We see—I. How mucH CHRIST DISAPPROVES OF IRREVERENT BE-
HAVIOUR IN THE House or Gop, Are there none who bring to church their
money, their lands, their cattle, &c.; who bring their bodies only to a place
of worship and are “almost in all evil, in the congregation” (Prov. v. 14).
II. How MEN MAY REMEMBER WORDS OF RELIGIOUS TRUTH LONG AFTER THEY
ARE SPOKEN, and may one day see in them a meaning which they now do
not see (vers. 19, 22). Sermons preached to apparently heedless ears are not
all lost and thrown away; nor are texts taught by teachers or parents to
children. There is often a resurrection of the good seed sown after many years
(1 Cor. xv. 58; Eccles. xi. 1). II. How prrrscr 1s our Lord’s KNOWLEDGE OF THE
HUMAN HEART (vers. 24-25). He saw beneath their superficial faith that they were
not disciples indeed. This thought ought to make hypocrites and false professors
tremble. They may deceive men but they cannot deceive Christ. But it is a word
of encouragement to real Christians. (Bp. Ryle.) Transition :—It is impossible
not to feel the change which at this point comes over the narrative, I. There is A
cHaner. 1. Of place: Jerusalem and Cana. 2. Of occasion : the passover and the
marriage feast. 3. Of manner of action: the stern Reformer and the sympathizing
Guest. II. Tu sPIRITUAL LESSONS WHICH THE TWO SIGNS CONVEY ARE ALSO COMPLE-
yenTaRy. 1. One represents the ennobling of common life and the other the
purification of Divine worship. 2. Oneis a revelation of the Son of peace, the other
a revelation of the Christ, the Fulfiller of the hope and purpose of Israel. (Bp.
Westcott.) The desecration of the living temple:—Alas! that even in the
restored and consecrated temple of man’s soul, scenes are at times enacted,
of which the sacrilege in the Jewish temple was but a feeble emblem. It
is a desecration, not of a material building but of God’s spiritual house—the
merchandise, not of sheep and oxen but of sins. The pollution is not in the
‘‘ outermost court of the Gentiles, but in the inmost sanctuary where God delights
to dwell””—in man’s heart. Too often is there rebellion, even in the believer’s soul,
against the authority of the Lord; and giving to Him a divided heart. Too often
are the living temples thronged with carnal things, earthly affections and desires.
Too often is the lowing of oxen and the bleating of sheep heard, and the tables of
the money changers planted, within the precincts of God’s house. Alas! how often
is the silent and solemn devotion of the believer’s heart distracted by the noise of


% » 1 oe Fae ae


180 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. =—‘ (omar,


conflicting passions, and its purity defiled by low and grovelling affections. ‘Holy
thoughts and desires, like the poor, despised Gentiles, are turned out of their proper
place, and thrust into a corner. Oh, this is monstrous incongruity. Have you not
here a temple which you have sacrilegiously profaned; and has not your passion
for sordid gain and worldly occupation so entirely engaged and absorbed you, that
all your feelings and faculties seem to be expended on earthly vanities, and your
affections settled down to the dust? You profane that which God has made holy—
that which He has set apart for Himself, and where He would delight to dwell.
“My house shall be called a house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves.”
(W. Chalmers, M.A.) | Money changers in the temple are those who pursue secular
interests in the church; and God’s house is made a house of merchandise, not only
by those who seek to obtain money or praise, or honour by means of holy orders,
but .by those also who exercise the sacred ministry, or dispense sacred gifts, with a
view to human rewards and not with simplicity of intention. (Bp. Wordsworth.)


Ver. 17. The zeal of Thine house hath eaten Me up.—I. ZEAL FoR THE STRUCTURE
OF THE HousE. 1, It is the duty of the Church to provide convenient places for
the public worship of God. Over-building is a lamentable waste of strength; but
under-building is a sin. The Church who neglects to provide proper accommodation
for the fast growing population of the country, is guilty of a grievous breach of
Christian trust. 2. The house of God should be in consonance with the most
chastened taste. Beauty is as cheap as ugliness. The flat roof was prevalent in
antiquity, but Christianity, elevating the human mind, has given us the dome and
the spire. Our conscience, like David’s, should smite us when our house is better
than God’s. 8. The same zeal which prompts us to build and beautify should
prompt us to pay, and not leave a burden of debt to coming generations; but those
who inherit the burdens should believe in the strength of God and remove them.
Many have been obliged to go through the bankruptcy court because-of too much
liberality in the cause of the devil; none through over liberality in the cause of
God, IL. Zan FoR THE ORDINANCES OF THE HOUSE. 1. The means of grace, the
ordinary services; if we neglect the means we shall not have the grace. God
promised to be a ‘‘ small sanctuary ” to the Babylonish exiles; so He will be to
those who are in sore captivity through affliction. But if in health, God expects
you to be in the assembly of His people. The social character of Christianity
must be thus maintained. 2. Two institutions in particular go under the name of
ordinances. About these there has been much controversy. Extremes are to be
avoided—(1) That they are miracles, (2) That they are empty ceremonies. True
zeal shuns both extremes. 3. There must be zeal not only for but in ordinances.
Warmth is always attractive and contagious, One of the objects of the gospel is
to warm man’s natural frigidity. Fervour in the pulpit, in the prayer-meeting, &c.,
imperative. ‘ But it is not respectable!” God preserve us from respectability,
then. But there is enthusiasm enough in political and social gatherings and in
business. III. For Tam DISCIPLINE OF THE HOUSE. 1. Wickednegs should be
rebuked. Purity must be maintained at all costs. Some churches need the
scourge of small cords to drive out the men who, by their negligence or immorality,
disgrace the altars of God. 2, Virtue should be fortified. In the family and the
Church, discipline should aim at the development of goodness, so that the doctrine
of God our Saviour may be adorned in all things. 3. Our interest in the holiness
of the Church should be all aflame with sacred zeal. In proportion as we are
zealous for God, He will bless our efforts at evangelization. IV. For THE pocTRINES
oF THE HouSE. It is the Church’s vocation, not that of the ministry as an official
order to defend the faith. 1. Zeal for the doctrine implies mental hostility to
error. The tendency of to-day is to tolerate not only heretics, which is right, but
heresy, which is wrong. 2. Whilst opposing heresy, our chief concern should be
the vindication and exposition of truth, Zeal not for sect and party, but for the
truth—particularly the cardinal truth of the cross. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.)
Christ’s zeal :-—I. Irs spHerz. We cannot confine it to the témple or any other
ecclesiastical structure. 1. The universe, in all the glory of its interminable
spreadings, is the house of God. There is not a lonely spot which is not full of
Deity. 2. And when we divide this universe into sections we know that there ig
some scene honoured above others with the Almighty’s presence—where angels
cluster, and where the Creator may be said more emphatically to dwell. 38, The
whole company of the faithful upon earth constitute “the house of God”—
builded together for a habitation of God through the Spirit. 4. Nay, there is not


CHAP, m.] ST. JOHN. = 181


& solitary individual, over whom the great change has passed, who is not tenanted
by the High and Lofty One. II. Cunisr’s zEAL WORKING IN THIS SPHERE. Zeal
devoured the spirit of our Saviour, and in driving out the traffickers from the
temple we can recognize the workings of the principle, but we cannot limit it to
this. We gather from the expression—1. That Jesus was consumed with a lofty
desire to benefit the denizens of the universe. 2. Over the inhabitants of heaven
Christ poured His amazing solicitudes. 3. An ardent longing to reseue this world
from its degradation, and to build up its desecrated fragments into a temple of the
living God, throbbed in the heart of Jesus of Nazareth. Confined, as it might
have seemed, to a single race, its effect branched out into every quarter of the
house of God, and orders of intelligence which needed not to be brought to the
Saviour might have been confirmed and sustained by that which put man within
the circles of acceptance. 4, Viewing God’s house as including the believing
remnants of Adam’s descendants, we see Him entering on His course as the sun
enters on his march in the firmament. His soul yearned over those who had
destroyed themselves. He entered into the nature on which rested the awful curse;
and when the race He had come to redeem rejected Him, the zeal of God’s house
kept Him fast on His pathway of pain. (H. Melvill.) | Christ’s zeal :—I. The opsect
of zeal—‘ Thy house.” The Jewish temple as symbolizing—1. The Old Testament
Church, 2. The world of sinners. 38. Corrupted Christian communities. II. The
NATURE of zeal. True and godly zeal, says Bp. Jewell, eateth and devoureth up
the heart, even as the thing that is eaten is turned into the substance of him that
euteth it; and as iron, while itis burning hot, is turned into the nature of the fire, so
great and just is the grief that they which have this zeal conceive when they see
God’s house spoiled, or His holy name dishonoured. III. The manrrestarion of
the zeal. 1. In rigidly expelling the defiling and the false. 2. In replacing and
building up the pure and the true, The zeal of Christ:—It is said that
sometimes when a crowd see a vessel that is going to pieces, and hear the
cries of the drowning men, they seem as if they were all seized with
madness, because, not being able to give vent to their kindness toward the
perishing ones by any practical activity, they know not what to do, and are
ready to sacrifice their lives if they might but do something to save others. Men
feel that they must work in the presence of so dreadful a need. And Christ saw
this world of ours quivering over the pit. He saw it floating, as it were, in an
atmosphere of fire, and he wished to quench those flames and make the world
rejoice, and therefore He must work to that end. He could not rest and be quiet.
(C. H. Spurgeon.) The zeal of our Lord to be imitated :—Let the zeal of
the house of God ever eat thee. For example: seest thou a brother running
to the theatre? stop him, warn him, be grieved for him, if the zeal of God’s
house hath now eaten thee. Seest thou others running and wanting to drink
themselves drunk? Stop whom thou canst, hold whom thou canst, frighten
whom thou canst; whom thou canst, win in gentleness: do not in any wise sit still
and do nothing. (Augustine.) Commendable zeal:-—The most remarkable
examples of zeal are found in the records of the early itinerant ministers.
Richard Nolley, one of these, came upon the fresh trail of an emigrant in the
wilderness, and followed it till he overtook the family. When the emigrant saw
him he said, ‘‘ What? a Methodist preacher! I quit Virginia to be out of the way
of them; but in my settlement in Georgia I thought I should be beyond their
reach. There they were; and they got my wife and daughter into their church.
Then I come here to Chocktaw Corner, find a piece of land, feel sure that I shall
have some peace from the preachers ; and here is one before I have unloaded my
waggon!’? The preacher exhorted him to make his peace with God, that he might
not be troubled by the everywhere present Methodist preachers. Christian
zeal necessary:—A young Brahman put this question to the Rev. E. Lewis,
of Bellary—* Do the Christian people of England really believe that it would
be a good thing for the people of India to become Christians?” Why, yes,
to be sure they do,” he replied. ‘What I mean is this,” continued the
Brahman, ‘do they in their hearts believe that the Hindoos would be better
and happier if they were converted to Christianity?” ‘‘ Certainly they do,” said
Mr. Lewis. ‘ Why, then, do they act in such a strange way? Why do they send
so few to preach their religion? When there are vacancies in the Civil Service,
there are numerous applicants at once; when there is a military expedition, a
hundred officers volunteer for it; in commercial enterprises, also, you are full of
activity, and always have a strong staff. But it is different with your religion. I


182 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. formar. 11.


te ee ee SENN ene ary RTE
see one missionary with his wife here, and one hundred and fifty miles away is
another, and one hundred miles in another direction is a third. How can the
Christians of England expect to convert the people of India from their hoary faith
with go little effort on their part?” (Chronicle of London Missionary Society.)
Consuming zeal :—When Baxter came to Kidderminster there was about one family
in a street which worshipped God at home. When he went away there were some
streets in which there was not more than one family on a side that did not do it;
and this was the case even with inns and public-houses. . . . While some Divines
were wrangling about the Divine right of Episcopacy or Presbytery, or splitting
hairs about reprobation and free-will, Baxter was always visiting from house to
house, and beseeching men, for Christ’s sake, to be reconciled to God and flee
from the wrath to come. (Bp. Ryle.) Zealous, but not furious:—It is in
the matter of religion as with the tending of a still; if we put in too much fire it
burns, if too little, it works not: a middle temper must be kept. A heat there
must be, but a moderate one. We may not be like a drowsy judge upon a Grecian
bench, who is fain to bite upon beans, to keep himself from sleeping ; neither may
we be like that Grecian player, who acted mad Ajax on the stage; but we must be
soberly fervent and discreetly active. St. Paul’s spirit was stirred within him at
Athens because of its idolatry, and it breaks out of his mouth in a grave reproof:
I do not see him put his hand furiously to demolish them. And if a Juventius
and Maximinian, in the heat of zeal, shall rail on wicked Julian at a feast, he
justly casts their death, not on their religion, but on their petulancy. It was a
well-made decree in the council of Eliberis, that if any man did take upon him to
break down idols, and were slain, he should not be reckoned amongst the martyrs.
There must then be two moderators of zeal, discretion and charity, without either
and both of which it is no other than a wild distemper; and with them, it is no
less than the very life-blood of the Christian. (Bp. Hall.)


Vers. 18-22. What sign showest Thou ?—Christ and the rulers :—I. THE DISPUTE
WHICH FOLLOWED His PROCEEDING IN THE TEMPLE. 1. The remonstrance adddressed
to Him by the Jews. The parties were the authorities of the Temple who, by their
question, espoused the cause of the traffickers. ‘‘ The Jews require a sign,” and for
the want of one to their liking, the Gospel was here as ever a stumbling block.
There was nothing unreasonable in the request. ‘The cleansing bore a Messianic
stamp ; but the request was made in anger at the disappointment that their gains
had been interfered with, and not with desire to receive information. The very
cleansing ought to have been a sufficient sign. 2. The reply of Jesus might be
understood to mean the Temple itself, or what He intended: the temple of His
body. ‘They misconstrued it into speaking against the sacred fabric, which became
one of the fatal accusations against Him afterwards. In the true sense Christ only
is the temple of God, although in a secondary sense believers are also, and the uni-
verse. The death and resurrection of this temple was to be the sign both for them
and for believers. ‘‘He was delivered for our offences and rose again for our justifica-
tion,” by which “‘ He was declared to be the Son of God with power.” II. Tx
PRESENT AND REMOTE EFFECTS or CHRIST’S REPLY ON THE MINDS OF THE DISCIPLES. 1.
As to the effect at the time there seems to have been none. Of many things,
including Christ’s death and resurrection, they were ignorant, and remained so up
to those events, and even then they were slow to believe. This was owing to their
secular views of the Messiah. And how often is such obtuseness the case with
believers now. Theirs was removed by experience, so must ours be. 2. The remote
effect was on the fulfilment of His Word, most blessed (ver. 22). The spirit
eventually quickened the seed sown in good ground (chap. xiv. 26). Exactly similar
is the experience of the Church at all times. The truth may lay dormant for years,
but when the Spirit comes it germinates. What an argument for teaching the young
whether they understand or not. (A. Beith, D.D.) Christ's sign:—It would
have been a great one in their sense of it. Zerubbabel and Herod had raised the
Temple, and other great persons buildings as great. But the temple of the body, if
ever that were down, all the temple builders that ever were would never get it up
more. So great, indeed, was it that he in hell could not desire a greater (Luke xvi,
30). I. Curtst’s Bopy 1s THIs TEMPLE. The Pharisees mistook the term. Christ
could not have meant God’s house, the zeal of which consumed Him, and which He
had just purged. Only polluted temples are destroyed. Christ, who knew His own
meaning best, has interpreted it, and perhaps then pointed to His body. 1. A body
atemple? How? Because God dwelleth there, There are temples of flesh and


Ie Para oN, ee ae


cHar. 11.] ST. JOHN. 183
Nee eae aos as ae cre mec” MENG Se re ee
bone as well as of lime and stone. Our bodies are called houses because tenanted
by souls, temples when tenanted by and used in the service of God, 2. Christ’s
body a temple seems only such by some gift or grace, but in Christ dwelleth the
fulness of the Godhead (eee. ii. 9), and always pure and employed in the Father’s
service. 3. Christ’s body “this” temple. (1) The two temples began alike at
Bethlehem (Psa. exxxii. 6; Matt. ii, 1). (2) Both were destroyed and reared
again. The Chaldees destroyed the one and Zerubbabel raised it. The Jews
destroyed the other, and Christ Himself raised it. (3) Both were consecrated
to like uses. There, the only true holocaust of His entire obedience, which burnt in
Him bright and clear all His life long (Levit. vi. 9). There the only true trespass-
offering of His death, satisfactory to the full for all the transgressions of the whole
world (Levit. v. 6). There the meat and drink offering of His blessed body and
blood (Levit. ii. 1). II. Tum prissonurion oF 17 By pEaTH. 1. The saying. (1)
Death is a dissolving, a loosing the cement with which body and soul are held to-
gether. (2) 'fhis temple drops noi down from age or weakness, dissolves not of itself,
but by force and vielence. (3) Violent on their part, voluntary on His. He could
have avoided it, and must have said it, or they could not have doneit. 2. The
saying no command, which would have been an order to commit sacrilege or murder};
but—(1) A prediction to warn them of what they were now casting about. (2) A
permission which is always in the imperative ; permitted for a greater good the
destroying of sin by destroying this temple; for a greater good still to raise it again.
3. The doing. Ile said dissolve; they said crucify. The roof of this temple, His
head, was loosed with thorns ; the foundation, His feet, with nails; the side aisles,
his hands, both likewise; the sanctum sanctorum, His heart, with a spear. They did
more, they violently loosed the temple. And remember it was one of flesh and bone,
not of lime and stone. Yet the ruins of a temple of senseless stone will excite pity ;
how much more the sensiblo temple of His body which, even before its dissolution,
was strangely dissolved in bloody sweat, nor was it alone dissolved. (1) The veil
of the material temple split from top to bottom, as it were, for company, or in sym-
pathy with Him. (2) The great temple of the universe in a manner dissolved: its
face black, the earth quaking, the stones rending, the graves opening. III. Tue
REARING IT UP AGAIN BY His ResuRKECTION. The saying was spoken by way of
triumph over all they could do to Him. 1. The act. (1) éyepw is a raising from
sleep, and sleep we know is not destruction. It is to show us that He would turn
death into a rest in’ hope, both His and ours. (2) They should therefore miss their
purpose. They reckoned to destroy Him, but would only prepare Him a short rest.
(3) The ease with which He would do it—with no more difficulty than waking from
sleep, or tying an unloosed knot. 2. The person rising. Not “destroy you and
some other shall raise,” but I will do it. An argument of His Divine nature. None
could do it but God, 3. The thing raised. The same and no other. (1) In sub-
stance. (2) But not in quality ; in a far better estate than before (Hagg. ii. 9). In
the morning after sleep the body riseth more fresh and full of vigour. So His body
and ours (1 Cor. xv. 42, 43) and henceforth this temple, dissolved in death, should
be indissoluble by reason of resurrection. IV. Tue TIME TO Do IT IN. Within three
days; and He did it within the time. Our duty then is—1. To rejoice. At Kaster


-we celebrate the feast of dedication, which was ever a feast of great joy. (1) His


dissolution means the loosing us from our sins and their consequences. (2) His
resurrection is a promise of what He will do for another temple: the temple of His
body mystical, of which we are parts—living stones. 2. To templify our bodies, which
in many are far from temples; houses of trade, pleasure, idolatary, which must be
dissolved to be made God’s houses. Then God must come in and sanctify them.
(Bp. Andrewes.) Christ’s sign :—I. Lirz THROUGH DEATH. II. ConstTRUCTION
THROUGH DISSOLUTION. III. Tuz use OF THE NEW THROUGH THE FALL OF THE OLD.
(Bp. Westcott.) The temple of Christ’s body :—The metaphor was not dragged
into conversation, but the temple He had just purged was shown to be a figure of
something greater than itself. I. Tue mNreMA. Christ cast a shadow over truths,
the full disclosure of which might have altered the conduct of the Jews and the
character of His mission. His hearers were puzzled and their after thonghts ex-
cited. What good man could propose such a destruction? What sane man could
promise such a restoration ? Yet it made such an impression that it was misquoted
against Christ in the high priest’s palace, and as He hung upon the cross (Matt.
xxvi. 60, 61; Mark xiv. 57, 58, xv. 29, 30). IL. Tae tyre. The tabernacle and
temple were significant preparations for the time when God would become flesh and
tabernacle among men, Christ knew and proclaimed Himself to be the antitype;


184 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Th


this new temple, in which the fulness of the godhead dwelt bodily, was consecrated
when Jesus was anointed with the Holy Ghost. III. THz uessons. 1. Christ fore-
saw clearly that the Jews would destroy this temple. To this He was reconciled
and longed for it, inasmuch as His sphere of influence was now circumscribed; but
the destroyed temple would be rebuilt on a scale more glorious, and all nations
called to it. 2. The words, “I will raise it again,” are significant—(1) Of the
identity of the body in which Christ rose with that in which He suffered. No doubt
the transformation was great. The conditions of an incorruptible body are noi
known to us. But these words prove the link of continuity, and if there was such
a link in the case of Christ, so also there will be one in the case of the saints whose
bodies are to be like unto His. (2) Of the power Christ had over His own future.
His authority to cleanse the temple had been called in question, He affirmed that He
had power not only to do this, but to raise up one which men could destroy but could
not construct (chap. x. 18). 8, As He is risen Christ is a temple for all nations. In
Him God dwells accessible to all: anywhere, irrespective of sacred times and places.
(1) The place of reconciliation, the refuge for sinners. (2) The home of communion,
the rescrt of saints; a temple that shall never be subverted. 4. The epistles carry
this view of thought further. (1) Every Christian is a temple of the living God; a
motive for holiness far higher than moralists have dreamed of in their theories of
the dignity of man, and the elevating power of self-respect (1 Cor. vi. 15,19). (2)
More frequently Christians are living stones which collectively form a great temple
or ‘habitation of God in the Spirit.’ 5. A local church, also, as representing the
Church Catholic, is also a temple of God (1 Cor. iii. 16; Eph. ii. 21, 22; 1 Pet. ii,
5). 6. The life which animates the stones, and so pervades the temple, emanates
from the living foundation stone—the risen Christ. But this cannot now be fully
manifest, just as our Lord was not understood at Jerusalem. The inner life of Chris-
tians is not seen. The Lord’s body is not discerned in the Church. But the temple
is so being built that the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it. 7. In sucha
world as this the holy temple encounters risk. (1) The traders desecrated the Temple,
worldly Christians secularize and degrade the Church of God; but such, sooner or
later, the Lord will drive out and disown. (2) Greater still is the fault of those who
by strife and schism tend to destroy the temple; against this Paul lifts a stern warn-
ing (1 Cor. iii. 17). (Donald Fraser, D.D.) The mysterious sign :—A word—lI.
ENIGMATICAL, conveying one thing to unbelief and another to faith. Under the figure
of a destroyed and rebuilded temple Christ announced that His death, brought about
by them and His resurrection effected by Himself, would legitimize His recent
action and demonstrate who He was. The sanie sign was subsequently given in
Galilee (Matt. xii. 40). II. Misunperstroop. 1. By the Pharisees through—(1)
Slavish adherence to the letter of Scripture (2 Cor. iii. 6). (2) Spiritual blindness
occasioned by hypocrisy (Mark iii. 25; Rom. xi. 25). (3) Positive aversion, arising
from inward moral corruption (chap. ili. 20; viii, 43, 44). 2. By the disciples.
They had begun to see the light, but, like men with eyes only just opened, they were
unable to discern accurately the objects the light revealed (Mark viii. 24), III.
Memorasue. Hid away, this word was never afterwards lost. It recurred after the
Resurrection illuminated by the fact to which it pointed, and thus helped to seal
their faith (Acts iv. 10, xxvi. 23; Rom. i. 4, iv. 25; 1 Pet. i. 3). Lessons:
1. The complete ability of Christ to justify all His ways to God and man.
Christ’s readiness to furnish a “sign.” 2. The irrefragable certainty of
Christ’s death and resurrection, attested by the knowledge and experience
of His disciples. 3. The veiled secret of Holy Scripture; the testimony of
Jesus, 4. The blessedness of faith, however immature. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.)
The temple of His body :—I, Tue piantry or our Lorp’s Bopy. The bodies of
believers are called temples because God dwells in them by & communication of
grace, but the humanity of Christ is God’s temple by a substantial inhabitation,
immediately and personally—‘ In Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead.”
God dwells in the Church as a King among His subjects, in Christ’s humanity as a
King in His royal palace. 1. In the Epistle to the Hebrews Christ is the mystery
shadowed forth by the outward sanctuary. The similitude will appear if we con-
sider—(1) They were alike in building; both under the immediate and special
direction of God. (2) In the ornaments by which they were beautified. (3) In
Him the import of the sacred vessels is fulfilled. (4) Christ’s body was like the
Temple, as it regards those religious services which were performed in it. (a) In the
Temple was a standing oracle ; in Christ’s humanity dwelt the true and living oracle
of heaven, (b) In the Temple was the altar of sacrifice and the atonement for gin.


%
;

i
+


CHAP. I1.] ST. JOHN. 185


_ Both derived their efficacy from Him who His own self bore our sins, (c) The
Temple was the house of prayer: in the days of His flesh what prevailing supplica-
tions Christ offered, and He now even liveth to make intercession. 2. To this
temple must every acceptable worshipper approach. (1) The Spirit of Christ must
inspire their prayers. (2) His name must authorize them. (3) His merit must
perfume them. (4) His advocacy must recommend them. I. THe viouENce AnD
DISHONOUR WHICH THE TEMPLE WAS DOOMED TO SUFFER AT THE HANDS oF HIs ENEMIES.
1. Tha nature of His passion was a dissolution, a full and complete death. 2. The
extent of this passion. Death severed soul and body, but this was all—the union
of the Godhead with the manhood was indestructible. 3. The circumstances by
which this event was accomplished and wherein their aggravation consists. (1)
Violence and wickedness on man’s part. (2) Voluntariness and love on His, III,
THE GLORY TO WHICH IT WAS TO BE RAISED BY His Aumiauty PowER. 1. The agent,
“7.” Dead men were raised by others. Christ by Himself. He is a quickening
spirit for Himself and for us. 2. The subject—the self-same temple. 3. The
state. (1) Substantial—‘A spirit hath not flesh and bones,” &c. (2) Enutire—
nothing wanting to its perfection. (3) Glorious. (J. Styles, D.D.) Christ’s
human body the temple of God :—I. THE DWELILING-PLACE oF Gop. As soon as the
first temple at Jerusalem was built. ‘‘ The glory of the Lord filled the house of the
Lord.” This splendid manifestation passed away, but the Lord did not depart.
To the very moment when the building was destroyed a shining cloud constantly
abode over the mercy-seat as a symbol of Jehovah. The second temple was without
this, but still God was there, dwelling unseen within it. And this fact was in our
Lord’s mind, for He calls the Temple “‘ His Father’s house.” He dwells indeed in
His Church and in every soul which He has redeemed, because He is continually
acting by His Holy Spirit. But when He speaks of dwelling in the Man Christ
Jesus, He means much more than this. There is an actual passing of the Godhead
into that frame of dust, a union so close and entire, that wherever that human
frame is, there is God. Is this mysterious to you? It was mysterious to Paul.
‘Great is the mystery of godliness’”’; to angels. We cannot explain it; but
Scripture, which calls on you most plainly to believe it. ‘ God was in Christ.”
‘‘In Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily,” not by a figure;
put really, substantially. God dwells in His Church as the light of day dwells
in our houses; He dwells in Christ as the same light dwells in the sun. He dwells
among His people as the ocean dwells in the rivers whither the swelling tide carries
it; He dwells in the incarnate Jesus as that ocean dwells in its bed. II. A
MANIFESTATION or Gop. And herein also the resemblance between Him and both
the Jewish temples holds good. When God entered that, He entered not spiritually
only, but visibly; a bright cloud was the symbol of His presence. To understand
the application of all this to Christ we must bear in mind—1. Though we ourselves
are spiritual beings, we can form no conception of any being that is purely spiritual.
This incapacity arises from the constitution of our nature. God is a spirit. It
will follow, then, that unless something is done to help us, we can never have any
right idea of God. We may form some conceptions of His attributes; but as for
God Himself, He can have no place in our minds. But He meets this weakness of
our nature. We cannot get into that spiritual world which He inhabits; He
comes, therefore, within our range, into the world of matter, and embodies
Himself in the human nature of Christ, and then says to an astonished uni-
verse, ‘* Behold your God!” 2. We can form no adequate idea of the character
of any being, unless we see him in action, or are made acquainted with his actions.
Now, had God merely embodied Himself in a human frame, and then just showe
Himself to the earth and disappeared, we should not have been advanced materially
in our knowledge of Him. Hence He “‘ dwelt among us,” spoke and acted ; and in
so doing made a revelation of Himself. By the truths Christ taught, by the powers
He exercised, by the dispositions He manifested, and above all, by His sufferings
and death ; He has unfolded to us the Divine character. Something was known of
God before. The heavens had declared His glory. His law too had asserted His
authority and holiness, and His providence: had borne witness to His justice, His
goodness and truth. But what was all this? Nothing, when compared with the
person, and work, and cross of Christ. III. A monument to Gon’s pRraiszE. We
wonder not that lofty structures were raised to the gods of the heathen, and that
the heathen thought they honoured their gods by raising them. They did honour
them. Their gods were men like themselves. But as for building a temple to the
living Jehovah’s glory, the thought of it seems at first confounding. We think of


a ae


186 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHap, IL
Ne a eee
Him who has heaven for His throne and the earth for His footstool. Yet God did
allow a temple to be built to Him, and that temple did show forth His praise. It
was a public acknowledgment of Him, Christ’s human nature glorifies God while
it reveals Him. He is “the light of the knowledge of the glory of God,” ‘the
brightness of the Father’s glory.” (C. Bradley, M.A.) The three temples of the
one God:—I. Terr one purpose (cf. Psa. lxvili. 29; 2 Cor. vi. 16). The essential
idea of a temple is that of a place where God manifests Himself to man, and where
man dedicates himself to God. The first of these is realized by the Shekinah; by
the power and character of Christ; by the holiness of Christly souls in each of the
three temples respectively. The second is attained in each: by the altar of the
Jewish Temple, by the cross, by consecration. II. THErr siMrLaR HISTORY. In their
—1, Origin. There was silence and mysteryin each. The temple noiselessly built,
Christ obscurely born, the Christian spiritually quickened. 2. Materials: Glorious
ineach. Inthe Temple gold, precious stones, fragrant woods. In Christ a specially
prepared sinless body. In Christians fearful and wonderful elements. 3. Sufferings.
One besieged, the second crucified, the third hated by the world. 4. Divine deser-
tion. The first was “left desolate,” the second “forsaken,” the third often loses
God asineclipse. 5. Destruction. The Temple was more than once destroyed; the
Saviour gave up the Ghost ; the Christian descends into the grave. 6. Restoration.
The first was restored and may be again, Christ rose again the third day, Christians
shall rise so that the temple shall be completed and the top stone laid with rejoicings.
‘‘ Grace, grace unto it.”” Lessons: 1. For those who refuse to be identified with
the Temple: What glory you lose; what a destiny you miss. 2. For those who
are identified with the Temple: Be enduring; be pure; fulfil your high end. (U.
R. Thomas.) The crowning act:—I, A CERTAIN DEMAND. It is shown—1l. What
they required—a sign, often requested in our Lord’s day and afterwards. 2. Why
they required it—because of the extraordinary cleansing of the temple. IL. A
SIGNIFICANT ANSWER. There is here—l. An exalted claim. The temple was the
abode of God. 2. A striking prediction. 38. A wonderful declaration. III. A Gross
MISREPRESENTATION. 1. How it originated; in applying literally what was only
meant figuratively. 2. The feeling it produced—ridicule or contempt. 3. The
explanation which the Evangelist supplies. IV. AN mportTanr ResuLT. ‘‘ When
therefore,” &c. From this we see—l. That the words of Christ were not forgotten.
2. The effect such remembrance produced. (Miracles of our Lord.)


Vers. 23-25. When He was in Jerusalem at the Passover.—The first Jerusalem
believers :—I. THE OBJECT OF THEIR FAITH: the name of Christ. The name of
anything is that by which it is known; so the name of Christ is that revelation of
the Saviour proposed for faith’s acceptance. So faith may vary in different ages,
persons, and even in the same person according as the object is fully or partially
unveiled and apprehended. Faith can never travel beyond the bounds of testimony.
What was offered to Abraham was a Saviour to come (chap. viii. 56); to his
descendants, a Saviour come; to John’s disciples, the Lamb of God; to Nathanael,
the Son of God and the King of Israel; to the rulers and people of Jerusalem, the
Messiah. As such He had been rejected by the former and was now accepted by
the latter. The sare name, now completely unveiled, is still faith’s object (Acts
iii, 16; iv. 12). Il. Tue @rounp or rHErr FarrH—the miracles of Christ; signs,
visible pictures of Christ’s Messianic work as well as attestations of His Divine
mission (chap. iii, 2; Acts x, 38). In the same sense they are still helps to faith;
they are obstacles only when considered impossible. ‘Chey are not continued
because unnecessary, having been superseded by a complete historical revelation
and by a conscious indwelling of the Spirit. III. Tae cHarRacTER oF THEIR FAITH.
1. Sincere, as far as it went. If afterwards those who believed in Him took up
stones to kill Him (chap. viii. 31, 59) that constituted the damning character of
their crime. But some who now believed afterwards became disciples (chap. iv. 45).
2. Incomplete, It did not go far enough. Resting: satisfied with intellectual
acknowledgment of Christ it did not pass on to spiritual surrender. It had taken
the preliminary step of believing in Christ’s name; it wanted that additional of
trusting in His person. 3. Superficial: occasioned by the impression produced by
miracles and liable consequently to disappear when that impression failed. IV.
THE TREATMENT OF THEIR FAITH, 1, The nature of it: Reserve. He did not trust
Himself to them, enter into close relations with them, unite them to Himself
as disciples. When Christ puts Himself into the hands of a believer, the result ig
salvation and eternal life (chap. vi. 50-54). 2. The reason of it: Insight. He


ee


ee


NG Ce eee eee


pee eel as


cHar, 11.) ST. JOHN. 187


knew what was in them, saw they had not fully surrendered themselves. When a
soul does so faith is complete. Christ’s knowledge of the human heart was the
deepest ground of the different treatment accorded to the Baptist’s disciples; and
that knowledge was (1) instantaneous. He knew at a glance without investigation
(chap. vi. 64, xiii. 1; Luke vi.8; Acts i.24; Heb.iv. 13). (2) Original (Col. ii. 13;
Rev. ii. 18). (3) Universal (chap. xvi. 30, xvili. 4, xxi.17). (4) Particular (chap.
iv. 29, v. 42, xiii. 11, xx. 27). (5) Complete (chap. i. 48, vi. 64; Luke v. 22; Rev.
ii. 23). Lessons: 1. Christ commonly obtains a readier welcome from the humble
than from the great. 2. Faith may sometimes look to the right object and yet be
exceedingly defective. 3. The soul that would fully enjoy Christ’s fellowship must -
have perfect faith. 4. Christ knows the quality and quantity of every man’s faith.
5. He who would have Christ trust Himself to him must first trust himself to Christ.
(T. Whitelaw, D.D.)


Vers. 24, 25. Jesus did not commit Himself unto them, because He knew all men.
Superficial faith :—I. Tue DANGER OF A SUPERFICIAL FaiTH. It was only such a faith
that these people had who believed in Christ on the ground of His miracles. It
did not satisfy Christ. It had no deep root and ‘had not led to loyal acceptance of
His doctrine. Compare it with that of Nicodemus. Both felt that Christ was a
teacher sent from God; but in the one case the feeling stopped there; in the other
it stimulated patient inquiry. Consequently, while Christ did not commit Himself
to the one, He did to the other. There are believers and believers; there is a
serious possibility of being a sincere believer, but with a faith so shallow as not to
be owned by Christ. II. Tue UNPROFITABLENESS OF A SUPERFICIAL FAITH. Christ
had no faith in their faith. Shallow faith secures none of the privileges of disciple-
ship; it does not appropriate Christ, and therefore does not enjoy His love and
friendship. Christ reciprocates the faith of His true disciples only. Ill. Tur
PERFECT ACQUAINTANCE WHICH CHRIST HAS WITH THE STATE OF PROFESSED BELIEVERS.
1. This bears on the nature of Christ ascribing to Him an attribute of Deity.
2. This bears on ourselves, telling us how thoroughly we are known. We may
deceive ourselves, but we cannot deceive Him. This should lead to carefulness and
honesty. (W. Steele, M.A.) The omniscience of Christ:—Nature in all her
realms lies open to His eye. Mankind in all its races are in His view. Every
man’s circumstances and thoughts are known to Him. This knowledge is—
I. Inruitrvz. Ours is dependent on human testimony; His utterly independent
of it. Who told Him Zaccheus’ name, or of the domestic history of the
woman of Samaria, or of the treachery of Judas? And so now from heaven He
addressed Saul of Tarsus by name and told the Asian churches that He knew their
works. Still “All things are naked and open unto His eyes.” II. Universat.
With instant discrimination He knew friend from foe, the enthusiasts which fed on
His miracles, and that which was love to Himself. Where is there a man? Christ
knows Him, one of a thousand millions. What is He doing in crowded mart or
solitary cell? Christ knows all about it. III. Intrmate. He reads thoughts,
feelings, affections, desires. Deception has no covering from Him; hypocrisy no
mask He cannot pierce. Judas may deceive the twelve, he cannot deceive the
Lord. There is no secrecy in sin. Conclusion: Take comfort from Christ’s
omniacience. 1. Are we in sorrows? Think of Hagar. 2. Do we give ourselves
to prayer? Think of Nathanael. 3. Are we of doubtful mind? Think of Thomas.
(G. T. Coster.) Christ’s distrust of man:—I. WE MAY MEASURE IT IN PART BY
THE TEMPTATION IT RESISTED. It was more wonderful than even His mighty works.
Around Christ was a-nation full of Messianic hopes. All He had to do was by falling
in with the notional ideas to gather those hopes around Himself. Who could have
resisted such a temptation but He who knew the falsity of the hearts which enter-
tained those hopes. II. Ir pEPENDED UPON THOROUGH AND ABSOLUTE KNOWLEDGE.
With most people distrust is the offspring, as in turn it becomes the parent of
ignorance. When men have never fairly tried their fellows or studied their
behaviour under circumstances which reveal character, they naturally hesitate to
commit great interests to their keeping. Christ knew men because He knew man.
III. Irs BEARINGS ON THE REDEMPTIVE WORK OF CHRIST WERE MOST IMPORYANT.
I. It safeguarded Him from surprise and precipitancy. 2. It rendered His death
absolutely voluntary. (4. F. Muir, M.A.) Christ’s knowledge of man :—Christ
knows the very roots of the trees; we know the character of the trees only from
the fruits. (Calvin.) The miracles at the Passover :—I. Tok woRKS WHICH THE
SavioUR PERFORMED. 1. Where they were performed, 2. When, On the feast day,


a ~


188 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHaP, IL
<class SB ORS Bel Be
a most favourable time. II. Taz nonour wHicH THE SaviouR RucEIVED. No
greater honour can be given to a man than to trust him. 1. By what means the
people’s faith was produced. Miracles. 2. The number who were convinced of the
truth of Christ’s claims was considerable. III. Tue cavrion wHicH THE Savi0uR
EXERCISED. 1. How it was shown. 2. The reason asigned. 3. The truth announced—
“Needed not,” &c. (Miracles of our Lord.) Christ’s knowledge of man:—
I. Hz KNOWS ALL ABOUT THE DISEASE WHICH AFFLICTS US. Our faith in a physician’s
knowledge has often much to do with our recovery. Christ knows thoroughly His
own workmanship, and all about that sin which is marring it. I. Cunist toRovcH
Hs KNOWLEDGE I8 ABLE To worRK His cure. To perform this cure requires a
perfect knowledge of the disease and power over it. Christ has both these.
III. Curist KNows THE CHRISTIAN IN A SPECIAL way. ‘I know My sheep.” He
calls us by name. As in the human so in the Divine family dispositions and
temperaments are recognized. One can be lead by a thread, another will break an
ox chain. Christ saw the faith of the Syro-phenician. He knew what was ir
boasting Peter and in Judas. 1. He knows the temptation of each Christian, and
will not allow us to be tempted above what we are able. 2. In the light of this we
are able to understand better our trials. Christ as the Physician does not hesitate
to use the lancet when necessary. He bleeds the plethoric that he may bring forth
more fruit. (f. L. Cuyler, D.D.) Christ’s knowledge of man:—He knows what
was in man—I. As He cAME aT FIRST FROM THE CREATOR'S HAND. God made
man upright; and that uprightness is known to Him on whom our help has been
laid. The Son partook of the Divine council in which the human constitution was
planned. II. WHEN HE HAD FALLEN. Knowing the character of the perfect work,
the Saviour knows also the amount of damage that it has sustained. He knows, also,
the gravity of man’s sin, as an event affecting all the plans of God, and the
government of all intelligent beings. Some trees are of such a constitution that if
the uppermost bud is once nipped off, the tree is finally ruined. It can never
develop itself into its proper shape and dimensions. Such an uppermost bud was
humanity on the whole material creation. Deprived of its head, the world could
not shoot up into the beauty and completeness which its Maker intended it should
attain. III. WHat wouLD RESTORE HIM, AND WAS ABLE TO APPLY THE CURE.
Knowing the worth of man as God had made him, our Physician would not abandon
the wreck; but knowing how complete the wreck was, He bowed His heavens and
came down to save. He united Himself to us, that if He should rise so must we.
I rejoice in the omniscience of the Holy One, both on account of the good that He
knew in man, and the evil. A counsellor who understood less fully what our
nature was, and our constitution fitted us to become might have advised abandon-
ment. It often becomes a question whether a stranded ship should be left to her
fate or brought off and repaired. Sometimes an erroneous judgment is acted on.
On one gide, an effort is made to save the wreck, when it would have been better to
abandon it, and construct another. Again, she is sometimes weakly abandoned

when it would have been profitable to have saved her, Andsoahelper who understood
less of our original nature and capability might have proposed to cast us off as
hopelessly damaged, supposing that, by allowing the wreck to be wholly washed
away, a new and higher degree of intelligence might have been called into existence.
Although Christ knew all the evil that was in man by sin, He did not disdain to
undertake the rescue. By assuming the nature of the fallen, and meeting the law
in their stead, He received the curse into Himself and exhausted it. IV. Somer
Lussons: 1, Speaking of the unconverted—He knows what is in them and yet He
does not cast out the unclean. 2. Speaking of His own disciples—He knows what
is in them, and with that knowledge, it is because He is God and not man, that He
does not shake them off. 38. He knows what is in man, and therefore can make
His word and providence suitable. (W. Arnot, D.D.) Inward knowledge of
man necessary for good authorship :—Dickens, writing about a clever story by a
popular author, says, ‘It is extremely good indeed ; but all the strongest things of
which it is capable missed. It shows just how far that kind of power can go. It
is more like a note of an idea than anything else. It seems to be as if it were
written by somebody who lived next door to other people, rather than inside of them.”


OHAP. II1.] ST. JOHN. 189


ee ——————————————


CHAPTER III.


Vers. 1-2. There was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus.—Nicodemus :—
I. NicoDEMUS THE INQUIRER. He was a Pharisee, and therefore all manner of re-
ligious obstacles, formalism, &c., stood in his way. Hewasa ruler, and therefore all
manner of social impediments beset him. But his conscience had been awakened.
He came in the dark so as not to be noticed. He admits Christ’s Divine teacher-
ship. Men now hold miracles in light esteem, but this narrative shows us that they
should make a sober man think. Our Lord’s reply shows that Nicodemus’ admis-
sion was not enough. It is a great thing to reverence Christ, but this will not save
without a spiritual change. About this Nicodemus was as ignorant as a babe;
and as Jesus opened it and related matters he might well marvel. He had inquired,
and now heard much more than he anticipated. He is a sample of most
inguirers. Through chinks and crannies the heavenly light steals silently and
gradually. As the light goes in, prejudices are overcome and notions surrendered,
until it becomes day as it did with Nicodemus. II, Nicopemus THE CONFESSOR
(chap. vii.). The impression made on the public mind by Christ’s teaching and
miracles was great (chap. vii. 27). The rulers, filled with wrath, sent officers to
arrest Him, These officers were so struck with what they heard that they returned
without their prisoner. The Pharisees rebuked them, and heaped insults on all
who acknowledged Him. Then Nicodemus arose in His defence, standing on Exod.
xxiii. and Deut. i.16. It requires some courage to defend one whom rulers have
condemned. Nicodemus did this, and bore the reproach of discipleship. He who
was once timid now dares to stand up for Christ alone. The explanation is that
in the meantime he had been born again. III. Nicopemus FAITHFUL IN HIS MAsTER’s
HUMILIATION (chap. xix.). Jesus has been tried, condemned, and executed. All
His diseiples had fled, but Nicodemus stands firm, and with Joseph of Arimathea
secures for our Lord an honourable burial. Lessons—1. If God begins a work in the
soul, He will carry on that work to completion. 2. Ministers must not be dis-
couraged at unpromising beginnings. 3. A man may be at first, but he cannot
continue, a secret disciple. (C. D. Marston, M.A.) Nicodemus :—Every effect
is to be traced up to some adequate cause, and the effect is in exact proportion to
the cause. This is true—l.In nature. 2.In providence. 3.In grace. Witness
the case of Nicodemus here and in chaps. vii. and xix. I. Grace IN ITs FIRST CoM-
MENCEMENT MAY BE VERY FEEBLE. Nicodemus was a timid man, and ignorant, and
somewhat hard; yet he welcomed and employed the light, although not to the fullest
extent, In his and in all other cases the beginnings of grace are feeble. Young
believers are likened in Isa. xl. 11 to lambs; in Isa. xlii. 3 to a bruised reed and
smoking flax; in Matt, xiii. 31 to a mustard seed; in Mark iv. asa blade. Just as
Christ in His natural body grew up from nothing as it were, so is Christ born in
the heart. II. ALTHOUGH GRACE IS THUS FEEBLE IN ITS COMMENCEMENT IT IS A REALITY.
Though Nicodemus came as a coward, yet he came; though he was ignorant, yet
he asked; though he was aruler, yet he renounced his knowledge and inquired
with all the simplicity of a child. If we had rescued some poor creature from the
waves, not a breath stirring, apparently dead, we should use every means and go on
in hope. At last we hear a feeble sigh, and the conclusion we draw is that he lives.
His life is as real as if he walked. ‘Look at the sinner dead in trespasses and sins.
Nothing moves him; not the terrors of the law, nor the invitations of the gospel.
But God sends forth His Spirit, the heart is touched, the conscience enlightened,
and the effect is that He feels his sin and cries, ‘‘ God be merciful,” &&. We now
find him pleading the atonement and finding mercy. He receives a new principle.
This is a reality, and is so described in the terms new creation, new birth, resur-
rection. That it is realis proved by three things. 1. It abideth (Gal. v.17). 2. It
overcometh (1 John iii. 9). 38. It still tendeth towards God (chap. iv. 14). It
came from God, it ascends to God. It longs to love Christ and holiness more, and
is not satisfied till it reaches the bosom of its Father (Psa. xvii. 15). ILI. WHEN
GRACE IS REAL, HOWEVER WEAK, CHRIST DOES NOT DESPISE IT. He did not upbraid
Nicodemus with coming by night, nor does He any one now. 1. His covenant engage-
ments forbid it. 2. His love forbids it. 8. Beware, then, how you despise feeble
grace (1) in others; (2) in yourself. Conclusion—1. James iv. 6. 2. Prov. xiii. 4.
(J. H. Evans, M.A.) | Nicodemus :—I. THE DESCRIPTION HERE GIVEN OF THE MAN.
1. His religious profession, ‘a man of the Pharisees.” 2. His official position, ‘a
ruler of the Jews.” II. THE CIRCUMSTANCE RECORDED CONCERNING HIM. 1, Why


190 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (car. m1.
Me SE ae ee
he came. (1) Negatively. (a) It was not to ensnare or oppose Jesus, as was the
case with his co-religionists generally. (b) Not out of curiosity like Zacchzus.
(2) Positively, to know the truth. 2. When he came, ‘‘ by night.” (1) It might
have been from a feeling of shame or timidity ; but what we know of him does not
favour this supposition. Our Lord does not blame him, why should we? (2) From
necessity, his duties forbidding during the day. (3) From choice as well as con-
venience. He wanted a private interview, such as Christ’s busy life could not
afford during the day. III. Tae ackNowLEDGMENT maDE By Him. 1. To what it
refers—to the character of Jesus as a teacher come from God. 2. The ground on
which it rests. Nothing can be more reasonable than the inference. It will be
seen—(1) That the miracles of Christ are here spoken of as things of general
notoricty. They certainly were not done in acorner. (2) Their reality is repre-
sented as being above all suspicion. They are spoken of as ‘‘ these miracles,” and
no doubt was, or could be, entertained concerning them. (3) Their wonderful
nature was such as clearly indicated that they were wrought through a Divine
interposition. The feeling of all who were not blinded by their prejudices, on wit-
nessing each mighty act in succession, was, ‘‘ This is the fingerof God.” (4) Their
express design is recognized as confirmatory of our Lord’s character and claims.
What He says should therefore be attended to, and the important truths He
uttered on this occasion are especially worthy of the most serious consideration.
(Miracles of Our Lord.) The character of Nicodemus :—I. AN INQUIRER. Reports
had reached the teachers and rulers concerning Christ which startled them. A
man not educated in their schools, nor sent forth with their authority, an obscure man
of peasant origin, was preaching doctrines not included in their systems, and doing
works to which they were not equal. Nicodemus, one of them, came to inquire of
Christ personally as to these things. II. A caurious MAN. There are some who are
carried about with every wind of doctrine. Nothing astonishes us more than the
ease with which men take up a new religion except the ease with which they lay
it down. Not so with Nicodemus. He knew that Judaism was of God, and that
Judaism prophesied a Messiah with which Christ did not seem to correspond.
Yet Christ’s miracles appeared to authenticate His mission.. But before accepting
Him he would inquire further. III. An mnrELLIcENT man. Education does not
always enlarge the mind. Religious education sometimes tends to bigotry. But
this man was an independent thinker, and claimed the right of private judgment.
His large mental capacity had been cultured to appreciate evidence and to weigh
words. Consequently Christ reveals to him more advanced truths, IV. AN EARNEST
man. He had been occupied with his official duties during the day, and now he
treads the lone dark streets uncertain whether Christ would receivehim. V. Brine
FAITHFUL TO THE LIGHT HE HAD, THE LIGHT WAS TO DEEPEN AND BRIGHTEN. (H. J.
Bevis.) , Brave Nicodemus :—We see in him—I. THE couRAGE OF THE EARNEST
INVESTIGATOR INTO THE CLAIMS OF CuRist. He was earnest enough to come by night
80 that he might have a long, calm, and uninterrupted interview. Had he been
afraid, Christ would probably have rebuked him. He boldly acknowledges Christ’s
Divine mission, and pursues his inquiries into the meaning of Christ’s words.
Christ rewards this courage by unreserved communications of spiritual truth. This
courage must be imitated by every truth seeker, II. THz couraGE OF WISE-WORDED
SPEECH FoR Curist. The next time we see him (chap. vii. 50) his courage has
grown, and in the midst of Christ’s implacable enemies he speaks a wise word for
Him. For such a man with his constitutional reserve to act as he did, and to
incur what he did, required no ordinary courage. This courage is the power of
Christian testimony now: in the presence of enemies, in the midst of tamptations,
at home. III, THe counaGE OF LIBERAL-HANDED SACRIFICE FOR Cunist. When our
Lord’s hour was darkest, Nicodemus’ courage is at the brightest. He takes His
stand by the Crucified, whose disciples were scattered, whose cause was discredited,
and whose name was a mockery. He ran some risk, knew little of Him compared
with what we know, took His body reverently from the cross, embalmed and buried
Him. Christ is not in the grave now. To be on His side still requires courage and
sacrifice. Count the cost; maintain the struggle; win the crown. (G. T. Coster.)
Nicodemus and Christ :—I. Tuis man’s approach To Curist. 1. Who was he?
(1) A Pharisee; a member of the richest, proudest, most numerous, influential, and
sanctimonious class in our Saviour’s time. Not only so, but ‘a man of them ”—
a full-blown representative whom the community and the sect acknowledged as a
leader and light of the party. (2) A ruler of the Jews, not a mere master of
& synagogue, but (John vii. 50) a member of the Sanhedrim—the supreme ecclesiag


“omar. on] 7 ST. JOHN. 191


tical and civil tribunal, the final court for the interpretation and enforcement of the
law. No one could be a member of it without being well advanced in life, perfect
in all his faculties, tall and impressive in appearance, wealthy, learned, and trained
in judicial administration. Perhaps the sublimest visitor the Saviour ever had.
2. Why did he come? The Messiah’s coming was generally expected. Christ had
done some apparently Messianic deeds, and had been acknowledged. The San-
hedrim could not avoid dealing with Him. Nicodemus was therefore probably
deputed to wait upon Him. This was not a worthy method of procedure. Instead
of inviting Christ openly to hear what He had to say, or going as frank and faithful
men to Him, they concluded to keep their impressions secret while one of their
chiefs under cover of night stole away to catechise the Saviour. 38. How did he
act? (1) Very inconsistently. If he knew that Jesus was a Divine teacher it was not
his business to raise up objections. (2) He was crippled by his prejudices and pride
of character. His very first word betrayed him. He must needs bring forward
the official ‘‘ we,” as if the individual Nicodemus had nothing specially personal
at stake. Then his difficulty about the new birth arose out of his prepossessions
in favour of his own goodness and the non-necessity for him of a spiritual change.
IJ. Curist’s TREATMENT OF THIS DISTINGUISHED viIsIToR. 1. He met him with
calmness and civility. He came to save great men as well as small. (John vi. 37.)
2. He spoke at once tothe point, and undeceived him in regard to the basis on
which he and his fraternity were building their hopes. Jesus, who knew what is
in man, knew the unspoken thought of Nicodemus. He knows what is in our
hearts, and is able to suit His favours to our wants before we express them.
Nicodemus wanted some decisive manifestation that Christ was the King of
Israel. Christ responds that no one would ever be able to discern or enter the
kingdom without a new birth. Thus, at a single stroke, Christ laid prostrate
this renowned councillor’s greatness, and dashed out for ever the fondest
hopes of his race. 38. The Saviour expounded the unalterable condition of
admission. That condition was—(1) A birth: mysterious, but (2) real (James
i. 18; 1 John v. 1; 1 Peter i. 23). (3) A re-birth (2 Cor. v. 17), a renova-
tion in the springs of life, in the impulses and activities of the man, and in all the
aims and endeavours of his being. (4) A birth from or out of the Spirit. (5) A
birth conjoined with baptism (Matt. xxviii. 19, 20; Mark xvi. 16). 4, In order to
this renewal, Christ explained the true nature of the Messianic work. Not to
fight the Romans, confront Casar with Cesar’s weapons, subdue the nations to
Jewish vassalage—but to die for sinners that they might live. 5. As underlying
all, Jesus taught the right doctrine concerning God. Nicodemus believed in
God, but had a very limited and inadequate conception of the higher mysteries of
the Godhead. He needed to be taught that God was Three-One, and that in this
same young Galilean the expressed Godhead dwelt, being come from heaven for man’s
redemption. {J. A. Seiss, D.D.) Who was Nicodemus ?—Of this particular Nico-
demus, we know with certainty nothing more than is told us in this Gospel (chaps.
vii. 50; xix. 39). The Talmud mentions a Nakedimon, so called from a miracle
performed by him, who was the son of Gorion, and whose real name was Bonai.
It also gives the name Bonai as one of the disciples of Jesus. He was one of the
three richest Jews when Titus besieged Jerusalem, but his family were reduced to
the most abject poverty. So far the Talmud. The inference is that this change
of fortune is connected with his becoming a Christian and with the persecution
which followed, and he is himself identified with the Nicodemus of the gospel.
We can only say this may beso. (H. W. Watkins, D.D.) Two historic night
scenes :—One of the most memorable and important interviews which ever took
place between two individuals in this world was held on a raft in the middle of the
river Niemen, at the little town of Tilsit, in Prussia. At one o’clock precisély, on
the 25th of June, 1807, boats put off from opposite sides of the stream and rowed
rapidly toward the raft. Out of each boat stepped a single individual, and the twa
met in a small wooden apartment in the middle of the raft, while cannon thundered
from either shore, and the shouts of great armies drawn up upon both banks
drowned the roar of artillery, The two persons were the Emperors Napoleon and
Alexander, and the history of the time tells us that they met ‘‘to arrange the
destinies of mankind.” And the hastily-constructed raft, on which the interview
took place, will be remembered as long as the story of great conquests and mighty
revolutions can interest the mind of man. The conference lasted but two hours ;
it was entirely private between the two emperors, and yet it was fraught with
momentous consequences to millions, It was one of the great crises in human


' x oe
192 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. formar. m.
history when the currents of power that govern the nations take new directions,
and break over the bounds and barriers of ages. Go back eighteen hundred years
beyond the treaty of Tilsit, and we can find a private conference between two indi-
viduals of far more momentous and lasting importance than that between Napoleon
and Alexander. This more ancient interview was not watched with eager expec-
tancy by great armies; it was not hailed by the thunder of cannon and the shout
of applauding thousands ; it was not arranged beforehand by keen and watchful
agents guarding the interest and safety of the two who were to meet. It was in a
private house, at a late hour of the night, and it was brought about by the mingled
curiosity and anxiety of an old man to know something more of a young teacher
who had recently appeared in his native city. And yet from that humble night-
conference of Jesus with Nicodemus there have gone forth beams of light and
words of power to the ends of the earth. The plans formed by Napoleon and
Alexander at Tilsit were yeversed and defeated long ago, and it is impossible to
trace their influence in the condition of European nations to-day. The words
spoken by Jesus to His wondering and solitary listener that night have already
changed and glorified the destiny of immortal millions; they have more influence
in the world now than in any previous age; and they are destined to go on increas-
ing in power, until they shall be received as the message of life and love by every
nation under heaven. (D. March, D.D.) The influence of night on the student :—
There is a reason why students prefer the night to the day for their labours.
Through the day their thoughts are diverted into a thousand streams; but at
night they settle into pools, which, deep and undisturbed, reflect the stars. But
night labour, in time, will destroy the student; for it is marrow from his own
bones with which he fills his lamp. (H. W. Beecher.) Christ the greatest
Teacher :—In I. The extent of His knowledge, II. The perfection of His character.
III. The excellence of His methods. IV. The kindness of His disposition.
V. The greatness of His rewards. (R. Brewin.) The relation of miracles to
teaching :—When God had some new tidings to tell to the world, He gave to the
men whom He sent with the message the power of working miracles. The
miracles were a sort of bell, which they rang in the ears of their generation, that
people might listen to what they had to say, and believe that it came from Heaven.
(Dean Goulburn.) An interview with a night visitor :—The hours were too few for
the work each day brought to Jesus. His labours were often prolonged into the
night. An exciting day was over, and one of Jerusalem’s noblest sons sought the
Saviour. The visit was not prearranged, but spontaneous. Nicodemus could not
sleep till he had seen Christ. Others were within the same influences, yet slept.
Here was the first-fruit of Christ’s direct ministry. The visit did not surprise the
Saviour. Let the incident suggest—I. Ustna THE DARKNESS FOR SEEKING THE
Saviour, Night is friendly to retirement and secrecy. The guiltyabuse it; but the
holiest have ever found its tranquilizing calm, helpful. Attention is needed to—
1. The struggle which compelled Nicodemus to journey to Jesus. Naturally he
must have felt reluctant to quit his home. Why not wait till morning? But
thoughts had been arrested, anxiety stirred by the works of Jesus. Conviction had
grown, He could not therefore be inactive. The visit involved risk. Caution
would counsel hesitation, but eagerness made him resolute, and, determined
to lose no opportunity, he came to Jesus by night. 2. The motive which led to the
use of the night. Jear, prudence, unwillingness to court attention, are motives
with many. Vanity, sense of shame, reluctance to compromise one’s dignity, are
motives with others. Were these Nicodemus’ motives, or the fact of convenience,
the night ensuring quiet and leisure? Or was it restless eagerness? The narra-
tive marks that no earlier hour was available (chap. ii, 24). Yet the thrice
reiterated ‘by night’? seems to denote excessive prudence, 3. The spirit His
visit betokened, He craved satisfaction. If He is the promised One, I must know
Him. 4. The knock at the door of Jesus’ home. II. Yienpina uP sLEEP FOR A
SOUL’S ADVANTAGE. 1. No hour finds Jesus unwilling to attend to our need. 2.
Christ’s eagerness to meet a seeker. At once Nicodemus was led into themes of
which his heart was full, III, SpenpING THE NIGHT TALKING OF WONDROUS THEMES.
Jesus uses time well. The themes may be thus classified—1. Concerning the
Divine Trinity. The Spirit (vers. 5, 6), ‘the only begotten Son” (vers. 13-18),
God the Father, who sent the Spirit and gave the Son. 2. Concerning the action
of the threefold Godhead in man’s salvation, The Spirit regenerates; the Son
atones ; the Father’s love provides the sacrifice and gathers in the world. 3. Con-
cerning man’s responsibility in reference to salvation, He has no part in saving


|
;
:
|


CHAP. I.) ST. JOHN, 193
cea a Re EB ear ae eo ee ee eee eee
himself. Jesus accomplishes that (ver. 17). He must be enlightened (ver. 3) and
renewed (ver. 7). On him is cast the solemn duty of personal belief in Christ.
4. Concerning the great issues set before the soul. Not to believe incurs condem-
nation. But the world through Christ may be saved (ver, 17). There remains for
each the vast alternatives of everlasting life or the abiding wrath of God (ver. 36).
IV. HEAVENLY LIGHT GAINED IN THE NIGHT INTERVIEW WITH Jesus. 1. Nicodemus
became a humble listener at the feet of Jesus. It was his intention to interrogate
the Teacher, but he soon became silenced. 2. He retired with new and sacred life
within him. (W. H. Jellie.) Lhe anxious inquirer—coming, disputing, listen-
ing :—I. NicopEMUs ComING To cHRIST. Amongst those mentioned in the closing
verses of the last chapter was the Rabbi Nicodemus. To him the young man
Jesus was an object of profound interest. He retired from the crowd to the San-
hedrim. There his fellow princes were in indignation at the assumption of the
youthful Nazarene, and amazed at the audacity of His holiness. He leaves the
Sanhedrim, and retires to his own home. He becomes anxious about this Teacher
sent from God. He takes down the ancient laws and prophecies. He sees the
resemblance between that young Rabbi and some of those shadowy words which
lighten over the ancient parchments. A new interest gathers over the pages.
While he reads the sun has set, the crowds have dispersed, Jesus has gone home.
Nicodemus resolves to goto Him. The night season is all the more favourable.
Nicodemus approaches the retreat of Jesus, timidly and holding back. But the
door is open, and there is Jesus waiting for him. 1. Nicodemus was an anxious
but haughty inquirer. The proud, moral disposition of the Jew starts into light
at the first word—We know. The things of eternity will not allow him to sleep;
but the opening remark of this emissary of the Sanhedrim implied that he and
they had little to learn. 2. Still he made a concession. He calls Jesus Rabbi.
He could call his brethren in the great council chamber no more. 3. He main-
tains a reserve. Something clutched at the rope and plucked you back just as you
were about to tell Christ all. Christ came to him at once, and replied not to what
he said, but to what he thought. You cannot see till you are born. II. NrcopEmus
DISPUTING WITH CurRist. He came expecting to discuss with Christ the things of
the Jewish Church; Christ pressed home all his thoughts to internal questions,
Many came to Christ to dispute rather than to listen, The overcoming of the
disputatious element in us is one of the most important preliminaries to the recep-
tion of the truth. In disputing we defend our own views rather than open our
minds to the truth. Nicodemus disputing reveals to us—1. How the carnal mind
is ignorant of the things of the Spirit of God. 2. Wherein lies our difficulty of
belief. It is in the How and the Why we find the great obstacles to our faith, ‘3.
How far we may be immersed in spiritual ignorance when we seem to be most
advanced in knowledge. 4. How possible it is to belong to the outward and visible
church, and yet to know nothing of the great and saving change of heart and life.
JI. Nicoprmvus LISTENING To Curist. He gives up djsputation, and Christ unfolds
the plan and science of salvation. 1. He asserts the inability of the man and the
inutility of human knowledge. 2. The plan of Divine ability beginning with the
work of the Holy Spirit and ending with that of the Divine Father. 3. The exhibition
of the mediatorial sign. 4. The unfolding of the essential law of the Divine kingdom
—do the truth and you will know thetruth. (Paxton Hood.) The Teacher and the
taught :—I. Tur viscrpte, 1. His relation to the ruling powers and his position as
aman of culture. 2. His want of moral courage. 3. His reverent acknowledg-
ment of Christ’s authority, in which he manifests elementary faith. 4. His willing-
ness to be taught. II. THz Txacuer. 1. His willingness to teach. Christ ever
meets the eager and reverent inquirer in this spirit. 2. His willingness to accept
imperfect faith. 8. The truths be taught. (1) Theneed of regeneration. (2) The
mystery of His own person, 3. The great purpose of His mission with the method
of its accomplishment. (Family Churchman.) Thetwo Rabbis :—I. Tae Tracuer
come From Gop. 1. Accessible to men (vers. 1,2; Matt. viii, 34, ix. 28, xi. 28, Xv,
1; Mark iii. 8; John iv. 40). 2. Commissioned of God (ver. 2; Deut. xviii. 18;
John viii. 28, xii. 49, xiv. 10, xvii. 8; Heb.i. 1, 2). 3. Confirmed by miracles
(ver. 2; Luke xxiii. 47; John ii. 11, ix. 33, x. 38, xiv. LP ACtS I. 22), oe. A
TEACHER ABLE To TEACH, 1. Of the new birth (ver. 3, i, 13; 2 Cor. v. 17; Gal. vi.
15 ; James i. 18; 1 Peter i. 23; 1 John iii. 9). 2. Of the Spirit’s power (ver. 6, xiv.
26, xvi. 13; Rom. viii. 14; 1 Cor. ii. 10, i. 22; Titus iii, 5). 3. Of the Heavenly
things (ver. 12, vi. 33, vi. 51, xiv. 3, xvi. 28; 1 Cor. xv. 47; 1 Thess. iv. 16). III.
A TeacsEeR ABLE TO saYE. J. Lifted up to ‘save (ver. 14; Num xxi. 9; John viii. 28,


194 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. ITZ
ee eg a eee
xii, 82; 1 Cor. ii, 2; Gal. vi. 14; 1 Johni. 7). 2. Given of God to save (ver. 175
Matt. i. 21; John iv. 42, v. 34; Acts iv. 12; Rom. v. 9; 1 John iv. 9). 3. Believed
on to save (ver. 18; Mark xvi. 16 ; John iii. 36, vi. 47; Acts xvi. 31; Rom. iii. 26;
1 John y. 1). (Sunday School Times.) Christ as a teacher :—I. THE EVIDENCES WHICH
CHRIST GAVE OF BEING A TEACHER COME FROM GoD. 1. His qualifications to be this
teacher. (1) Im His nature: Godand man. Hence He spake with authority and
worked miracles. (2) In His commission. The Father sent Him. (3) In His
endowments. He was filled with the Spirit (Isa. lxv. 1). 2. The peculiarity of His
instructions—(1) What was their character? What sublime views He gave of God;
what Divine revelations of grace; what Divine consolations; what holy precepts;
what openings of the invisille world. (2) Observe their manner. ‘Never man
spake as this man ”-—with such authority, power, simplicity, consistency. He taught
by events, anecdotes, parables. (3) Mark their effects—conviction and conversion—
Zacchaeus, Mary, Martha, dying thief, &c. II. In wHaT RESPECTS THIS GREAT TEACHER
SHOULD BH IMITATED BY OTHER TEACHERS, 1. In His imitable qualifications—(1) His
knowledge, particularly of God’s Book. Every teacher should have a concordance,
4 commentary, and a companion to the Bible. (2) His various methods. (3) His
possession of the Spirit. 2. In His Spirit—(1) The spirit of prayer; (2) of com-
passion; (3) of faithfulness. 3. In His conduct. (1) His self-denial. (2) His un-
wearied perseverance. 4. In His aim—to save souls. Conclusion. 1. Rejoice that
you have such a teacher. Wearn of Him if you would be successful teachers. 2.
There is no cause for discouragement if you see not the success of your teaching.
Christ’s “‘ own received Him not.” 3. Let Scripture motives urge you to undertake
and pursue this great work. Gratitude, the brevity of time, the present benefit, the
future reward. 4. What a blessed day when teachers and taught will meet in
heaven. (James Sherman.) Christ as a teacher :—Jesus was emphatically a
teacher. Not one who was confined to a professor’s chair, but one who taught every-
where. As ateacher He was eminently successful, and exceedingly popular. What
was the secret of His success and popularity? I. His pocrrines were of such a
character as to command the most profound respect, and make the deepest im-
pressions. 1, There was in them a peculiar fitness to the people. His teachings
awakened the conscience, enlightened the understanding, and stirred the heart. 2.
They were free from sectarian bigotry and prejudice. His principles were broad
and generous, having universal application to the physical, social, and spiritual
wants of men. II. His styzux. There was nothing stiff or stilted about it, no ex-
travagance of speech, no affectation of manner. His very presence was a charm.
Gentleness and simplicity marked all He said and did. III. His muusrrativensss.
One of the elements in His great strength lay in the aptness of His figures and
comparisons from common life. Wherever He turned His eye He found central
truth, and brought out of it something that the people could apply home. He
ignored bewildering terminology, and showed that religion had something to say in
the home as well as in the temple. IV. His rmmparrianiry. Teachers often make
distinctions among their pupils. But Christ looked at man as man, and turned no
one way either on account of rank or of poverty. V. His aurHoriry. It was the
consciousness of His Divine authority which made Him so independent as a teacher

He did not pander to the corrupt tastes of the people nor accommodate Himself to
their errors and prejudices. VI. His naruratnuss. There was nothing strained

artificial, or formal about His methods. It was in the most incidental and easy way
that He taught some of His grandest lessons and did His greatest works. The
smallest occasion was improved. There never was a teacher so little dependent on
times and places. Why this spontaneity in all the teachings of Jesus? Because
religion’is natural, and religion is natural because it is real. VII. His asmiry to
INSPIRE MEN, to kindle in their hearts a holy enthusiasm. Xenophon tells us that
men were more inspired by the example and spirit of Socrates than by his words

So with Jesus. There was something in His manner, address, and personal
presenee that at once won the hearts of His hearers. When He wanted men to
become His disciples He had but to say to them “Follow Me,” and they at once
‘forsook all and followed Him.” And He exerts that influence to-day. (J. L

Harris.) Our Lord a model for Sunday-school teachers :—I. Tue CHARACTER OF
JESUS Crist AND HIs QUALIFICATIONS FOR A TEACHER. His qualifications are more
apparent in their subjects than in their modes. What was Christ? is a better ques-
tion than How did He teach? Many put too much faith in systems method,

and too little in menofGod, 1. Christ had a very high estimate of His work. He
made men’s minds, and was “the light that lighted,” &c. He had afull perception


ea he


CHAP. 123.) ST. JOHN. 195
Se are cao re a el A eM eee
of the powers and value and destiny of the human spirit. You must have this same
high estimate. No man will do heartily what he does not think worth doing.
Nothing can be greater than to teach truth to an immortal mind. 2. Christ’s mind
was fully possessed with the truth He taught. He always spoke as though the
truth were His own. You never perceive any effort or sense of novelty. He bore
truth about Him as a daily dress. He spoke of God as if He were in His bosom.
He left an impression that He ‘‘ spoke that which He knew,” &c. It was this that
made the people astonished, and that made the officers say, ‘‘ Never man spake like
this man.”’ Be like Christ in this respect. There is but one way of attaining it,
and thatis by being real. It is not attainable by art. You must be a Christian,
living and walking in the Spirit of Christ. 3. Christ was entirely self-consecrated
to His work. He was not forced or persuaded into it. He came to it because He
loved it and those He taught. Kindness, the key to the human heart, therefore,
was the temper in which He taught. Nothing is done without this. He who is set
on keeping up His dignity may end in losing His charge. Children are eminently
susceptible to Kindness. 4. Christ lived His lessons. It was this that silenced
His enemies and won His friends. If you would be effective you must teach by
what you do as well as by what you say. Children have consciences, and no appeal
will be so powerful as that of holiness of character. Besides, imitation is the law
of their minds. II. Tue teacuine or Jesus Curist. 1. The free and familiar
manner of it. Thereis no setsystem. His course was prompted by circumstances.
He spoke to the time. Truth came out of Him on particular occasions, like virtue
when Hewastouched. Don’t fill the minds of the children with formal propositions.
Speak always ‘‘the present truth.” Be simple, but not coarse. Christ had not
hard words or technicalities ; He trusted to the inherent dignity of the truth. The
sublimest thoughts can be put into words of one syllable, ‘‘ God is light,” ‘*God is
love.’ 2. If you would imitate Jesus Christ, don’t teach more than one thing ata
time. He uttered a great doctrine and then dwelt upon it. The minds of adults
may be injured by trying to put too much into them. ~He who seeks to do too
much ends by doing nothing. 3. Christ adapted Himself to those whom He
addressed. He had many things to say, but waited till they could hearthem. This
has been His method from the beginning. Revelation was progressive. So you
must lead the children’s minds from one degree of knowledge to another. Begin
with ‘first principles,” and ‘‘ go on to perfection.”” 4, Christ taught pictorially.
Parables are pictures. The Bible is history, and what is history but a picture ?
What are baptism and the Lord’s Supper but pictures, Dry didactic statements
have few charms for children, but they may be won by anecdotes. Conclusion. 1.
Jesus Christ as a teacher had very little success, but He did not faint. The
husbandman has faith in the operation of nature; so must you in the growth of
the good seed. 2. Christ believed that His seed would grow again. Many a
doctrine: the apostles remembered after He had risen. Future events must be
allowed to quicken your teaching, perhaps your death. But no truth is ever lost.
3. Even Christ prayed while He was labouring. Without prayer you might as well
not teach at all. (d. J. Morris.) Open and secret Christians :—There are always
in a congregation some who accept Christ but do not confess Him openly. The
Church has its hypocrites, but so has the world: for there are men who seem to
lead a worldly life whose inner life is turned toward Christ; but they make three
mistakes in their position. I. Tomy ovERESTIMATE THE VALUE OF WORLDLY FRIEND-
sures. How much will your friends among the men of the world sacrifice for you?
They will desert you when your purse fails. II. Tory ovERNSTIMATE THE EFFECT OF
CONFESSION ON FRIENDSHIP. It will not drive away a true friend. What hurts us
most is ridicule. Learn to live above it. Christ suffered the meanest-insult. His
followers have often sealed their faith with their blood. II. TuHey unpERESTIMATE
THEIR OWN STRENGTH. ‘They are afraid of falling after they have made a public
confession, and of giving opportunity to scoffers to blaspheme. They put too low
a value on the strength Christ gives for every crisis, At the moment of danger
Nicodemus came forward. Is there a danger now that calls these silent Christians
to come forth? There is, though this age is no worse than many others. Our
literature is full of a lofty scorn, a condescending pity for Christianity. Many of
our scientists are materialists. Itis time to be brave and outspoken. Christ is
polarizing the world; there are but two classes of men. (W. M. Taylor, D.D). An
audience of one :—Permenides upon reading a philosophical discourse before a

ublic assembly at Athens, and observing that, except Plato, the whole company

ad left him, continued notwithstanding, saying that Plato alone was sufficient


196 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [onar. ae


udience for him. (W. Baxendale.) No man can do these miracles except God be
with him.—The eens in Christ’s history :—At the very threshold of the discus-
sion there meets us the assertion that miracles are impossible. Now I hold that
we cannot believe in a personal God and doubt the possibility of miracles. 1. We
have a great deal of learned talk about the inviolability of the laws of nature, which
really makes a strait-waistcoat for God of His own laws. But the question is set at
rest by facts which science attests. What is the beginning of life but a miracle?
Scientific men know that this world was once a molten mass, and that there could
not then, by any possibility, be on it any germ of vegetable or animal life. But life
by and by appeared and multiplied ; and in its appearance we have a distinct and
special act of God creating life; and that is a miracle. 2. But there are those who
admit all this and yet deny any other miracles. They say that they are not reason-
able, that they are a reflection on the wisdom of God. But while God’s being
makes miracles possible, God’s mercy and man’s needs make miracles reasonable.
If there is a defect in the mechanism of the world, it is not due to God, but to us;
the disorder in the universe is not His, but ours. And a special interposition by
Him to right what we have put wrong is the reverse of a reflection on His wisdom.
A revelation of mercy to a sinful world is a miraculous thing in itself; and if other
miracles accompany it, it isjust what might be anticipated. 3. But there are those
who say that whether wrought or not, miracles cannot be proved. This is Hume’s
position, which is modified by Huxley, who insists that the proof, if proof can be
adduced, must be very strong. Mill further modifies it by admitting that ‘‘if a
supernatural event really occurs, it is impossible to maintain that the proof cannot
be accessible to the human faculties.” My contention is that miracles can be
proved like other facts, and I proceed to prove that the account of Christ’s miracles
by the evangelists is true. I. THErR NARRATIVE HAS THE AIR OF TRUTHFULNESS.
When we are examining witnesses, we must assume that they are truthful until we
have found them false; and there are various ways in which they may impress us.
They may give their evidence in such an unsatisfactory manner as to arouse the
suspicion that it is false; or it may be given with such artless simplicity as to con-
vince us that it is true. On turning to the Gospels, we find the miracles of Christ
recorded with as much calmness as if they had been only ordinary events. Their
time and place, their nature, their witnesses, and sometimes their moral effects, are
minutely recorded. The writers have all the appearance of men who are not
making fiction but recording fact. IL. TH piscreLes HAD AMPLE MEANS OF KNOWING
WHETHER THE ALLEGED MIRACLES WERE REALLY WROUGHT. Witnesses may be truthful
and yet give a testimony we cannot accept, because of their having been deceived.
But there are considerations which show that it could not have been thus with the
disciples. The assertion that Christ tried to impose upon them charges Him with
conduct so much at variance with His character as they present it, that we cannot
entertain it for a moment, and the miracles were of such a kind that they could not
be deceived in regard to them. They were numerous, varied, and striking. III.
THE DISCIPLES HAD NO CONOEIVABLE MOTIVE FOR CONSPIRING TO PALM ON THE WORLD A
FALSE HISTORY OF Jesus. It could not exalt their Master to attribute to Him miracles
He never wrought; it conld not exalt themselves in their own estimation to sit
down and carefully construct an elaborate fiction; and they could not expect to
gain over the people to Christ by alleging that He had wrought many miracles
among them both in Judea and Galilee when they knew that the people had not
seen one of them. Just credit them with common sense, and then say if you can
conceive of their trying to palm falsehoods on the world. If they had been knaves
they would not have taken this course, for there was nothing to gain by it; and if
they had been fools they would not have acted as they did. IV. Tury Hap nor
ONLY NO MOTIVE TO GIVE A FALSE ACCOUNT, BUT THEY HAD THE STRONGEST REASONS FOR
Not borne 80, There was no worldly honour or wealth to be got by their testimony;
it was certain to entail the loss of all things. Is it conceivable, then, with the
knowledge of all this that they would publish false accounts. V. Tumy covunp nor
HAVE GAINED ACCEPTANCE FOR THE GOSPELS IF THEY HAD NOTBEEN TRUE. Itis Christ’s
miracles which were appealed to when the apostles urged men to believe in Him,
Consider what believing involved. It meant not only accepting His history in the
Gospels as true, but taking Him to be the Saviour from sin, and leading, in obedi-
ence to His command and after His example, a holy life; and this in the face of
the scorn and contempt of the world, with the prospect of temporal ruin, and the
risk of a violent death, Now, how could men be persuaded to face the sacrifices
all this involved by appeals to miracles which had never been wrought? Corrobora-


,


Ee


CHAP. r11.]} ST. JOHN. 197


tive proof I find in the Jews. They did not deny that He wrought miracles, but
only tried to explain them away. In their Talmud, which dates back to the third
century, it is acknowledged that “mighty works” were wrought by Him, but it is
said that these were the results of magical arts which he had learned in Egypt.
And the heathen bear similar testimony. Celsus admits Christ’s miracles. “ Ye
think Jesus to be the son of God,” he says, ‘‘ because He healed the lame and the
biind, and as ye say raised the dead.”” And when he tries to deprive His miracles of
their value as evidence of a Divine authority, it is by ascribing them, like the Jews,
to His having learned magical artsin Egypt. (A. Oliver, B.A.)


Vers. 3-5. Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God.—
The birth of the new man :—Man is confronted with two facts. 1. The existence
of evil. 2. The hope of deliverance. Christ here shows how this hope may be
realized, viz., by a new birth, and by that alone. I. Way must THIs BE? Simply
because to live in heaven we must have the life of heaven. Man can enter no
world but by a birth, and to enter heaven, therefore, he must be born into it. To
the heavenly world man is dead (Eph. ii. 1). This is not his proper condition, nor
was he created in or for it (Gen. 1. 26, 27). But very soon his life went out. Adam
fell, and begat sons and daughters in his own image; and we, the children of this
fallen head, like the descendants of some king who has been dethroned, by genera-
tions of bondage have well-nigh forgotten the traditions of their father’s glory, and
become utterly unfit to fill his place, All do not feel this death. The fact is
hidden by present cares, pleasures, or occupations. For this reason men love the
world. It keeps them from coming to the painful fact. But God in mercy some-
times removes these things that the salutary pain may be felt, and the necessity of
regeneration seen. II. How can THIs BE? Regeneration, the re-quickening of
God’s life in man, can only be effected by Him who has that life—the Son of God.
1. Regeneration has been wrought for us in Christ. In Him man again received
God’s life by the coming of the eternal life to dwell in the flesh, This was the
beginning, but it could not be perfected until death, by which man in Christ re-
entered heaven. 2. To come where Christ is the self-same thing must be wrought
in us by the Holy Spirit. God’s nature must be first re-quickened by our receiving
the Word (2 Pet. i. 4; John i. 4), and then there must be a delivery from the fallen
old man by the Cross, i.e., through death, to our present nature. 3. Of this new
man, Christ formed in us, Christ Himself is the prelude and figure in the progress
of His humanity from the humiliation at Bethlehem to the glory of heaven.
(Andrew Jukes.) The new birth :—I. WHAT WERE THESE WORDS MEANT TO EXPRESS
ro THz Heprew mnquirer., 1. The Jews were expecting the revelation of the
Messiah and of His kingdom. A few like the venerable Simeon looked forward to
one who should save them from their sins. They believed as a few do now—when
the tendency is to seek for the golden age in legislative enactments and reformed
institutions—that what we want is, not something done for us in ameliorated outward
conditions, but in individual education in grace and righteousness. The multitude,
however, are always trusting in some political measure or social change to bring
about the millenium of national well-being. So did the Jews, who, abiding in
their sins, counted on a revolution of circumstances and a conquering Messiah
who should exalt theland. The constant indulgence of this dream operated to make
them more and more vulgar and coarse in soul, and in Christ’s time they had sunk
to be very mean and low. And now here at length stood the veritable Messiah in
their midst, and of course they could not comprehend Him, Having by prolonged
communion with their carnal idea deadened their spiritual susceptibility, they were
blind to the royalty of Divine character and Divine truth. 2. When. Nicodemus,
therefore, came to Christ for information about the Messianic reign, it was in
reference to the incapacity of his and his countrymen’s worldliness that our Lord
said, ‘In your present moral state you are unable to take in the idea of it, and
you never will be unless you become inwardly another creature. You must begin
to be and live afresh.” The phraseology was not new to Nicodemus, ‘The
Gentile who gave up his heathen creed and embraced Judaism was said to undergo
a new birth. The ruler’s impression, therefore, would be that he must submit to
a revolution in his Messianic ideas as a condition of instruction. How, he asked,
could an old man like himself, whose opinions were too fixed for surrender, do that°
Christ replies in terms which he could not fail to understand, that what was wanted
was not a change of mental view, but of moral heart—an inward cleansing and an
inward experience of Divine influence, without which it was impossible for him


~


198 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. ub
iden Scie Ta Sy See
to perceive the reality or touch the circle of the Messianic kingdom. III. Wuar
{ACHING 18 THERE HERT FoR us? 1, The kingdom of God is simply the reign of God ;
and to enter it is to become subject to Him. But since this reign is everlasting
and universal, and since all must be subject to it, the kingdom of God established
by Christ, and within which we may or may not be found, must have a deeper,
inwarder significance—even the reign of the righteous and merciful God over the
individual affections and will. They, then, are in this kingdom who have come to be
thus governed. 2. To enter that kingdom there must be a new birth; not a mere
modification of original ground, but a fresh foundation—not an alteration of form,
but a change of spirit. Look at those who are manifestly not in this kingdom: is
it not obvious that to become so would not only constitute a great change, but
would necessitate an antecedent great change in order to bring it about? 3.
Christ is the Divine organ for the production of thisinward change. (S.A. Tipple.)
The new birth: —I. Is THERE SUCH A THING AS AN ENTIRE TRANSFORMATION OF CHARACTER?
Certainly. Take a, child of five, when it hasa nascent character. At the beginning
he is selfish, sharp, and irritable ; but after the judicious training of a kind mother,
by the time he is ten he has learned to restrain his temper and is becoming
generous, and living on a different plane from that in which he started. But
take a child who has had no such training, but has been brought up gross and
violent and selfish, is it possible that there shall come a time when, by a sweeping
influence from above, all the past may be effaced and all the future changed? Is
it true that a life of forty years can be revolutionized in a moment? No; buta
change can be begun ina moment. Here is a train rushing on a track which a few
miles beyond will lead to a collision; but the brakesman turns it on to another
line, and the danger is averted. The pressure measured an inch, and the train
passed instantaneously, but its travel on the new track will be longer or shorter
according to circumstances. A man has lived an indolent life up to five-and-
twenty. Then his father breaks, and he finds himself without bread-or habits
of industry. He knows, however, that he is ingenious, and goes to a cabinet-
maker and agrees to stay for two years for board and clothes. The moment he
is indentured he is changed. He was a do-nothing before; he is a do-something
now. He was a man without purpose before, but now he is a man whose life is
re-fashioned on the theory of industry. But did he know his trade? No. Still
the change had taken place. A manis changed the moment his purpose is changed,
if it be really radical and permanent. II. Ler us INQUIRE WHAT CONVERSION IS.
Any change that takes a man away from that which is bad and carries him forward
to that which is good, and gives him a purpose of making this new course a con-
tinuous thing, is conversion. 1. Conversion is sometimes simply Christian culture.
When a child is urged by a mother’s teaching and affection to love goodness, purity,
spiritual excellence, and takes to it with all its little heart, that is conversion ; i.e.,
it is character building on the right foundation. The world will never become
Christian until the cradle is the sanctuary and the mother the minister, and day
in and day out the child is brought up to manhood in the nurture and admoni-
tion of the Lord. Is not the child as susceptible to training in spiritual asin
social things? There is just as much reason in training for virtue and holiness as
in training for any secular end. And it is far better that a child should never
know where the point of transition is, _ This is the truest conversion and the best;
but it does not follow that it is the only conversion. Y%. A man is thrown out
upon the world and gone into vice and crime, or into a lower form of selfish, proud,
unsympathizing life. Oh, it is a blessed thing for him to know that he need not
continue in the downward course for ever, and that there is provision made whereby
when a man has gone wrong he may stop and grow right. Not that he can be
transformed in the twinkling of an eye, but the change may begin when he resolves
to turn from sin to God. III. Is a man conVERTED BY THE POWER OF THE Hony Sprnrr
OR BY HIS OWN wiLL? By both. The Divine Spirit is atmospheric, and becomes
personal when any one appropriates it. The sunlight has in it all harvests, but
we do not reap until that sunlight is appropriated by some root, leaf, blossom.
Some say we must wait for the Spirit ; as reasonable as to say we must wait for the
sun when it is a cloudless afternoon ; and what time any man accepts the influence
of the Divine Spirit and co-operates with it, that moment the work is done by the
stimulus of God acting with the practical energy and will of the human soul. IV.
WHAT ARE THE EVIDENCES OF CONVERSION? 1. The consciousness of a new and
heavenly life, whether we can trace the time of its origin or not, or whether it came
to us through agonies of remorse or the sweet, quiet influences of Christian nurture.


onaP. r11.] ST. JOHN. 199


2. The fruits of the regenerating Spirit—love, joy, peace, &c. 3. Advancement,
growth, development in the things that please God. (H. W. Beecher.) Regenera-
tion:—I. Irs narurE. 1. It is something that isnot merely done for a man, but is
done upon him. The former is justification, which is a change of state in the
reckoning of law, whereas regeneration changes the man himself and gives him a new
character. This being the case, regeneration is conscious, whereas justification is
not. Is there then in each of us such a cheracter of holiness as no natural tempera-
ment, civilization, learning, maxims of prudence or courtesy could have formed,
and without such as is not dishonouring to God to ascribe to the agency of the
Spirit? 2. Regeneration being something which is done on a man’s person, it is
his mind, not his body, which undergoes the change, although the regenerated mind
may have a beneficent effect upon the body. 3. Regeneration being mental, it is
effected, not on the faculties of the understanding, but on the passions and affections
of the will. These faculties do often, as a matter of fact, undergo considerable
improvement, but it is in consequence of the incitement with which regeneration
has supplied them. It willnot make a bad memory good, but it frequently stirs up
asluggish memory. 4. Regeneration is not an organic change, in respect of the
extinction or addition of any passion or power; but entirely a functional change,
in respect of the direction of the powers, so that their emotions are expended on
different objects from those to which they were formerly directed. Take, for
example, the change produced on the passions of love and anger. (1) When
a man is regenerated, he will continue to love objects which he loved before,
but with a change of reasons for loving them. Unregenerate he loved gold
for its ministry to his luxury and pride; regenerate he loves it because it helps
him to honour his Master. (2) A regenerated mind will in some cases entirely
forsake former objects of affection, and expend itself on others about which
he was careless. He may withdraw from former worldly companions, not
because he despises them, for they may be decent and amiable, but because there
is more attraction for him in the fellowship of the saints. (8) The regenerated
mind will in many cases regard objects with feelings the opposite te those with
which it regarded them in its state of nature, loving what it once hated, and hating
what it onceloved. II. Irs cuanactEristics. 1. Itis a change of heart from a state
of carelessness about God, or slavish fear of Him, or enmity against Him, into a
state of filial reverence, confidence and obedience ; of admiration of Him, gratitude
towards Him, dependence on Him, loyalty towards Him. 2. It is a change of
mind in which the name of Jesus was wearied of, or resented, or despised, or
maligned, into a state in which, in union with that of the Eternal Father, it
receives a place ‘“‘above every name,” as most honoured for its excellence, most
endeared for its love, and most loyally reverenced for the legitimacy of its claims.
3. It is a change from a state of mind in which the Name of the Holy Spirit
obtained no acknowledgment, into a state in which it is cherished, in union with
the names of Father and Son, as the Comforter, Counsellor, and Advocate of the
soul, 4. It is a change from a state in which the gratification of the flesh, or the
avoidance of its pains, or the culture of the intellect, were matters of supreme
importance, toa state in which holiness of heart is the principal concern. 5. It is
a change from a state in which this world is the object of greatest interest, into one
where eternity is a name of the greatest fear and the greatest hope. 6. It is a
change from a state of enmity against to one of love for man. 7. It is a change
of feeling with reference to the Church, the Bible, and the means of grace. (W.
Anderson, D.D.) Regeneration : —I. Tor suBJECT WHEREOF CHRIST ENTREATETH. A
second birth. 1. The contents of it. It contains the seeds and habits of all graces ;
as original sin, to which it is opposed, contains the seeds of all sin (James i. Af LB) ie
not only those natural graces we lost in Adam, but whatsoever belongs to our
spiritual being in grace and glory. 2. The extent of it. The whole man, every
part, answering to the infection of original sin. Hence described us leaven
(Matt. xiii.). Sometimes in natural generation a part of the body may be wanting,
but there is no such defect in regeneration. 3. The notes and signs of it. (1)
Spiritual life. As generation produces natural life, so regeneration spiritual life ;
and every generator the life he bears—a man human life, an animal animal life,
God divine life (Eph. iv. 18; 2 Cor. iv. 10; Gal. ii. 20). This life may be dis-
cerned by its properties. (a) Every life seeks its own preservation, so does this life
that which is fit for itself (1 Pet. ii. 2; Col.iii.1). Beasts seek after grass or prey:
worldly men after worldly things; the regenerate after food for the soul and
heavenly honours. (b) Life feels that which is an enemy to it, as sickness. A


. , ) eas aT
200 _ HE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, fowar. om.


a ee eS ee — —


dead man feels nothing. It is an evident sign of spiritual life to feel our corrup-
tions. (c) Life resists her enemy. So in the regenerate the spirit lusts against the
flesh (Gal. v. 17), and rises in opposition to temptation. (d) Life, if it be stronger
than the enemy, is victorious. So the life of God being stronger than sin, the
regenerate overcome the evil one. (e) Life is active and stirring. We know that a
motionless image, although it has the features of the human body, has no life in it.
So professors, without the powerful practice of godliness, have not the life of God
in them. (f) Life, when grown to strength, is generative. So the regenerate
labour to breathe their life into others. (2) Likeness to God. The begetter begets
in his own likeness: so does God (ver. 6; 2 Pet. i. 4; 1 Pet. i. 15,16; Luke vi. 36;
Matt. v. 48). (3) Change. In every generation there is a great change ; existence
from non-existence, order from chaos. So with the Christian (Eph. v. 8; 2 Cor.
vy. 17). (4) Love of God and His children (1 John v. 1, vi. 7, iii. 17). 4. The reason
and ends of the name of it, viz., second birth. (1) To show our passiveness in
conversion. (2) That as in generation, so in regeneration there is proceeding from
little beginnings to great perfection. (3) That as the first birth is not without pains,
neither is the second. (4) To show us the hopelessness of our nature. Mending
will not do, we must be new born. II. WHat Hz arrirms or rt, that itis necessary
to salvation (Rev. xxi. 27; Heb. xii. 14). This necessity is set forth—1. The
certainty. Verily (Amen) is doubled for greater certainty (Gen. xli. 32). 2. The
universality. (J. Dyke.) Regeneration :—The expression ‘‘born again” was
political. Gentiles were unclean, and to become Jewish citizens had to be baptized,
and so cleansed became sons of Abraham by anew birth. ‘“ Naturalization ” means
the same thing. Finding the ceremony on foot, Christ takes advantage of it to
represent the naturalization of a soul in the Kingdom of Heaven; taking water as
the symbol, and the Spirit as the real cleansing power. I. CHRIST REQUIRES OF ALL
SOME GREAT AND IMPORTANT CHANGE AS THE NECESSARY CONDITION OF THEIR SALVATION.
1. Not, of course, of those who are already subjects of it, and many are so from
their earliest infancy, having grown up into Christ by the preventing grace of their
nurture in the Lord. But this is no real exception. Intelligence is not more
necessary to our humanity than is second birth to salvation. 2. Many cannot
admit this, It savours of hardness, and does not correspond with what they see of
natural character. How can moral and lovely persons need to be radically
changed? That depends upon whether the one thing is lacking or not. If it be
Christ’s love will not modify His requirement. 3. Christianity is based upon the
fact of this necessity. It is not any doctrine of development or self-culture, but a
salvation. The very name Jesus is a false pretence, unless He has something to do
for the race which the race cannot do for itself. 4. But how can we imagine that
God will stand on any such rigid terms? He is very good and very great; may we
not risk the consequences? (1) It is sufficient to answer that Christ understood
what was necessary, and there is no harshness in Him. (2) Such arguments are a
plea for looseness, which is not the manner of God. He is the exactest of beings.
Is character a matter that God will treat more loosely than the facts and forces of
nature? If He undertakes to construct a beatific state, will He gather in a jumble
of good and bad and call it heaven? (3) We can ourselves see that a very large
class of men are not in a condition to enter into the Kingdom of God. They haye
no purity or sympathy with it. Who can think of these as melting into a celestial
society? And if not, there must, be a line drawn somewhere, and those who are on
one side will not be on the other: which is the same as saying that there must be
exact terms of salvation. (4) We feel in our own consciousness, while living a mere
life of nature, that we are not fit to enjoy the felicities of a perfectly spotless world.
Our heart is not there. (5) When we give ourselves to some new purpose of amend-
ment, we do it by constraint. What we want is inclination to duty, and this is the
being born of God. II. Tum nature or THE cHANGE. 1. Let’some things which
confuse the mind be excluded. (1) There is a great deal of debate over its sup-
posed instantaneousness, But a change from bad in kind to good in kind implies
a beginning, and therefore instantaneous, but not necessarily conscious. (2) Some
people regard it as gradual. But this is to make it a matter of degrees., (3) Much
is said of previous states of conviction and distress, then of light and peace bursting
suddenly on the soul. Something of this may be among the causes and conse-
quences, but has nothing to do with the radical idea. 2. Observe how the Scriptures
speak of it, Never as a change of degrees, an amendment of life, but a being born
again, & spiritual reproduction, passing from death unto life, putting off the old
man, transformation, all of which imply a change of kind. Had redemption been


OHAP. 111.] ST. JOHN. 201
a mere making of us better, it would have been easy to say so. The gospel says
the contrary. Growth comes, but there can be no growth without birth. 3. Try
and accurately conceive the interior nature of the change. (1) Every man is con-
scious that when he sins there is something besides the mere words or acts—viz.,
the reason for them. (2) Sometimes the difficulty back of the wrong action is con-
ceived to be theman himself, constitutionally evil whoneeds to have the evil taken out
of him and something new inserted. But this would destroy personal identity, and
be the generation of another man. (3) Sometimes the change is regarded only as
the change of the governing purpose. But it is not this that we find to be the seat
of the disorder, but a false, weary, downward, selfish love. We have only to will
to change our purpose, but to change our love is a different matter. (4) Every
man’s life is shaped by his love. If it be downward, all his life will be downward.
Hence, so much is said about change of heart. (5) Still, this cannot be effected
without another change of which it is only an incident. In his unregenerate state
man is separated from God and centred in himself. He was not made for this, but to.
live in and be governed by God. When, then, heis restored to the living connection
with God he is born again. His soul now enters into rest, rest in love, rest in God.
III. THe MANNER IN WHICH THE CHANGE I8 EFFECTED. 1. Negatively: (1) To main-
tain that it can be manipulated by a priest in baptism is solemn trifling. (2) Equally
plain is it that this is not to be effected by waiting for some new creative act. ‘he
change passes only by free concurrence with God. (3) Nor is it accomplished by
mere willing apart from God. A man can as little drag himself up into a reigning
love as drag a Judas into Paradise. 2. Positively: (1) You must give up every
purpose, &c., which takes you away from God. (2) There must be reaching after
God, an offering up of the soul to Him, which is faith. (3) Let Christ be your help
in this acting of faith to receive God (see vers. 14-16). (H. Bushmell, D.D.)
Regeneration :—I. Irs nature. 1. Negatively: (1) Not baptism, as witness Simon
Magus. (2) Not reformation, as witness the case of many an unspiritual but truly
moral man. Regeneration is the cause, reformation the effect. Nicodemus did not
need reformation. 2. Positively: An entire change of nature. (1) a renovation of
all the powers of the mind; (2) a new direction to the faculties of the soul; (3) a
restoration to the image of God. II. Irs cuaracteristics. 1. It is instantaneous.
There can be no medium between life and death. It differs from sanctification,
which is progressive. 2. It is mysterious. We cannot tell how it takes place, or
when or where it will take place. 3. It is universal. It affects the whole man, and
governs all his character, powers, and conduct. III. Is EvipENcES. 1. The con-
dition of the regenerate is altered—the dead are made alive (Eph. ii. 1); the blind
see (Eph. v. 8); the servants of Satan become Christ’s free men ; His enemies His
friends; the proud humble. 2. Their views are changed (1) concerning themselves ;
(2) Christ; (3} sin; (4) heaven. 8. Their pursuits are different. 4. Their enjoy-
ments arise from a different source. 5. Their motives. IV. Irs necrssrty. 1.
Without a change of heart we shall not be identified with the Church militant ;
2. With the Church triumphant hereafter. Reflections: 1. To the unregenerate,
“Ye must be born again.” 2. To those who are resting in good works, &.,
“Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision,” &. 3. To the regenerate. ‘Show
forth the praises’of Him who hath called you.” (R. Kemp.) Regeneration :—I.
WHEREIN DOES REGENERATION consist? In a radical supernatural change, the seat
of which is the heart. 1. A just perception of spiritual objects, of the character and
perfections of God, the Person and work of Christ, the gospel plan of salvation, the
excellency of holiness, and the evil of sin. On all these the conceptions of the
human mind are defective and erroneous, even with the light of reason and the aid
of philosophy. 2. A taste for, and delight in, spiritual objects. This is given, not
acquired. It may and must be cultivated, but regeneration is its beginning. I.
WHENCE DOES THE IMPORTANCE AND NECESSITY OF THIS CHANGE APPEAR? 1. From the
uniform teaching of Scripture. (1) When the object of the ministry is described, it
is ‘*to turn them from darkness to light,” &c. (2) When the power of the Word is
spoken of, it is thus—‘‘ Being born again... . by the Word of God.” (3) When
the character of the saints is described, they are “created anew,” &c. 2. From the
nature and employments of the heavenly kingdom. 3. From the utter unsuitableness
of the unregenerate for the society, employment and pleasures of the kingdom, 4,
From the value and preciousness of thesoul. (W. Deering.) | The needful change im-
plied in regeneration :—The expression “to be born again ” implies—I. A VAST MORAL
CHANGE, the impartation of a principle of spiritual life and godliness to a heart
entirely destitute of it, through which new affections, views, and state of the will


202 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [eHap. It.


ee eS


are produced. The characteristics of the change are—I. The self-righteous man
learns to trust in the Redeemer. 2. The enemy of God now loves Him. 3. The


obdurate becomes penitent. 4. The disobedient becomes obedient. 5. The earthly-


minded now seeks things above. II. Tue aczency. 1. Not by baptism, thought,
reading, the following of good examples, fear, the intrinsic efficacy of prayer, or
the merit of any reforms and confessions. 2. But by the Holy Ghost. Various
means may concur, but He is the solitary agent. IIL Tue necessrry oF THE
CHANGE is seen in—1. The opposition which it meets with from the world. 2. The
agent. If it be wrought by the Spirit it must be necessary; for “if any man have
not the Spirit of Christ,” &. 3. Natural disqualification for the kingdom of God.
Conclusion. 1. Make this a practical question. 2. Never forget that the new birth
is accomplished only by God. 3. Think of the great blessings it brings. (B. W.
Noel, M.A.) Regeneration necessary to a capacity for heaven:—Consider what
heaven is. I. Socmmry wira Curist. Christ prayed that those whom the Father
gave Him might be with Him. Paul tells us that we shall be for ever with the
Lord, and John that the glorified see Christ’s face. Should you like to be with
Christ at this moment? With that Prophet to whom you will not listen! That
High Priest whose atonement you despise! That King on whose laws you trample!
II. [HE ABODE OF THOSE WHO LOvE Curist. ‘‘ Kye hath not seen,” &c. Do you
imagine that it will give you joy to be with those whose every pulse beats in admira-
tion of Christ? Try itnow. Would you choose their society as that which would
give you pleasure? Do you not shun it, because your heart is alienated from
Christ. III. WHERE THE PURE IN HEART ARE, and the spirits of just men made
perfect ; where there is no fault. Are you ready for that company? Why there is
not one of the habits and sentiments of heaven that does not thwart and contradict
and condemn your own. Conclusion. 1. Do you venture to think that death will
effect a change? The Word of God forbids the expectation. 2. If by any means
you could enter heaven as you are, it would be your hell. (Ibid.) Regeneration
necessary to admission into heaven :—The reasons which illustrate the statement of
our text are most plain. J. Tur cHaRAcTER oF GOD WOULD BE DEGRADED by the
admission of the unregenerate into heaven. God placed man here for His glory,
endowed him with many faculties, lavished His love, revealed His will, and for this
purpose, a purpose which man has frustrated wholesale by doing the abominable
thing that He hates. II. Ir wounp PUT THE GREATEST DISHONOUR ON THE NAME
or Curist, who has come into the world to die for sinners, and offers them peace
here and glory hereafter. Notwithstanding all this, He is actually or virtually
rejected. ‘T'o bring the unregenerate to heaven, therefore, would be on some other
ground than that Christ has died. Can God the Father doit? Nay, it is His will
that all should honour the Son as they honour Him. III. Ir wounp pisHonour
rau Hony Sprrrr, whose work is to convince of sin, sanctify, and prepare men for
heaven. All this is set before the unregenerate ; and instead of receiving His-grace,
they do despite unto it; and those who do this, the apostle tells us, will die with-
out mercy. IV. Iv wouLp INFLICT A WOUND ON THE HAPPINESS OF EVERY GLORIFIED
saint. It would be like the introduction of a pestilence into that pure climate. The
story of Hden would be renewed, and heaven ultimately become like earth. (Ibid.)
Lhe regenerate endowed with a meetness for heaven and a title to it :—As certainly
as the unregenerate are excluded from heaven shall the regenerate find admission
there. I. Wuat 1s tHe tirLkE? The merit of Christ applied to the soul of the
sinner. The first characteristic of a regenerate soul is that he believes. So he
who is regenerate, being a believer in Christ, has the one title to everlasting life.
Il, Wuar 1s THE Preparation. 1, Love to the Saviour, “Whom haying not seen
ye love.” How can they do otherwise? And they prove their love by the applica-
tion of every test that is available—zeal, delight in communion with Him, friend-
ship with His people, cbedience to His will. 2. As the glorified are also made
perfect in holiness, the regenerate are being sanctified, and their hearts are being
purified to see God. 3. As in heaven God’s “‘ servants serve Him,” so the regenerate
are prepared to join them by holy, ungrudging, joyful activity. 4. If it be a
characteristic of heaven that its inhabitants are lifted above all that is low in the
inferior world and are occupied with spiritual pleasures and employments, so the
regenerate, led by the Spirit, set their affections on things above. III. Tuts 18
TRUE OF THE WHOLE MULTITUDE OF THOSE WHO ARE REGENERATE BY GRACE. The
promise is not made to vigorous faith and experienced piety, and unusual attain-
ments, but to faith in its least beginnings, to holiness in its simplest elements, to the
very first and fecblest work of Divine grace. In conclusion. The danger of the


OHAP, u1.] ST. JOHN. 203


—


unregenerate serves to fasten on our minds the importance of this great change,
and the blessedness attached to it should animate us to seek it. (Ibid.) The
means of becoming regenerate:—I. THE agent is God alone, by His Spirit. If
therefore any man denies this work of the Spirit, he has every reason to believe he
will be lost. II. The mmsrrumenrtatity which the Spirit uses. _1. The Word of God,
principally as a revelation of the grace of Christ. The Spirit takes of the things
of Christ, and manifests them to the soul. ‘Of His own will begat He us by the
word of truth.” 2. But while we are called to use this instrumentality, there are
many habits of the ungodly man which incapacitate him from using the Scriptures
well, and which must be removed. Levity, worldliness, pride; every habit of known
sin must be broken off. 3. The Scripture next directs—(1) To a course of duty and
the formation of such habits which becomes a man who hopes to become a child of
God. (2) The abandonment of ensnaring society, and the use of the various
ordinances of religion. IL. Tar aoruan process. In the use of the various means
the Spirit meets the unconverted and—1. Humbles him with a revelation of Christ,
and convicts him of the sin of unbelief, and leads him toa realization of his ruined
condition. 2. Creates the desire for salvation, and helps him to wrestle with God
for it. 3. Instructs and assists the penitent to embrace the offer of salvation. He
believes in Christ, and commits himself to Christ. 4. Believing in the Son of God,
he is admitted into the Divine family. And then—5. Leads the now renewed person
to gratitude and delight in the commands of God; and never leaves him till that
regeneration is completed in entire renovation, when he re-attains to the lost
image of God, and is conducted through grace to glory. (Ibid.) Repentance
before theology :—The way to begin a Christian life is not to study theology. Piety
before theology. Right living will produce right thinking. Yet many men, when
their consciences are aroused, run for catechisms, and commentaries, and systems.
They do not mean to be shallow Christians. They intend to be thorough, if they
enter upon the Christian life at all. Now, theologies are well in their place; but
repentance and love must come before all other experiences. First a cure for your
sin-sick soul, and then theologies. Suppose a man were taken with the cholera,
and, instead of sending for a physician, he should send to a book-store, and buy all
the books which have been written on the human system, and, while the disease was
working in his vitals, he should say, ‘Tl not put myself in the hands of any of
these doctors. I shall probe this thing to the bottom.” Would it not be better for
him first to be cured of the cholera? (H. W. Beecher.) The need of sinners is to
be born again :—Suppose they could be born again. Suppose they could be made
to love the things which they now hate, and hate the things which they now love.
New hearts and right spirits are the need of London outcasts. How can these be
produced? In the hand of God the Holy Ghost, this is exactly what faith works
in the heart. Here is a watch. ‘It wants cleaning.’ Yes, clean it. “It does
not go now. It wants a new glass.” Well, put in a new glass. “It does not
go any the more. It wants new hands.” Get new hands by all means. Still it
does not go. What is the mattor with it? The maker says that it needs a main-
spring. There’s the seat of the evil: nothing can be right till that is rectified.
(C. H. Spurgeon.) The heart must be changed :—A man may beat down the bitter
fruit from an evil tree until he is weary; whilst the root abides in strength and
vigour, the beating down of the present fruit will not hinder it from bringing forth
more. This is the folly of some men; they set themselves with all earnestness
and diligence against the appearing eruption of lust, but leaving the principle and
root untouched, perhaps unsearched out, they make but little or no progress in this
work of mortification. (John Owen.) Regeneration preceded by conviction :—If
you had an old house, and any friend of yours were to say, ‘‘ John, I will build you
a new house. When shallI begin?” ‘ Oh!” you might say, ‘‘ begin next week to
build the new house.” At the end of the week he has pulled half your old house
down. “Oh,” say you, “this is what you call building me a new house, ts it? You
are causing me great loss: I wish I had never consented to your proposal.” He
replies, ‘* You are most unreasonable: how am I to build you a new house on this
spot without taking the old one down?” And so it often happens that the grace
of God does seem in its first work to make a man even worse than he was before,
because it discovers to him sins which he did not know to be there, evils which had
been concealed, dangers never dreamed of. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Regeneration
defined :—It is that great change which God works in the soul, when He brings t
into life; when He raises it from the death of sin to the life of righteousness. It is
the change wrought in the whole soul by the Almighty Spirit of God, when itis


' ye


204 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [oHar. mt.
“ created anew in Christ Jesus,” when it is ‘trenewed after the image of God, in
righteousness and true holiness” ; when the love of the world is changed into the
love of God, pride into humility, passion into meekness; hatred, envy, malice, into
a sincere, tender, disinterested love for all mankind. In a word, it is that change
whereby the earthly, sensual, devilish mind is turned into the “ mind which was in
Christ Jesus.” This is the nature of the new birth. ‘* So is every one that is born.
of the Spirit.” (J. Wesley.) The need of regeneration :—If I enter a place where }
there is a musical performance, my ticket entitles me to cross the threshold; but if
I have no musical ear, I can have no enjoyment. In the same manner, if you have
aright in something done for you that will warrant and enable you to cross the
threshold of heaven, yet if you have no heart prepared for the exercises and the joys
of heaven it can be no happiness to you. (Dr. Cumming.) The heart must be
changed :—A man may be reformed in his habits and yet not be transformed in his
heart. When the icicles are hanging in winter from the eaves of a cottage, will it
suffice that the inhabitant should take his axe and hew them down one by one till
the fragments are scattered in powdery ruin upon the pavement beneath? Will the
work so done be done effectually ? Surely a few hours’ warm shining of the sun
would do it ina far better and muck shorter way? (Ryland.) Conversion a change
of nature :—How foolish and ignorant we should deem an artificer who, having taken
a piece of iron, should melt and mould, file and polish it, and then imagine that it
has become gold. It shines, it is true, but is its brilliancy a proof that it is no
longer iron? And does not God require pure and refined gold, that is to say, a
perfect righteousness and a perfect holiness! Say, ye sages of this world, shall any
metal but that of the sanctuary find currency in heaven? Or shall God mistake
what is false for what is genuine, and shall He confound the hypocritical outward
show of human morality with that everlasting life which partakes of His own
nature, and which the Holy Spirit alone implants within the soul which He has
new created ? Regeneration more than reformation :—It is not mere reformation ;
not the renovation of that which was dilapidated—the repairing of the old house,
and making it as good as new; but it is a reconstruction of the house upon a new
foundation—the house itself being built anew from that foundation to the copestone.
The meaning of this, however, is not that the renewed man is then a different being
as to his identity. The house in which the leprosy had become a fretting plague,
when taken down every stone of it, and built again in due time, was not a different
house from that which it had previously been. The materials were still the same
—the design and form were the same even to the most minute details; and, in the
case of the new birth, the “ spirit, and soul, and body,” are the same in personal
identity, but they are ‘‘made new.” (J. Beith, D.D.) Regeneration a great
change :—Dr. Leifchild tells us that he once met a lad twelve years old at a toll-
gate, who had a Testament in his hand. ‘Can you read it?” inquired the doctor.
“To be sure I can. I can read to you this, ‘Except a man be born again, he can-
not seo the kingdom of God.’” ‘What does that mean, my boy?” ‘The lad
quickly replied. ‘It means a great change. To be born again means something
here” (laying his hand upon his breast), ‘‘and the kingdom of God means some-
thing up yonder.” That boy had got hold of the very core of Bible theology. But
what was so clearly revealed to that lad in his Bible was yet a mystery and a puzzle
to the Jewish ruler, The physical effects of regeneration :—In the case of the
drunkard there are two diseases in him: one of the mind, the other of the body;
the one a depravation of his affections, the other a vitiation of his nerves. Now
when such a person comes to be regenerated, the process does not cure the
disease ; the craving continues for some time; and when at last the nerves may be
restored to a healthful tone, and the regenerated man is no longer tormented with
the woeful thirst, this is not the result of any healing power put forth by the
regenerating Spirit on his bodily organization, but the natural physiological effect
of his regenerated mind having resolutely adopted habits of sobriety. So it is with
all other habits and appetites. Itis the mind alone on which regeneration acts,
and the mind when changed reduces the rebellious flesh to order. (W. Anderson, D.D.)
Lhe terms of regeneration :—It is called a renovation of the soul, or its being made
new; a transformation of the soul on its being changed into another likeness; a
translating of the soul, or its being brought from one position and placed in
another ; a quickening of the soul, or its receiving new life; a resurrection of the
soul, or its being raised from the dead; a new creation of the soul, or its being
created anew by Him who made it; the washing of the soul, or its purification from
defilement; the healing of the soul, or its deliverance from disease; the liberation


omar. 111.] ‘ST. JOHN. 205


of the soul, or its emancipation from bondage; the awakening of the soul, or its
being aroused out of sleep; and it is compared to the change wrought in the blind
when they receive their sight; on the deaf when their hearing is restored; on the
lepers when they are cleansed; on the dead when they are raised to life. (J.
Buchanan, D.D.) The necessity of regeneration :—If birth and religious advant-
ages could do anything to put a man into the kingdom of God, Nicodemus could
surely claim to be there. His descent went back without a break to Abraham, to
whom it was pledged that in his seed should the whole earth be blessed; he
belonged to a nation marked off as God’s peculiar people by deliverances and
promises such as belonged to no others. If ever a man could claim to belong to
God by religious observance and association this man could. Upon him was the
sign and seal of his belonging to God, the mark of that initial sacrament with all
its significance; he was constant in prayer, in the study of the Scriptures, and in
the observance of the law. If external ceremonies could set a man in the kingdom
of God, none could stand more securely than Nicodemus, who through every day
and every hour of his life was subject to all kind of religious exercises, and cere-
monies carried out with a scrupulous jealousy. If religion is in notions, scriptural
and orthodox notions, in reverent feelings, in devout prayers, in generous senti-
ments, here then is a man in need of nothing. Yet thisis the man to whom it is
spoken, ‘' Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again he cannot see
the kingdom of God.” What then, was all this a cumbersome folly? This Jewish
arrangement of training and worship; circumcision, altars, priests, sacrifices,
prophecies—was it all no good, even though God Himself had arranged and com-
manded it? Even so; it was all useless, unless there is something more, and
greater than it all. No good, precisely as food and light and air, as education and
commerce and civilization, are no good to a dead man. Put life into him—then
all these things shall wait upon him and minister to him and bless him. But
he must live first. Sacraments, services, sermons, Seriptures, creeds, may
minister to life—but there must be life first of all. (Mark Guy Pearse.)
The great change :—I. Irs xatuRe: entirely spiritual. 1. In its subject—the soul.
It is not an external reform merely, but an internal renovation—a change of mind
and heart taking effect—(1) On the understanding, when it is enlightened. (2) On
the conscience, when itisconvinced. (3) On the will, when it is subdued. (4) On
the affections, when they are refined and purified. (5) On the whole man, when he
is transformed by the renewing of his mind and created anew. 2. In its Author—
the Spirit of God. It belongs to Him—(1) To enlighten the darkened understand-
ing by shining into it. (2) To awaken the slumbering conscience by convincing it
of sin, (3) To subdue our rebellious wills, by making us willing in the day of His
power. (4) To take away the stony heart and give us hearts of flesh. 3. In its
means—the Word of God. II. Irs concomrrants. 1. Precedent instruction, con-
viction, repentance, faith, 2. Consequent progressive sanctification. II. Irs
necEssity. 1. From the fallen nature of man, An unconverted man is out of the
kingdom of God, and is incapable of entering it until born again. 2. From the
character of God. No unregenerate man can enter the kingdom of God, because—
(1) It is impossible for God to do what implies a manifest contradiction, such as is
involved in the idea that a fleshly mind can, without a radical change, become the
subject of a spiritual kingdom. (2) Because it isimpossible for God to lie, and He
has expressly said that we must be converted or condemned. God is said to re-
pent, but only. when man himself repents, (3) Because it is impossible for God to
deny Himself or act in opposition to His infinite perfections. The supposition that
a sinful man may enter His kingdom implies that He must—(a) Rescind the law of
His moral government. (b) Depart from His declared design in the scheme of
redemption. (c) Reverse the moral constitution of man. (d) Alter the whole
character of His kingdom. (J. Buchanan, D.D.) The lesson by night :—I. The
clear deliverance, by implication at least, on the doctrine of THE COMPLETE DE-
PRAVITY OF HUMAN NATURE. It is to this man with his morality and unblemished
life, a teacher of the only true religion, and not to some sin-defiled creature, that
the Saviour speaks. Christ knew what was in man, and this is in man. Tl. Tue
RADICAL CHARACTER OF THE RELIGION OF CHRIST. In order to meet this great need
religion goes to the root of everything within us, transforming all and ‘“‘creates us
anew in Christ Jesus,” III. Tum INEXORABLE CHARACTER OF THIS REQUIREMENT-
It is a law of the kingdom of Christ never to be annulled. 1. One man comes
strong in life’s integrities. 2. Another radiant in social charities. 3. Another
religious according to his own ideas. They see the gates open, but the law shines


206 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. mr.
above it, “Except,” &e. These virtues do not go far enough, and leave untouched
life’s centre and essence. At the root of all virtues is the claim which God has on
the love of His creatures. A just man who “‘robs God”’!, A tender-hearted man
who has no love for Jesus Christ! A religious man who expects to get into
the kingdom by outward ordinances! What contradictions! IV. Although
this law is radical and inexorable, THERE IS NOTHING UNIFORM AS TO TIMES AND
moves. There is endless variety. It may be by love or fear, with difficulty or ease,
&e. It follows the lines of our individuality, and is suitable to our circumstances.
V. THIS GREAT CHANGE I8 VERY BLESSED. Why should it be regarded as a stern
necessity? It is a glorious privilege. It is described as seeing or entering a king-
dom of which God is King; as being born again into the family of which God is
Father. Philosophy tells meto think again and be wiser, and I think till my brain
is giddy. Morality tells me I must act again and be better, and I whip my con-
science, but make little way. Philanthrophy tells me to feel again with quicker
sympathy. But in that I fail. Priesthood and priestcraft tell me that I must
pray, &c., again. Yes! but the burden of it. Jesus tells me I must be born
again. That is gospel for me. (A. Raleigh, D.D.) Regeneration, or the
second birth:—I. Wat 1s REGENERATION? 1. Not a ritual or ceremonial change.
Outward washing cannot confer inward grace. The spirit birth is necessary
for admission into the spiritual kingdom. 2. Not morality. Good citizen-
ship, honesty, integrity, natural affection, may elevate and bless this human
life; but more is necessary to qualify for saintly and Divine fellowship in the
upper world. 3. Not self-culture. 4. Regeneration is coming into the Divine
realm, into the spiritual kingdom, into right relations with God and heaven,
through Jesus Christ. It is a new life, above the senses, above the earthly, above
the material. It is the faith faculty. No more aliens, but children. II. How may
I know THAT I HAVE BEEN BORN AGAIN, THAT I am A CHILD OF Gop? 1. The direct
witness of the Holy Ghost. 2. The conjoint testimony of our own spirit. My
consciousness affirms the fact. 3. The predominance of grace. The new govern-
ment is supreme. The renewed soul stands ready for orders. 4. There will be
difficulty in sinning. The new nature shrinks from sin as a tender and sensitive
plant shrinks from the north wind’s blast. 5. There will be affinity for God.
Fellowship with Father and Son. 6. There will be Christian joy and comfort.
The rapture of a soul rescued from sin and hell, and adopted into God’s family.
Til. THE NECESSITY OF REGENERATION. Spiritual life is an essential condition for
the spiritual kingdom. Without it you can have no vital union with God, and no
knowledge of the spiritual life. What would you do in heaven with an unregene-
rated nature? A stranger in a strange land; a beggar amid bounty; blind amid
beauty ; deaf amid waves of song; hungry, yet with no taste for heavenly joys—
you would be out of place there. (C. P. Masden, D.D.)


Vers. 4-8. How can a man be born when he is old ?—The incredulous listener :—
I, THE AMAZED INTERROGATION (ver. 4). 1. Its origination: astonishment and
perplexity. 2. Its intention: investigation and inquiry. 3. Its explanation: the
new birth an impossibility. Il. Tae supiime Enucrpation. 1, The exposition
(ver. 5), in which are noticeable—(1) That the former truth is repeated with the old
solemnity, authority, particularity, universality, certainty. Christ conceded nothing
to the rank and character of His interlocutor. (2) That the hard truth is explained
with much simplicity, fulness, kindness, and condescension, also furnishing a
pattern for His followers in general and His official servants in particular. 2. The
argumentation (ver. 6). The law of propagation is one throughout the realm of
animated existence—every creature after its kind. (1) In the sphere of matter like
produces like (Matt. vii. 16; Luke vi. 44). (2) In the loftier domain of man
nature can never rise higher than itself. III. Tuz susrrme miusrrarion. 1. The
natural phenomenon: the wind, selected as an emblem of the Spirit, probably
because of—(1) Its etherial character; (2) Its free motion; (3) Its inscrutable
mystery. 2. The spiritual interpretation (ver. 8). The Spirit’s grace is like the
wind in respect of—(1) Its origin, coming from heaven. (2) Its sovereignty, blow-
ing where it listeth. (3) Its movement, going softly. (4) Its influence, pene-
trating and quickening. (5) Its results. Lessous—1. The natural blindness of
the understanding in the region of the Spirit. 2. The hopefulness of those who
bring their intellectual and moral difficulties to Christ. 3. The danger of reasoning
that what is impossible in nature must be impossible in grace. 4. The moral im.
potence of human nature. 5. The necessity of regeneration. (ZT. Whitelaw, D.D.)


a a a ee


ie ha


Sie


CHAP. Mi1.] ST. JOHN. 207
ee Ne el
The reasoning with Nicodemus:—I. A RE-ASSERTION OF THE PREVIOUS DOCTRINE
WITH SOME CHANGE IN THE FORM OF EXPRESSION. 1. We must be born of water.
This describes a change of condition, from guilt and condemnation to righteous-
ness and acceptance. “ Water’ emblematically represents Christ’s obedience as
the substitute of those who are saved by Him, and to be “ born” represents the
application of that obedience for salvation. Baptism is the symbol of this change
of condition. 2. We must be born of the Spirit, which describes a change of
character as distinguished from a change in condition. This change may be small
in its beginnings. It is the origin which has progress unto perfection for its com-
pletion. With this new life and its growth will come the gradual decay of all
unholy principles, until they are wholly destroyed. II. AN ARGUMENT IN SUPPORT
OF THE NECESSITY OF REGENERATION. 1. That which is born of the flesh is flesh.
(1) Flesh means our fallen nature—the source and seat of evil within the soul. The
body is but the instrument through which the inherent corruption acts, (2) This
nature can never be anything else than that which Scripture declares it to be.
Treat it as you will, improve it by what cultivation you can, it is flesh still, 2.
That which is born of the Spirit is spirit. (1) This is to have a new life and a
new nature, not to have some faculties set against others, but the possession of all
the faculties by the Hoiy Spirit, and their renewal in the image of God. (A. Beith
D.D.) Nicodemus :—I. Nicodemus did not deny the doctrine of the new birth ;
he merely started a difficulty. He was a literalist, and doubted the exactness of
the term born: it was too specific in its common meaning to be literally applied to
anything else. Christ’s answer was consistent with His whole method of teaching.
The strangeness of His language excited attention, provoked thought, and awakened
controversy, and so through a process of inquiry and strife men entered into the
mystery of His rest. It seems as if every one must at some time have doubts and
anguish of heart respecting Christ and His kingdom. II. Nicodemus was one of
those persons who always ground their course on facts. The facts which he had
observed led to the conclusion that Christ was a teacher come from God, because of
His miracles: an admission of the utmost importance. If the works are from God,
what of the words? Yet important as the admission was, Christ returned an
answer which apparently had no bearing on the subject of miracles; and yet He
did not evadeit. He showed incidentally the true position and value of His mi ghty
works. They were symbolic of one great miracle, and unless a man is the subject
of that miracle, his belief in other miracles will not admit him into the kingdom of
heaven. Other miracles were to be looked at, were public, material, gave new views :
the miracle of regeneration was to be felt, was personal, moral, and gave new life.
II. This call from cutward circumstances to the deepest experience of the soul
naturally suggested the question “ How can these things be?” Christ’s answer
does not clear the original mystery. His meaning is that we are not to deny results
because we cannot understand processes. We may see a renewed life, but cannot
seg the renewing spirit. In His metaphor Christ found a common law in nature and
in grace; the Spirit is the same whether He direct the course of the wind or renew
the springs of the heart. Man occupies an outside position. There are limitations
to his knowledge. He does not understand himself. The atom baffles him. The
wise man only knows his own folly. IV. These considerations show the spirit in
which the subject of the new birth should be approached—one of self-restraint, of
conscious limitation of ability, of preparedness to receive not a confirmation of
speculative opinion but a Divine revelation. The shock of this new life comes
differently. 1. Sometimes on the intellectual side, as in the case of Nicodemus,
throwing into confusion the theories of a lifetime. 2. Sometimes on the selfish
instincts, as in the case of the rich young man who cannot give his possessions to
the poor. 3. Sometimes on the natural sensibilities, as in the case of Bunyan.
Hence the folly of setting up a common standard. A man only knows the agonies
of the new birth by giving up what he prizes most. V. What Jesus Christ has left
a mystery it would be presumption to attempt to explain. ; We hear the sound of
the wind, we cannot follow it all the way. Can we explain how a child is born?
when the child is displaced by the man? the origin and succession of ideas? Yet
as the sound of the wind is heard, so there are results which prove the fact of our
regeneration. These of course may be simulated, just as & watch may be altered
by the hands and not by the regulator, or as the ruddiness of the cheek may be
artificial and not natural. The regenerate man is known by the spirit which ani-
mates his life. 1. He lives by rule, but it is the unwritten and unchanging rule of
love. 2. He advances in orderliness, but it is the orderliness not of mechanical


208 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omar. mm.


stipulation, but of vigorous and affluent life. 3. He is constantly strengthened and
ennobled by an inextinguishable ambition to be filled with all the fulness of
Christ. (Joseph Parker, D.D.) Natural ignorance :—Water riseth no higher
than the spring whence it came; so the natural man can ascend no higher than
nature. (J. Trapp.) Amazing ignorance :—It is said that Robert Hall once
visited a poor man in his sickness; and, during his conversation with him, the man
every now and then knocked with a stick the board at the head of the bed. Mr.
Hall, rather annoyed by this interruption, asked his reason for such strange con-
duct. The man replied, that the Bible commanded him to knock, and it should be
opened unto him. Ignorance in learned men:—‘I used frequently,” says Cecil,
“‘to visit Dr. Bacon at his living near Oxford. He would frequently say to me,
‘What are you doing? What are your studies?’ ‘I am reading so-and-so.’
‘You are quite wrong. When I was young I could turn any piece of Hebrew into
Greek verse with ease. But when I came into this parish, and had to teach
ignorant people, I was wholly at a loss; I had no furniture. They thought me a
great man, but that was their ignorance, for I knew as little as they did of what it
was most important for them to know. Study chiefly what you can turn to good
account in your future life.” Ignorance of religion :—Samuel Wesley visited one
of his parishioners as he was upon his dying bed—a man who had never missed
going to church in forty years. ‘‘ Thomas, where do you think your soul will go?”
“ Soul! soul!” said Thomas. ‘‘ Yes, sir,” said Mr. Wesley, ‘* do you not know what
your soulis?”’ ‘Ay, surely,” said Thomas ; ‘* why it is a little bone in the back
that lives longer than the body.” ‘So much,” says John Wesley, who related it
on the authority of Dr. Lupton, who had it from his father, ‘‘ had Thomas learned
from hearing sermons, and exceedingly good sermons, for forty years.” (Anecdotes
of the Wesleys.) Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit.—The Holy
Spirit’s work :—The translation of the soul from “death to life,” “from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,” is ascribed to the Holy Spirit. I.
Its necessity. 1. As natural birth is necessary to our present existence, so also is
spiritual birth to our spiritual existence. 2, Unless we are born of the Spirit we
‘“ cannot see the kingdom of God.” Spiritual things are spiritually discerned. 3.
Without this birth no man ‘can enter the kingdom of God.” Nominal member-
ship in the Church will not save us. It is only as we are spiritually born that we
may confidently hope to enter heaven. II. Irs nature. 1. Itisdivine or spiritual
in its origin: ‘‘ That which is born of the Spirit is spirit.” 2. It is a supernatural
change, ‘‘ Except a man be born again,” or, as in the margin, “ from above.” 3. It
is the impartation of a new principle of a spiritual life, ‘‘ Whereas I was blind, now
I see.” Before the change we “‘ were dead in trespasses and sins ” ; but afterit we are
‘* made alive unto God.” 4. Itis a cleansing of the soul from all sin in the blood
of Jesus Christ. (ZL. O. Thompson.) No admission to heaven but by the new
birth :—I, WHat WE ARE TO UNDERSTAND BY THE KINGDOM oF Gop. This expres-
sion seems to have been borrowed from the Book of Daniel (ch, ii. 44; vii. 13, 14),
and hence it was in common use amongst the Jews (Luke xvii. 20; xix. 11), and
they justly supposed it to mean, the kingdom of the Messiah; only imagining, in
the pride and carnality of their hearts, and in direct opposition to many passages
of their own Scriptures, that it would be of a temporal nature, established by human
policy and power. The kingdom of the Messiah is termed the kingdom of God:
because by Him the kingdom of Satan is overthrown, men are rescued from his
power (Acts xxvi. 18), and made the subjects of God, the kingdom of God is set up
on earth, and displayed in power and glory. This kingdom is to be considered in
two parts; in a state of infancy, imperfection, and warfare, on earth, in which it is
continually receiving fresh subjects, making fresh conquests, and is enlarged more
and more; and in a state of triumph and full perfection in heaven. II. In wuat
SENSE MUST WE BE BORN OF WATER AND OF THE SPIRIT THAT WE- MAY ENTER THIS
xincpom. 1. Birth by water implies baptism (Mark xvi. 16). When administered
by the apostles to adults, it was only to such as repented and believed (Acts ii. 38;
viii. 36-37), and hence was considered an outward and visible sign of cleansing
from past sin and pardon (Acts xxii. 16; xiii. 8). This is a relative change, a
change of state. But—2. Birth of the Spirit isa real change; a change of nature
(2 Cor. v. 17; Gal. vi. 15; Eph. iv. 22-23), (1) It is not only an external but an
internal change ; not mere reformation of manners, but change of principles and
dispositions (Psa. li. 10; Ezek, xxxvi. 26). (2) Itis not a partial but a universal
change : “Old things have passed,” &c. * (3) It is a progressive change (Tit. iii. 5;
2 Cor. iv. 16; Col. ii. 19; Eph. iv. 15). 8, It is termed a birth because it may be


CHAP. in] ides 5 ST. JOHN. 209


illustrated by the natural birth. III. Toe Grand NECESSITY, REASONABLENESS, AND
HAPPY CONSEQUENCES OF THIS BIRTH. 1. Flesh means not so much our animal and
mortal as our depraved nature (Gen. vi. 3, viii. 21; Rom. viii.9; Gal. v.16). Man
has sunk under the dominion of his senses, appetites and passions. Men are there-
fore naturally unfit for the kingdom (Rom. viii. 5,9; Eph. v. 5). Hence arises the
necessity of being born again. 2. The Spirit having begotten us again, and
inwardly changed us, we become spiritual. Endued with the Holy Spirit (Rom.
viii. 9); with the life, light, power, purity, and comfort, which he imparts. Free
from the dominion of the flesh, we become heavenly, overcoming the world (1 John
v. 4, 5). Holy, not committing sin (1 John iii. 9), having power over it, and over
“the law in the members” (Rom. vii. 23) ; walking “ not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit”? (Rom. viii. 1), ‘“‘ crucifying the flesh with its affections and lusts,” and
‘led by the Spirit” (Gal. v. 16-25); divine, resembling God in love and in all its
fruits (1 John iv. 7, 8-16). We thus are made fit subjects for the kingdom of
Christ on earth and in heaven. IV. How wk MAY EXPERIENCE THIS NEW BIRTH.
The Author of it is the Spirit of God; the means by which it is effected are the
Word of God (John xvii. 17). (J. Benson.) Baptismal regeneration :—I. Iv 18
CLEARLY OPPOSED TO THE SPIRIT AND DESIGN OF OUR Lorp’s DiscouRSE To NicopEMus
(cf. vers. 3, 6, 8; and Mark xvi., where ‘‘ believeth not ’’ is disassociated from baptism).
II. Ir 18 OPPOSED TO THE DECLARATION AND PRACTICE oF Sr. Pavu (1 Cor. i. 14-18).
Had it regenerated, his wisest method would have been to baptize. III. It has an
AWFUL AND MOST UNSCRIPTURAL ASPECT ON THE DESTINY OF THE UNBAPTIZED. Think
of the myriads infant and adult who on this hypothesis are lost, and contrast it
with ‘Suffer little children,” &c. IV. Iv oFFERS GREAT DISHONOUR TO THE HoLy
SPIRIT, AND IS AT VARIANCE WITH SCRIPTURAL VIEWS OF THE NATURE AND EFFICACY OF
His REGENERATING AND SANCTIFYING Grace. Look at thousands who have been
baptized. Have they fallen from grace? When did they ever evidence the pos-
session of it? V. Iv 18 CALCULATED TO PRODUCE THE MOST RUINOUS DELUSIONS,
that a man is safe by a mere ceremonial without a-moral change. VI. Ir
DIVERTS THE MIND FROM THE TRANSCENDENT IMPORTANCE OF DIVINE TRUTH
AND FIXES ITS ATTENTION ON EXTERNAL OBSERVANCES. The truth is the
agency which the Scripture set forth of regeneration. (H. F. Burder, D.D.)
The general teaching of our Lord:—I. THaT THERE SHOULD BE A CHANGE IN THE
CONDITION OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE; that it was not suflicient for them to do the
works of the law if they would be saved; and that with this change the old rites
had passed away. II, Tar FROM HENCEFORTH THE RELATIONSHIP OF MEN TO GoD
WAS TO BE A NEAR RELATIONSHIP, for a new birth implies a new filiation, and that
whereas they had been in the state of servants, this should pass away and they
become sons, III. THar THE GATES OF HEAVEN, THE NEW JERUSALEM, WERE NOW
THROUGH THE NEW BIRTH TO BE OPENED TO ALL MEN, both Jews and Gentiles, that
none could see the kingdom of God without the new birth, but that the new born
should see and enter that kingdom. IV. THarT atl THESE BLESSINGS SHOULD BE
THROUGH CHRIST. (Beaux Amis.) The baptism of water and of the Spirit :—The
Spirit in regeneration worketh like water. I. Water hath the property of ABLU-
TION, to wash away the filth of our bodies. So the Spirit—l. Besprinkling us
with the blood of Christ assureth us that the guilt of sin is taken away, and 2.
Applying to us the virtue of Christ’s death causes sin to die, and so washes away
the filth of sin and sanctifies us. And this is the first degree of spiritual life, to
have sin die and decay in us, as Paul (Gal. ii. 20) joins his being crucified with
Christ, and living by faith in Christ, tugether. I. Water causes FRUITFULNESS, a8
drought does famine (Job. viii. 11). Hence was Egypt’s fruitfulness, because of the
Nile’s inundations. And hence the regenerate man is compared to the trees planted
by the rivers of water (Psa. i.), because the presence of the Holy Ghost is the same
to them, that waters to the willows (Isa. xliv. 3-5). IIL Water coozs and allays
heat (Psa. xii. 1). So the Spirit cools the heat of our raging and accusing
consciences pursued by the law. (Jer. Dyke.) Regeneration :—J. THe Kincpom
or Gop. The expression was a Jewish one, and the Jew would understand by it
society perfected. That domain on earth where God was visible and God ruled.
The Jewish kingdom was a theocracy : a kingdom in which God’s power was mani-
fest by miracles, and in which His laws were promulgated, This was Nicodemus’
conception. He saw that Christ fulfilled the two requisites of a Divine mission—
asserting a living will ruling over the laws of nature. He had seen a society grow-
ing up in acknowledgment of the rule of a person. But Christ asserted the neces-
sity that the subject should be prepared for the kingdom. He distinguished


i,


210 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP. Il.
eer inlet
between the visible and the invisible kingdom—the presence that man can see, and
the presence that man can feel. Nicodemus eaw Christ first when he gazed on the
miracles. Christ told him he could not see or enter the other save by being born
again, II, THz ENTRANCE To THIS KINGDoM. As there is a twofold kingdom, so a
twofold entrance. 1. By the baptism of water. We enter the kingdom by our
senses and our spirit. God’s witness to our senses is baptism. This is not the
fact of our regeneration, but it substantiates the fact. The right of a man to his
ancestor’s property is the will or intention of the ancestor. But because that will
is invisible it is necessary that it should be made manifest in a visible symbol, viz.,
a ‘* Will.” So baptism is the Will of God, i.e., the instrument that declares His will.
The will itself is invisible; verbally it runs, “‘It is your Father’s good pleasure to
give you the kingdom”; the visible instrument equivalent to the parchment is
baptism. And so baptism is regeneration only as the parchment is the will. 2.
Entrance into the kingdom by a spiritual change. The ground on which our Lord
states it is our twofold human nature—the nature of the animal and the nature of
God. When these natures are exchanged is the moment of spiritual regeneration.
Our Lord’s phrase has been interpreted—(1) In a fanatical way. Men of enthu-
siastic temperament, whose lives have been irregular, and whose religion has ecme
upon them suddenly, contend that if a man does not know the hour of his conver-
sion he is no Christian. (2) Another class of persons, to whom enthusiasm is a
crime, rationalize the change away, contending that it applies to Jews, and that to
say that it is necessary to those brought up in the Church of England is to open
the door to all fanaticism. (3) A third class confound it with baptism, which seems
equally opposed to the text. (4) In our life there is a time when the Spirit has
gained the mastery over the flesh. That time was the time ofregeneration. There
are those in whom this never takes place—grown men still having and indulging
animal appetites. These may have been born of water but never of the Spirit.
(F. W. Rovertson, M.A.) Regeneration—its subjective aspect :—Our Lord’s sermon
was delivered—1. Not to the multitude, as were His other discourses, but to an audi-
ence of one. But the smallness of the auditory did not affect the sublimity of what
Christ said, or His earnestness. The elder Beecher was called upon to preach in a
country chapel where, owing to the weather, he had but one hearer. Twenty years
after Mr. Beecher met this person, then an eminently successful preacher, and the
instrument of hundreds of conversions, as a result of this sermon. Preachers
should never despair because of small audiences. 2. This solitary hearer lacked
two very desirable qualities in an inquirer— boldness and quickness. Yet on the
other hand he was.teachable, and was convinced that Christ was qualified to teach.
I. THE NATURE OF REGENERATION. The figure indicates the radical character of
the formative process of Christianity over the moral nature of its subject. There
are other figures equally forcible : “‘ Creation,” ‘‘ renewing,” ‘‘ workmanship.” Our
Lord’s term had peculiar significance for a Jew, inasmuch as all His privileges
were secured to Him by birth. The others are St. Paul’s terms, who wrote to
Gentiles, who would be more familiar with artistic.and mechanical operations.
Both describe the same process, but represent two distinct truths respecting it.
Creation has a wider meaning than birth. Every new existence is a creation, but
that of Adam, e.g., was immediate—but the production of a new man in Christ
Jesus is mediate, viz., by birth. Il. Irs spuere “from above.” The source of
the new principle is outside the earthly. Natural birth ushers into a conscious life
only on an earthly plane; but spiritual birth ushers into a conscious life ona
heavenly plane. Its starting point is from above, and it maintains its spiritual
elevation along its whole course. III. Irs mernop. 1. By the breathing of the
Spirit. The same method is adopted to quicken the new man as was empioyed to
quicken the old. ‘*God breathed into his nostrils,” &., &e. 2. The breathing of
the Spirit assumes the form of a voice. In Adam’s case God breathed into his
nostrils; in our case the Spirit breaths into the ear. ‘Of His own will begat He
us,” &. 3. This exercise is—(1) Sovereign——not to justify arbitrary selection of
subjects, but to show God’s right and purpose to extend the exercise of His grace
beyond the limits set down by the exclusive notions of self-righteous men (Rom, ix

15). Our Lord was explaining the kingdom: one of its most glorious features ia
universality. (2) Mysterious. Life in its physical form has ever defied every
attempt to solve the mystery of its origin. So with the life spiritual. IV. Irs
ESSENTIALNESS. The new birth is essential to seeing and to entering the kingdom

“ Seeing ” is that power of deep spiritual insight into spiritual things, the absence
of which our Lord deplored (Matt. xiii, 13-17), and which Paul declares to be neces.


EET. yeahs NU Ney ee ae


= ore eee


a ed,


ORAP. 11.) ST. JOHN. 211


sary to understand the deep things of God (1 Cor. ii. 14-16). To see the kingdom
of God means to obtain a sympathetic apprehension of its nature and aim. To
enter means actual participation in its blessedness. This entering, however, is
conducive to the seeing. A building viewed externally is seen, but in a very in-
complete sense. We must inhabit it to realize its use, comfort, and protection.
(4. J. Parry.) | The nature and process of regeneration :—Yonder is a cracked
bell. How again td restore it? By one of twomethods. The first is to repair the
bell, to encompass it with hoops, to surround it with bands. Nevertheless you can
easily discern the crack of the bell in the crack of the sound. The only effectual
way is to remelt the bell, recast it, and make it all new; then it will ring clear,
round, sonorous as ever. And human nature is a bell suspended high up in the
steeple of the creation to ring forth the praises of the Almighty Creator. But in
the Fall in E¢2n the bell cracked. How again to restore it? By one of two wavs.
One is to surround it with outward laws and regulations as with steel hoops. This
is the method adopted by philosophy as embodied in practical statesmanship; and
without doubt there is a marked improvement in the sound. Nevertheless the
crack in the metal shows itself in the crack in the tone. The best way is to remelt
it, recast it, remould it; and this is God’s method in the gospel. He remelts our
being, refashions us, creates us afresh from root to branch, makes us new creatures
in Christ Jesus, zealous unto good works; and by and by we will sound forth His
praises in a nobler, sweeter strain than ever we did before. Heaven’s high arches
will be made to echo our anthems of praise. (J. C. Jones, D.D.) The need of
regeneration :—A raw countryman having brought his gun to the gunsmith for
repairs, the latter is reported to have examined it, and finding it to be almost too
far gone for repairing, said, ‘‘ Your gun is in a very worn-out, ruinous, good-for-
nothing condition, what sort of repairing do you want forit?” ‘‘ Well,” said the
countryman, “I don’t see as I can do with anything short of a new stock, lock, and
barrel; that ought to set it up again.” ‘* Why,” said the smith, ‘‘ you had better
have a new gun altogether.” ‘ Ah!” was the reply, ‘‘I never thought of that;
and it strikes me that’s just what I do want. A new stock, lock, and barrel; why
that’s about equal to a new gun altogether, and that’s what Ill have.” Just the
sort of repairing that man’s nature requires. The old nature cast aside as a com-
plete wreck and good for nothing, and a new one imparted. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
The new birth :—I. Man in a state of nature, or MAN BEFORE REGENERATION. Christ
nowhere inculcates the doctrine of the fall, but everywhere assumes it. His
doctrine of regeneration presupposes it, “that which is born of the flesh is
flesh.” 1. This depravity is therefore innate—‘born.” In Psa. li. David
says, “In sin did my mother conceive me.” No wonder therefore that he
should pray, ‘‘ Wash me throughly.” Two words are used for “wash.” (1) The
cleansing of the surface, just as a man washes his face. (2) A washing that
cleanses the inside as well, as a woman washesclothes. This David’sword. 2. The
turpitude is hereditary. This is a verity of science as well as of theology. Once
degeneration enters a species, the process goes on from bad to worse unless a
remedial check be applied. Adam begat a son in his own likeness. Like begets
like. My personal sin grows out of an undercurrent of evil in the race. 3. Uni-
versal. 4. Total. Not that every man is as bad as he can be, but that every
faculty is more or less tainted, that the bias of the soul, the whole trend of our
being is in the direction of evil. II. Man changed from a state of nature into a
state of grace, or MAN BEING REGENERATED, 1. Godliness begins in life. It is not
a thing of profession or acquisition, but of birth; not a trade, but a nature. 2.
This life is new; not a continuation of the old, but a new creation, Human
nature is too dilapidated to be repaired. 3. This life is heavenly: in origin, nature,
and direction. Heavenly—(1) In opposition to the life of the carnal man. (2) In
contradistinction from that which God bestowed on man at his first creation. 4. It is
specifically a Divine life. Thus (1) superior to the angelic; (2) to Adamic life; (3)
for it is the life of God Himself. Consequently regeneration is a supernatural
process; not a miraculous, for Christianity ceased to be miraculous in the first
century. The miraculous is only accidental to it, but the supernatural belongs
to its essence. III. Man in a state of grace, or MAN AFTER REGENERATION, Once
a man is born again—1l. He is able to understand the gospel in its spiritual sig-
nificance and relations. He ‘‘sees” the kingdom. The natural man may receive
the thoughts of the Spirit of God, but not the realities represented by the thoughts
2. He “enters” the kingdom, becomes a denizen of it, a naturalized subject
enjoying its privileges and sharing its responsibilities. His “citizenship is in


change.
So a new birth is evident—(1) To himself. He loves and seeks spiritual
things, whereas formerly he disliked and avoided them. (2) To others. (a) To the
regenerate who find a congeniality of taste and feeling with them. (0d) To the
unregenerate, who marvel at the change. II. Irs Necxssiry. 1. From the character
of Him who declares it: Christ—(1) The Divine Saviour. (2) The Divine Teacher.
2. From its indispensableness to happiness. (1) Present. The world in itself is
an unsatisfying, empty portion. The soul craves a higher joy than it can give.
The new birth brings joy unspeakable and full of glory. (2) Eternal. Heaven
would not be heaven to the unconverted. Its employments, &c., would be offensive.
His nature and taste savour not of spiritual things. III. Ivs stens. He that is
born of God—1. Overcometh the world. 2. Doth not commit sin. 3. Brings forth
the fruits of the Spirit—love, joy, peace, &c. Application. If the new birth be—
1, A supernatural change, do not fancy you can renew-yourself, but cry, ‘‘ Create
in me aclean heart,” &c. 2. An internal change; do not think that the amend-
ment will suffice, but pray that the axe may be laid at the root of the corrupt tree.
3. An universal change;-no idol must be retained. 4. A sensible change; see that
your acquaintance with truth is experimental, not theoretical. 5. Avisible change;
let your light shine. (W. Mudge, B.A.) The new birth :—What a meeting was
this between Christ and Nicodemus! 1. The season was most solemn. 2. The
theme the most momentous. 38. The hearer a ruler in Israel. 4. The Speaker
the great Teacher sent from God. I. THE NATURE OF THE NEW BIRTH. Altogether
spiritual. Regeneration by water baptism is a dangerous fallacy. (1) Thousands
who have been baptized are unchanged. (2) Christ who came to save the lost
never baptized. (3) Paul said, “I was not sent to baptize,” &c. By baptism we
enter the visible kingdom, but by spiritual regeneration the invisible. 1. The
agent in this work is a Spirit—the Spirit of God. Some secondary agency is
usually employed, the Word of God, &c., but that is only His instrument. 2. The
subject is spirii—the soul of man, Regeneration is in its very nature a complete
reorganization of the moral man. (1) Correcting what is wrong. (2) Supplying
what is deficient. (3) Removing what is superfluous. The works of the devil are
destroyed, and the kingdom of righteousness established. 3. The immediate
associations are spiritual. The signs may be evident, but the causes are unseen.
Therefore the unregenerate cannot understand either spiritual mourning or spiritual
joy, because there is nothing that they can see to occasion either. II. Irs REsuLTs.
1. It introduces a man into a new world. It seems as though he saw with new
eyes, heard with new ears, enjoyed with new senses. 2. It introduces him into a
new society where he forms more dignified companionships. Some imagine that
to become a Christian is to lose caste. On the contrary it is to be elevated in the
rank of being and to have God and the purest and best for friends. 3. It produces
a new Class of feelings, motives, and desires. Joy where once was sorrow ; love of
God where once was love of self; aspirations after heaven where once was worldly
ambition, 4. It opens new sources of pleasure. III. Irs necussrry. 1. From
the moral condition of man which is depraved. 2. From the character of heaven,


our. 011.) ee ST. JOHN. 213


into which the undefiled cannot enter. 3. From the mediatorship of Jesus
Christ, who came to bring about the great change.. (J. S. Jones.) The new
birth :—If any doctrines are fundamental they are those of justification and
regeneration. The former is what God does for us in forgiving our sins, the latter
what He does in us in renewing our fallen nature. They are concurrent, but in
the order of thought we first conceive His wrath to be turned away and then His
Spirit to enter our heart. I, Way must wE BE BORN aGaIn? 1. The foundation of
this doctrine lies nearly as deep as the foundation of the world. God created man
in His image. (1) Not barely in His natural image—immortal, spiritual, intelligent,
free, &c. (2) Nor merely in His political image, as having dominion. (3) But
chiefly in His moral image, in love, justice, mercy, truth, purity, and so very good.
2. But man was not made immutable, but placed in a state of trial, able to stand,
liable to fall. God apprized him of the penalty of falling—death. Man fell and
died—died to God. The body dies when separated from the soul; the soul when
separated from God. 3. In Adam all died; so every one that is descended from
him comes into the world spiritually dead. Hence the necessity of regeneration.
II. How must A MAN BE BORN AGAIN? 1, We are not to expect any minute, philo-
sophical account of the manner (ver. 8). 2. The phrase was well known to Nico-
demus as signifying the transformation of a Gentile proselyte into a son of
Abraham. 3. Before a child is born into the world he has eyes, but sees not;
senses which are not exercised; has no knowledge. To that manner of existence
we do not give the name of life. Only when a man is born do we say he lives.
Then his organs of sense are exercised on proper objects. The parallel holds good.
Man’s spiritual senses by nature are locked up. He has no knowledge of or inter-
course with God. Only when born by the Spirit of God does he spiritually live.
Then his spiritual senses find exercise. He knows God and enjoys Him, 3. From
hence appears the nature of the new birth. It is the great change which God
works in the soul when He brings it to life; when He raises it from the death of
sin to the life of righteousness. II. To wHaT END IS IT NECESSARY TO BE BORN
acain? 1. In order to holiness, which is—(1) Not an external religion, a round of
outward duties. (2) But the image of God stamped on the heart, which can have
no existence till we are renewed in the image of our mind. 2. Without holiness no
man shall see the Lord. 38. Without holiness no happiness. IV. Inrrrences. 1.
That baptism is not the new birth, but only the sign of it. 2. That it does not
always accompany baptism. 3. That it is not sanctification, which is progressive,
whereas regeneration, like generation, is instantaneous. 4. That it is a greater
charity to tell a man he needs to be born again than to suppress it. (John Wesley.)
The new birth of water and the Spirit :—As out of the dry wheat one mass or one
loaf cannot be made without moisture, so neither could we be made one in Christ
Jesus without the water of the Spirit which is from heaven. And as dry earth,
except it receive moisture, bears no fruit, so we also, being in the first place a dry
tree, conld never have become fruitful of life without being watered by the Spirit
from above. (7. H. Leary, D.C.L.} Spiritual births :—Thorwaldsen. who is
said to have been born in Copenhagen, when questioned as to his birthplace, replied,
“JT don’t know; but I arrived in Rome, March 8, 1797; ” dating his birth, as it
were, from the commencement of his artistic career. Shortly after Summerfield
arrived in America he met with a distinguished doctor of divinity who asked him
where he was born. ‘‘In Dublin and in Liverpool.” ‘Oh! how can that be?”
The boy-preacher paused a moment, and answered, “ Art thou a master in Israel,
and knowest not these things?” (S. H. Tyng, D.D.) Born a Christian:—A
person came in the inquiry-room, and I (D. L. Moody) said, ‘Are you a
Christian?” ‘ Why,” says she, “of course I am.” “ Well,” I said, ‘* how long
have you been one?” ‘Oh, sir, I was born one!” ‘Oh! indeed, then I am
very glad to take you by the hand; I congratulate you; you are the first woman
I ever met who was born a Christian; you are more fortunate than others, they are
born children of Adam.” She hesitated a little, and then tried to make out that,
because she was born in England, she was a Christian. Earthly minds love only
earthly things :—Alphonse Karr heard a gardener ask his master permission to
sleep for the future in the stable; ‘‘ for,” said he, ‘ there is no possibility of sleep-
ing in the chamber behind the greenhouse, sir ; there are nightingales there which
do nothing but guggle, and keep up a noise all the night.” The sweetest sounds are
but an annoyance to those who have no musical ear ; doubtless the music of heaven
would have no charms to carnal minds, certainly the joyful sound of the gospel is
unappreciated so long as men’s ears remain uncircumcised, (Feathers for Arrows.)


214 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. ‘[CHAP. III.
eee ee

. 7. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.—Every
Pe caai :—When men are perishing it would be cruel to interest their minds
or amuse their fancies. We must give earnest heed to their necessities. Is it
famine that slays them? We must give them food. Is it disease? Let us give the
medicine. Now the spiritual needs of men are urgent, and the most pressing 1s
their regeneration: they must be born again or lost. The change wrought in
regeneration is—I. Most tHoroveu. 1. It is more than reformation. 2. More
than change of opinion even on the best topics. Notions may be altered again
and again and yet a man be no nearer sonship with God. 3. More than priests
can convey or ordinances effect. 4. It is a new creature created in us. At every
birth a life comes into the world which was not there before. 5.A new experience.
To the new-born child everything is new—pain and pleasure. 6. A new world.
When a young girl found the Saviour, she said, ‘‘ Hither I am altogether changed
or else the world is.” In fact both are. 7. A new force. At every birth a new
worker comes into the world. He is feeble ai first, but those tiny hands and feet
soon become dexterous. And so when a soul is born a power is put forth from it of
which it was unconscious before. II. Most wonpErFuL. 1. As to the manner of
it, 2. As to the supernaturalness of its operation. No doubt moral suasion,
influence of association, education, do much, and much may be developed in
mankind that is admirable. But this is not what Christ meant. The Holy Spirit
must come to work upon us as God came forth to work on this world at creation.
3. As to the grandeur of the relationship to which it introduces us. To God as
children, to Christ as brethren. What privileges spring out of this relationship?
Paupers have mounted from the dunghill to the throne, but a stride from nothing-
ness to greatness is trifling compared with rising from being a slave of Satan to
become a son of God. III. Most manrrest. The house knows when a child is
born. The birth may be mysterious, but the fact is apparent. So we know not how
the Spirit works, but the change which comes over the subject shows that He has
operated. Elstow knew when Bunyan had found the Saviour. Every soul that is
born again—1. Repents of his sin. 2. Has faith. 3. Prays. 4. Develops the
spiritual power that has been imparted. IV. Most impErativE. You may be rich
or poor, wise or ignorant—many things are desirable, one thing is needful ‘Ye
must be born again.” If you are not—1. You have no spiritual life, and without
that you are dead in trespasses and sins. 2. No spiritual capacity, and so no power
to receive the blessing. When the gracious rain comes they are not like Gideon’s
fleece, ready to drink it in, but like a hard stone, neither saturated nor softened.
No spiritual inheritance. None can come in for the eternal portion but such as are
born in the house. V. Emmnentiy PpERsonaL. The idea of proxy is quite foreign.
No other can be born for a man: so the great change must be individually expe-
rienced. (C, H. Spurgeon.) (See Rev. xxii. 17 in connection with the text).
The necessity and possibility of the new birth :—I. Musr be born again, and may
be born again, are truths which should never be separated. II. Must without may
leads to despair. III. May without musr leads to presumption. IV. We must,
therefore we oan be born again through the grace vouchsafed from heaven.
(Homiletic Monthly.) No entrance to heaven without regeneration :—like the
rocks which sometimes guard the entrance to a safe and spacious harbour, these
words stand. A ship must enter here, or turn back to the wide ocean with no haven
or home. ‘Ye must be born again.” Of course this does not apply to a man
unless he is going in. If any one is quite contented to stay without; if he is well
pleased to sail up and down amid storm and calm, thinking that the end of his
voyage is well enough attained without making for a port; rounding the world for
ever, or at least until a grave shall open by land or sea, and end his travel in the
waves or in the dust; if any man deliberately takes that view of his own life; then
this law does not touch him. But if he desires to ‘‘see the kingdom of God,”
and enter in, he “ must be born again.” That law will not bend, it will not break,
it will not stand out of the way. It is inexorable. (A. Raleigh, D.D.) Conver-
sion i8 a great change :—I passed by a piece of common which some lord of the
manor or other had been enclosing, as those rascals always will if they can, to
rob the poor of their rights, and filch every morsel of green grass upon which
we may freely plant our feet; but I noticed that the enclosers,had only railed it
round, but had not dug it up, nor ploughed it, nor planted it; and though they
had cut down the gorse, it was coming up again; of course it would, for it was
common still, and a bit of fence or rail could not alter it; the furze would come
peeping up, and ere long the enclosure would be as wild as the heath outside.


OO


OHAP, IIt.] ST. JOHN. 215


But this is not God’s way of working. When God encloseth a heart that has laid

common with sin, does He cut down the thorns and the briars and then plant fir

trees ? (Isa. lv. 13). No, no; but He so changeth the soil, that from the ground
itself, from its own vitality, there spontaneously starts up the fir tree and the myrtle.

This is a most wonderful result. (C.H. Spurgeon.) Morality is good, but insuffi-

cient :—“ Is not morality good as far asit goes?”’ say you. ‘‘ Yes, certainly, as far

as it goes.” ** Isn’t my cable as good as yours, as far as it goes?” says the sailor who

has a short cable to him who has one very long. ‘“ Yes,’ says the other, ‘as far
as it goes; but what of that, when it won’t go within fifty fathoms of bottom?”

And of what use, oh moralist, is your cable, when it will not go within fifty fathoms

of the place where it can take hold upon the soul’s anchorage? (H. W. Beecher.)

Conversion necessary :—You may put what you please on a wild colt, a fractious
horse from the desert, and it will make no difference with his nature. Put a gold

harness on him—a silver harness—a velvet harness. Does one subdue his spirit
more than another? J tell you, the horse is mightier than the harness that you

put on him. Cover it with ornaments, make it brilliant with rosettes, put on
what you please—but there is the horse with his unsubdued nature. And human
nature is a wild ass’s colt. Now, the mere harness of the Church, its external
framework, and its outward procedure, are good enough if the men that are under
them are good, and they are bad if the men that are under them are bad. It is
not anything outside of men, it is the Spirit of God in them—that is the only
hope for any Church, sect, or community. (ibid.) Conversion a necessity :—
I’ve seen luxuriant grasses growing on the tops of graves ; I’ve seen flowers spring-
ing from the crevices of tombs; and like these are the fair and Icvely moralities,
and the social virtues which adorn the character of him who is not born of God’s
Spirit. The corpse, with its corruptions, its wasting flesh, and its decaying bones,
is beneath the fragrant flowers. (Ibid.) Conversion a necessity :—As it would
be impossible for the insect in its chrysalis state to observe the laws which are
made for the transformed state—for the worm to know the laws which make the
summer fly seek the sunshine and live upon the flower—as it must be “born
again,” and enter upon a new existence before it can keep the laws of that new
existence; so only the new creature can keep a new commandment—love.
(C. Stanford.) Why conversion is necessary :—As a dead man cannot inherit an
estate, no more can a dead soul (and every soul is spiritually dead until quickened
and born again of the Holy Ghost) inherit the kingdom of God. Yet sanctification
and holiness of life do not constitute any part of our title to the heavenly inheri-
tance, any more than mere animal life entitles a man of fortune to the estate he
enjoys. He could not, indeed, enjoy his estate if he did not live; but his claim
to his estate arises from some other quarter. In like manner, it is not our holiness
that entitles us to heaven ; though no man can enter into heaven without holiness.
The new birth a necessity :—Suppose a Red Indian should come to this country and
should endeavour to obtain the privileges of citizenship, well knowing that a man
must be a born subject or he cannot enjoy them. Suppose he says, ‘I will change
my name, I will take up the name of an Englishman—I have been called the Son
of the Great West Wind—but I will take an English name, I will be called a
Christian man, an English subject.” Will thatadmit him? (C. H. Spurgeon.)
The wind bloweth where it listeth The Spirit of God:—Nicodemus was a
member of the Jewish Church, and had participated in its rites. He had
probably been a listener to John and possibly had been baptized by him. He
came to Christ in the spirit of a man who should say, ‘‘ What lack I yet? Spgs
reply Christ puts no stress on baptism, because this was the ground on which
Nicodemus stood, viz., that he was initiated and had observed the required
ordinances of religion. So He said in effect, “‘ Except a man baptized with water
be likewise baptized with the Spirit,” &c. The truth of the Divine influence
enforced by Christ—I. Is nor uNscrenTirIc. Among modern discoveries nothing
is more striking than the fact that there is a spiritual as well as a physical unity.
Nothing is better attested than that upon the minds of men there are influences
which spring from invisible sources. Nor is there anything which men more need,
or aught so much to desire to be true and accept so willingly as this doctrine that
there is a Divine power which wakes up the better part of man’s nature. Then,
again, we are conscious of its inspiring yearnings and longings which we know
not how to locate or proportion. II. Is untversan. The fact that the universal
tendency of the human mind has been away from the physical and toward the
spiritual has to be accounted for. It is not to suffer doubt because fantastic


216) THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omr. me


* ti a —


notions have prevailed respecting it. Men sought chemistry through alchemy and
astronomy through astrology. But the fact is that as far back as we have records
there has been the conception of a free spirit. Where did it come from? II.
Dons NOT SUPERSEDE THE NATURAL FacuLiizs. It is not an attempt of the Divine
mind to put its action in the place of our action ; but lifts our mind into a sphere of
activity it has not known before, so changing its feelings and experiences that it
is called a new birth. Society ministers to our social wants—but only the Spirit can
lift our spirits toward the great realm of truth in which it is to develop and live.
The physical globe makes provision for the body, but to rise to the invisible and
infinite, we need the Spirit who gives vitality and force to all those elements which
go with the moral sentiment. IV. Requires PREPARATION AND CO-OPERATION. Man
may prepare himself for friendship and society according to the nature of the
relations into which he is going. So may a man prepare his soul to be acted on ©
by the Divine Spirit. There would be summer if there were no farmer; but the
farmer knows how to make summer work to advantage for him as otherwise it
would not have done. So there would be the universal influence of the Spirit of
God if every human being were swept from the earth ; but by meeting the Divine
Spirit, by opening the soul to and co-operating with Him, men have made them-
selves the recipients of blessings they would not otherwise have known. Y. May
BE RESISTED as well as co-operated with. It is not irresistible ; where men set their
wills against it, put themselves under antagonistic feelings, resist the tendencies it
would have developed, they certainly can set it aside. The strivings of God’s
Spirit have proved futile in thousands of instances. How many have yearnings
for something better, and sweep them away by social jollity! VI. Is INScRUTABLE.
Every man is more or less the subject of it, but may not recognize it, and cannot
analyse it. If you ask the flower, ‘‘How can you tell that which the sun does in
you?’’ the flower cannot tell. The sun wakes it up, that is all. VII. Is roe
GREATEST BOON, AND ITS LOSS THE GREATEST MISFORTUNE. VIII. WorRKS OHIEFLY
THROUGH Gopv’s Worp. (H.W. Beecher.) The freedom of the Spirit:—This wind
blows where it lists, as it lists, when it lists, as much as it lists, in what manner
it lists, and on whom it lists. This Spirit is a gift, and gifts are free (1 Cor. xii.
1-11). (Wm. Austin.) If the Spirit bloweth where it listeth, we are not certainly
to exclude any place or nation from these blessed gales, or to the Church or con-
gregation we are of; as if He could blow nowhere else, Learn charity. 1. If the
Spirit bloweth how He listeth, we do but show our folly to prescribe to Him His
way. He knows what best He has to do, how best to manage us to salvation.
Learn discretion, 2. If it be as much too only as He lists, it is not sure our
merit or desert, if we have more of Him than others, nor perhaps their demerit
always, who have less. Whatever it is, it is more than we deserve, both they and
we, Learn humility. 3. If it be only upon whom He pleases, it is certainly
sometimes upon some we know not. So we have no reason to pass & censure upon
any man’s soul, Learn to think well of all. And so much the rather, in that—
4, He bloweth when He will. If He has not already, He may hereafter breathe
upon him or her thou doubtest most. If thou, perhaps thyself, feelest Him not
within thee now, thou mayest ere long. Learn hence to despair, neither of thyself
nor any one else (Psa. cxxxix. 6-8; 1 Cor. xii. 5; Rom. xi. 33, ix. 18), (Dr. Mark
Frank.) The mysteriousness, reality, and variableness of the Spirit’s working :—
While Christ spoke, I imagine the spring night breeze, it might be the first air of
dawn, came sighing up the Kedron glen below the city. It sighed among the
young fig leaves ; it made the olive branches toss and moan; it shook the casement,
and the lamp-light flickered. Whence comes it? In what far-off land of the East
did it first awake to run before the sunrise? Where will it die away in the West,
over the hills, beyond the sea? Whence, oh viewless winds, and whither? Christ
lets the emblem speak: what does it say? Like an atmosphere the Spirit of
Divine life is everywhere, He envelopes the globes, He touches everyman. He
penetrates us. Why should not that living Spirit beget us, creating a Divine life
within these ribs of carnal death? The manner of His working may be as un-
traceable as the path of free winds that blow about the mountain tops, and chase
each other over the plain; but what.of that? His results may be as unmistakable
as theirs. The movements of a spiritual.power among men, again, vary as the airs
of heaven do. Alone in her closet, ¢.g., a girl is bending over her open Bible; and
as she reads, her young face grows solemn, the full eyes gather, till the page is
blurred with tears that are not wholly sad; and on her knees she weeps out her
godly sorrow for little daily faults which the world would count trifles, till with


 OHAP. I1I.] ST. JOHN. 217


sweet thankfulness in her purified spirit and all the peace of heaven within her
bosom, she rises to go forth to her lowly day of toil and uncomplaining service.
This is not the way of the flesh. It was the breath of God that stole into her
heart, just as outside the summer air was stirring among the leaves of the garden.
But also I have seen a strong man, hardened through thirty years of open reckless
sin, kneel in another :nner room by night crushed by the agony of an awakened
conscience, and gasping forth unwonted confessions in a voice hoarse with suppressed
emotion. This, too, is not the way of the flesh. There I saw the same breath of
Goa, but strong this time, and loud as when on wintry Appenines the great north
blast makes the pine trees writhe and creak before it tears them from the rock-
clefts. Such things are, and they show that there is a Holy Ghost. (J. Oswald
Dykes, D.D.) Diversity of the Spirit’s operation :—God hath divers ways into
divers men. Into some He conies at noon, in the sunshine of prosperity ; to some
in the dark and heavy clouds of adversity. Some He affects with the music of the
Church ; some, with some particular collect or prayer; some, with some passage in
a sermon, which takes no hold of him that stands next to him. Watch the way
of the Spirit of God into thee; that way, which He makes His path, in which
He comes oftenest to thee, and by which thou findest thyself most affected
and best disposed towards Him; and pervert not that path, foul not that way.
“ Make straight His paths; ” that is, keep them straight ; and when thou observest
which is His path in thee (by what means especially He works upon thee), meet
Him in that path ; embrace Him in those means, and always bring a facile, a fusile,
a ductile, a tractable soul to the offers of His grace in His way (Heb. i. 1; Psa.
lxxxv. 8). (Dr. Donne.) Spiritual movement an effect of the Spirit’s working :—
Just as when we see the leaves of a wood moved to and fro, we know the wind is
there; so when we see a man moved out of the careless routine of a natural life
and leading a new life, we may say the Spirit of God, the Spirit of life, is there.
(G. J. Brown, M.A.) Spiritual life a Divine inspiration :—Here we have that
aspect of regeneration which is so incomprehensible to the world. Men can under-
stand reformation through fear of perdition and hope of immortality; but the
great revolution of a new life inspired by God appears mystical and impo-sible.
We speak of the age of inspiration being over. That of inspired writing is, but
that of inspired living is not. I. SprrirvaL LIFE 18 A DIRECT INSPIRATION FROM
Gop. 1. That life is impossible without this inspiration. Spiritual life is an
elevation above the natural will, inclination, tendency, Men have tried to reach
this without the Spirit, by asceticism, but after all they have been still in the sphere
of self. All they have done has been merely a self-culture which does not rise
above the naturallife. Try to change a man’s character. Take a man worldly and
selfish, and try to convince him by reasoning that his course is a wrong one.
Perhaps he admits it : your logic has carried the outworks of intellect, but left the
deeper nature untouched. Point out his degradation. He may admit that too,
and hate you. Appeal to his interest with warnings of hell and promises of heaven.
Suppose you have convinced him you have not elevated him—he is selfish still.
Try another illustration. Men feel that they can do no great and noble deeds until
raised above the natural level of life by a possessing Spirit. This is the great
feature of all genius, poetic, artistic, political. So is Christian life. God’s Spirit
must enter us, or our endeavours will never raise us. We have instances of this
in all ages, e.g., Jacob, Paul. 2. This inspiration enters man in mystery. (1) We
cannot tell whence it cometh. We may trace the early signs of the Spirit’s power,
but cannot penetrate the mystery of its origin. Just as the spring is a revelation
of the secret energies which have been working in darkness through the cold winter
gloom, until under the influences of sun and air the hidden power bursts into leaf
and flower ; 80 is spiritual life. (2) Whither it goeth we cannot tell; its impulse
ever advances amidst all impediments through the long, cold, dark watchings of
life, waiting for the adoption. Il. Tum RESULTS OF REALIZING THIS TRUST. Tt would
work a mighty change. 1. In our faith. 2. In our prayers. 3, In the ease and joy it
gives to the discharge of duty. 4. In the strength it imparts to manhood. (H.L. Hull,
B.A.) Nature, evidences, and necessity of regeneration :—I, INQUIRE WHAT IT IS TO
BE BORNAGAIN. 1. It is a Divine and supernatural change, effected by the agency of
the Holy Spirit. 2. It is an instantaneous change; and herein it differs from
sanctification, which is a progressive work. 3, It is an internal and invisible
change, yet may be known by its effects. 4. The change is universal, extending to
the heart and life. Universal beauty spread over the whole man. 5. It is an
abiding change. II. Norick some oF THE EVIDENCES OF THE NEW BIRTH. These


—*
bat


218 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaP. II.
Oe ee ee
we shall chiefly select from the First Epistle of John. 1. Those who are born of
God “do not commit sin; yea, they cannot sin, because they are born of God”
(chap. iii. 9, v. 18). ‘The principle of grace will be always rising up against sin,
and at length will triumph over it (Rom. vii. 14-25). 2. They have ‘* overcome
the world ”—its frowns and smiles, hopes and fears (1 John v. 4). 3. They havea
sincere love to all the saints; for ‘every one that loveth is born of God” (1 John
iv. 7). 4. All their hope of salvation is founded on the meditation of Christ
(1 John y. 1). 5. Their walk and conversation is holy and exemplary. “ Every
one that doeth righteousness is born of God” (1 John ii. 29). II. Consiprr TuE
REASONABLENESS AND IMPORTANCE OF THIS CHANGE: ‘‘ Marvel not that I said unto
thee, Ye must be born again.”” 1. Do not marvel at it as if the doctrine were new
and strange. 2. Marvel not as if the doctrine were unintelligible. 3. Do not
consider this new birth to be impossible. With men, and with angels it may be
so; but not with God. 4. Marvel not at this change as if it were uunecessary.
(B. Beddome, M.A.) The new birth:—Christ taught Nicodemus that this new
birth is not ‘‘a developing of some latent power;” it is not “ bringing out the
constitutional tendency,” and guiding it. It is a new nature, a new level, a new
plane, a new sphere, into which human nature is to be exalted by the power of God.
It isa birth, with all which that implies. Just consider for a moment, in the light
of this principle which Christ laid down, the much debated question of morality.
A man says, “Are we to understand that a man is to substitute this,” if I may so
gay, ‘second nature,” which is born in him, or rather out of which he is born by
the operation of the Holy Ghost, for morality? I answer that the point is here:
That which is born of the flesh is flesh ; a man is amiable from good digestion; a
kind and generous friend from an active circulation and because he is successful in
life. He is a temperate man because wine is distasteful to him; he is a chaste
man because he has a phlegmatic, a cold nature. These things are matters of
temperament, good, excellent, much to be desired. But often they are granted to
people like their complexions and the shape of their hands and feet, while to
others they are vouchsafed by the grace of God after the labour of the new birth.
These moralities in either case bear the same relation to the after life which the
lower leaves of a plant bear to its blossoming. ‘‘ What is my morality worth,
then?” youask. ‘he Indian in his wigwam knows a great many things, but he
is not a civilized man. Suppose he should put this question, ‘‘ What is all I do
know worth, if this is not civilization? If I am brought out of this state, am I to
leave all these things and count them as nothing?” Certainly he is not. Re-
latively to his condition, they are unspeakably important, but as compared with a
higher development, they are of very litttle value. That is to say, if he should
become noble and refined in civilized life, he would look back with pity upon the
condition that he was in when wigwam and wampum were home and means. Not
because they were in, and of themselves, bad, but because he was so far from haying
attained by growth and development that which was possible to him. When we
began to learn to write, our letters were crooked enough, our sentences all went
up-hill—the writing was a hideous scrawl. But would we say to our children, “It
is good for nothing, your cramped and crude beginnings?” Not at all. They are
good to commence with—and good to end with so soon as you can go on to per-
fection, making the lines of beauty and a fair page. Moralities are the erabryo
children—the ground leaves—the cramped writing—the wigwam and the wampum;
but they must not be confounded with the higher developments of the new man.
hood which has its birth out of the water and the Spirit. When, therefore, our
Lord says, that morality is not sufficient—and that is what He says, substantially
to Nicodemus—He is the truest friend of man; and among men, he is the most
generous and kind who maintains that ideal and shows his fellow-men, not that the
things which belong to the body are worthless, but that true manhood is far hicher
than the body can reach, and far higher than ordinary reason can attain—so high
that it can only be groped after, like the newly-born infant stretches out its untried
hands toward the first glimmering of the shaded light—only reached by the power
of God developing the nascent nature of the new-born soul—a mystery no more
profound than that which surrounds the entrance into the natural life which every
one must concede. It is not that we have developed very much. It is not that we
have a point of development established ‘in us that determines our safety. It is
that the Spirit of God has gained a lodgment in the soul; that the leaven is there:
that the root is thrown down, and the germ is pointed up, that gives us ground
for hope. That being secured, there is an infinite space, called Eternity ” for


"ee salle


CC ee eer eee Ly ee


v3


CHAP. TI.] ST. JOHN. 213


men to develop in. God has promised to give His Holy Spirit to them that simply
ask for it. He has chosen, and that is enough for us; He has chosen to couple
the gift with the baptism of water in the Triune name. The seed is sown then.
How? I do not know, for God is silent there. (F. L. Norton, D.D.) Spiritual
influence :—The difficulties connected with the regenerating operation of the
Spirit of God are—I. Irs supeRNaTuRaLNEss. There is a certain shrinking
from the supernatural, which renders such doctrines as this peculiarly distasteful.
1. If, for the ignorant and superstitious, the invisible world possess a strange
attraction, there is an opposite class of minds in which the tendency is equally
strong to explain everything by natural causes. It is the tendency of the religion
of an unenlightened age to translate every unexplained fact or phenomenon into
the immediate interposition of the Deity. But as society advances in knowledge,
and as many of those events, formerly attributed to supernatural agency, are dis-
covered to be the result of natural causes, it too often happens that, with the super-
stitious recognition, all practical acknowledgment of the Divine presence and
agency is lost. The voice of God is no longer heard in the thunder when the laws
of electricity begin to be known. The old gods of heathenism have long vanished
from the woods and meadows and fountains; but it is not that the one living and
true God, but only gravitation, light, heat, magnetism, may be recognized as reiyn-
ing in their forsaken haunts. 2. And we carry the same tendency into the morai
world. To the power of motives, the influence of education, &c., we are apt to
trace changes of character. A child grows up gentle, amiable, pious; and when we
say that he had the benefit of a careful and religious education, we seem to our-
selves to have given the whole account of the matter. An irreligious man becomes
devout, and the severe affliction, or the influence of a Christian friend, has made
him a wiser and a better man. Seldom does the mind naturally turn to the thought
—“ the finger of God is here.” The idea of a mysterious Holy Spirit working in
the man’s mind is too often regarded as a strange mystical notion, having
nothing in common with the plain realities of every-day life. 3. It is to this habit
of mind that the text suggests a most striking corrective. For it brings before us the
consideration that the supernatural is not confined to religion ; it bids us see in the
most familiar processes of nature the proofs of a Divine agency as inexplicable as
any to which religion appeals. Science, with all its triumphs, is compelled to
admit the immediate presence of a supernatural power in the most ordinary move-
ments of nature. Gravitation, light, heat, chemical affinity, are on'y abstractions ;
they are nothing without a living agent, whose mode of working they express,
Dead matter, however arranged, can never act of itself. A human machinist may
leave his machine to work alone, because when he leaves it God’s laws take it up,
and by their aid the materials retain their characteristics, the vapour keeps its ex-
pansive power. But when God has constructed His machine of the universe, He
cannot so leave it; for,if He retire, there is no second God to take care of it. The
signs of an all pervading supernatural energy meets us wherever we turn. If every
echoing wind bespeak a-present Deity, shall it seem strange to appeal to His power
in the regeneration of a soul? Each time the sail of the vessel expands the breeze,
we call in the aid of a mysterious agency, without which human efforts were vain.
Can it be a matter of surprise that the same mysterious agency must be invoked tc
communicate to the dull and moveless spirit an impulse towards a nobler than
earthly destiny? II, Irs sovernicnry. 1. How very much, to the human eye,
have the relations of God with man, as a religious being, been characterized by an
aspect of strange uncertainty! Religion has not been communicated indiscrimi-
nately. While a few favoured regions have felt its reviving presence, others, un-
visited by its quickening power, remain from age to age moral wastes. Nor can
human research discover any law by which this inequality is ordered. And as little
in the case of individuals as of nations can we explain on what principle it is that
the gracious influences of the Spirit ave vouchsafed. In equal possession of the
outward means of improvement some are benefited whilst others continue un-
affected. A word, a mere look, will fly straight to the core of some human spirit ;
whilst, on others, all the strength of reason and the power of eloquence may be
spent, only to recoil ineffective as arrows from proof-mail. From the furnace of
affliction one heart will come forth softened, whilst others cool down into hardness
and insensibility. Is the hand of Jehovah ever shortened that it cannot save? Or
ean we ascribe to Infinite Love the wayward fitfulness of earthly beneficence—to
Infinite Wisdom the unreasoning favouritism of erring en? If grace be necessary
to conversion, why—are we not tempted to ask—is not the Spirit of God poured


=u


990 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, (omar. mm.


forth without measure wherever unconverted souls are to be found? To all such
questions we must reply in the words of the text. 2. The force of this illustration
it will need little reflection to perceive. (1) For what so fitful, wayward, incalcul-
able, as the operations of the wind? Who can fora single hour foresee what its
coursewillbe? And the argument is—If even this simple agent so baffle man’s highest
wisdom, shall it be thought strange that the ways of the unsearchable Spirit of God
are governed by no rules which finite minds can discern? (2) But the illustration
may suggest that the arbitrariness which characterizes the Spirit’s work is, after
all, ouly apparent, and that, beneath seeming irregularity, there is real and un-
varying law. It is so with the material agent. The wind never does really act at
random, Its unaccountable changes are the result of material laws as fixed and
stable as that by which the planets revolve. Science has made but slight progress
inthe attempt to trace out the laws of winds ; but it is only because of the limits of
our faculties. So, too, it is,with that of which the wind is set forth as the type. In
His most mysterious dealings with the souls of men God never acts without a
reason. Where, to us, there seems inconstancy, to Him allis order. A time was
when the firmament presented only the aspect of a maze of luminous poinis,
scattered hap-hazard; but at length the great thought was struck out which evolved
from all this seeming confusion the most perfect order and harmony. And s0,
perhaps, a time may come when light shall be thrown on many things that seem
mysterious in the dispensation of grace. But meanwhile, in presence of the inscru-
table order of God’s government, it is the befitting attitude of a creature s0 weak
and ignorant as man not to criticize, but to submit and to adore, IIL, Irs szcnxucy.
1. Momentous though the change be in regeneration, it is one of which we have no
immediate evidence. We are accustomed to associate great events in man’s history
with outward stir and show, and we can scarcely divest ourselves of the notion that
external significance is inseparable from real importance. When the heir to earthly
wealth or grandeur is born, the earliest cry is the signal for loud and universal
gratulation. How strange to be told that an event, infinitely more momentous than
these in man’s history, that a Child of the living God—the heir of an inheritance,
before which earthly splendours pale—has been born, and yet the event been un-
noticed and unknown! 2. But let us turn to the simple argument of the text; for
here we are taught that the association on which all such incredulity is based is an
altogether fallacious one. For the proof that visibility and greatness are far from
inseparable we are pointed to one out of many similar phenomena which daily meet
our observation. In nature greatest powers are invisible. When the magnet draws
the iron, who sees the strange influence by which the attraction is effected? What
keenest optics can see gravitation? So, too, the wind, visible in its manifold in-
fluences, it is in its essence and operation imperceptible. So it is with every one
that is born of the Spirit. You cannot see this mysterious agent any more than
those natural agents. But, as in the one case, so in the other, though the agent is
invisible, the effects of his operation are manifest. You do not see the gale from
heaven, wafted over any sinner’s soul, but ever and anon, if you watch carefully the
moral history of your fellow-men, you may perceive the visible witness of a hidden
and invisible work. Conclusion: This is a doctrine fraught with many obvious
practical lessons. 1. If the agency of the Spirit be supernatural, how urgent the
necessity for securing the Spirit’s intervention! What an arrest would be laid upon
many of the works of man if that natural agent were suspended! If the wind of
heaven ceased to blow, conceive how abortive, in many cases, would be all human
industry and skill. But equally fatal, in the spiritual world, to the success of all
human endeavours, would be the withholding of the supernatural grace of the
Spirit of God. Pray, then, for the Spirit. Despair of success apart from it; rest
not till you have obtained it. The wind comes not at the sailor’s or the husband-
man’s call; but the believer is possessed of a spell that can summon the gracious aid
of the Spirit in every time of need. And if the doctrine of the text furnishes us
with a motive to prayer, not less suggestive is it of encouragement to effort,
For whilst our natural powers soon reach their limit, to the supernatural aid on
which we are encouraged to depend there is none. Self-reformation soon proves a
vain attempt; but the effort to repent and turn to God cannot fail, when the very
Power that fashioned our mysterious being prompts and aids in the work of restora-
tion. 2. If the agency of the Spirit is sovereign, too, the subject is replete with
practical significance. For does not the very uncertainty of nature’s influences act
a8 a stimulus to the exertions of man? The fair wind that has long been waited
for, and may speedily die away. And so if there is any similar variableness in the


p
¥
3


7


CHAP, III.]} ST. JOHN. 221


times and seasons of religious influence, how urgent the motive thus presented to
Christian vigilance in waiting for every favourable opportunity, and to diligence in
improving it! 3. If the Spirit’s work be secret in itself, yet manifest by its effects,
it suggests the important inquiry, Can I discern in my character and life the signs
of the Spirit’s presence? (J. Caird, D.D.) The heavenly wind:—I. Take the
text in reference to raz Hony Spmrr Himszztr. The wind is an emblem of the
Holy Ghost. 1. In its freeness, The wind is the very image of freedom. No one
can fetter it. Cassar may decree what he pleases, but the wind will blow in his face
if he looks that way. So the Spirit is most free and absolute, He visits one
nation and not another. Of two men one receives His blessing and not another.
One man wins souls, another seems to missthem. And the same minister will one
day speak like the voice of God, and another be but a reed shaken by the wind. Yet
while absolutely free He is not arbitrary. (1) The wind has a law of its own, and
the Spirit is a law to Himself. He doesas He wills, but He wills that which is best.
(2) There are certain places where you will always find a breeze, on the mountains,
in the morning or evening on the seashore. Soin communion with God you will
ever find the Spirit in motion. (3) The wind in some lands has its seasons. There
are trade’ winds, &c., which may be counted on. So there are certain times in, and
certain conditions under which He visits the Churches—times of mighty prayer and
exceptional faithfulness in preaching, (4) The wind may blow, but the sailor may
be asleep. Never suffer the Spirit to be with us and find us regardless of His pre-
sence. When the windmill was more in use than now, some parishes would be half
starved when week after week there was no wind. The miller would look anxiously
by day, and if the breezes stirred at dead of night, somebody would run and knock
him up. Be on the look out. Hoist sail when the wind favours. 2. In its mani-
festations—“ Thou hearest,” &. Our Lord spoke of the gentle zephyr which is
heard. The hearing ear is intended to be the discerner of the Spirit. Faith
cometh by hearing. (1) Many get no further than hearing. (2) Others hear the
sound in their consciences and are disturbed. (3) The man who is saved hears—
(a) The threatening wind. (b) The destroying wind. (c) The invigorating wind.
(d) The sound of a going in the mulberry trees which summons us to victory. 3.
In its mystery—“ Thou canst not tell.” We may tell that the wind comes from a cer-
tain quarter, but we cannot tell at what point it begins or where it ends. So with
the Spirit we cannot tell—(1) ‘‘ Whence He cometh.” His first movements are
hidden in mystery. Why is it that you obtained a blessing under one sermon and
not under another, and yet when you spoke to your sister she had been blessed
under the other? (2) “Nor whither it goeth.” (a) When we let loose the truth
in the power of the Spirit we never know where it may fly. A child takes a downy
seed, but who knows where it will settle? Whole continents have been covered
with strange flowers simply by the wind’s wafting foreign seeds thither. Fling the
truth, then, to the winds. (6) Nor can we tell whither it will carry us. When
Carey gave his young heart to Christ, he never thought the Spirit would carry him
to Serampore. II. The text relates to THOSE WHO ARE BORN OF THE Sprart. The birth
partakes of the nature of the parent. 1. Asto freedom : where the Spirit is there is
liberty from the bondage of the law, custom, sin, fear of death and dread of hell, 2.
As to manifestation, The regenerate are known by their sound. The secret life will
speak by voice, action, influence. 3. As to mystery—(1) Thou knowest not whence He
cometh from thethrone of grace. (2) Thou knowest not whither He goeth—to thesecret
place of the Most High. (C.H. Spurgeon.) The operations of the wind :—I. The wind
souNDS. 1. Sometimes it wails, and so the Spirit sets men mourning for sin. 2, Some-
times its sound is triumphant, and so the Spirit inspires in us the shout of victory
over sin and death. II. The wind is a great tevenEeR. It aims at things high.
If you are down low in the street you escape its fury, but climb the height and you
will scarcely stand. Even so the Spirit. He makes every high thought bow before
the majesty of His might. III. The wind runrtries the atmosphere. In the Swiss
valleys there is a heaviness which makes the inhabitants unhealthy. They take
quinine and have big swellings in their necks, The air does not. circulate ; but if
there is a great storm it is a great blessing to the people. So the Spirit cleanses
out our evil and brings health to the soul. IV. The wind i8 &@ GREAT TRIER OF THE
NATURE OF THINGS. It sweeps over heaps of rubbish and scatters the dust, &c., but
iron and stone remain unmoved. The Holy Ghost is similarly a testing power,
both of men and doctrines. V. The wind is nenprun. In Lincolnshire, where the
country is flat and below the sea level, they are obliged to dry the land by means of
windmills. In many parts all the corn is ground by means of the wind. The


™


222 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cHaP. III,
OW | eee
Spirit is also a mighty helper. You are inundated by a flood of iniquity which you
can never bale out; or you need some power to prepare your spiritual food, and
you will never find better help than that which the Spirit can give. VI. Man must
CO-OPERATE WITH THE WIND, and so Christians with the Spirit. 1. In all spiritual
work : as the sailor has to raise his sails. 2. In growth in grace. We are to work
out what He works in. VII. MEN ARE COMPLETELY DEPENDENT ON THE WIND. They
are entirely at its mercy as to time, direction, and strength. So we are compelled
to wait the pleasure of the Spirit. But just as the sailor anxiously looks up at the
mast-head to see how the breeze is shifting, so should we look up to heaven and
observe the movement of the Spirit of God. (Ibid.) The work of the Holy Spirit
is a hidden work :-—As oftentimes, when walking in a wood near sunset, though the
sun himself be hid by the height and bushiness of the trees around, yet we know
that he is still above the horizon, from seeing his beams in the open glades before
us, illuming a thousand lgaves, the several brightnesses of which are so many
evidences of his presence, Thus it is with the Holy Spirit. He works in secret;
but His work is manifest in the lives of all true Christians. Lamps so heavenly
must have been lit from on high. (J. C. Hare.) Methods of conversion vary :—
Men’s convictions of sin differ with their characters. One man says, ‘In such a
sermon, a lion-like conviction sprang out upon me, and seized my soul in its grasp,
and had nearly torn it asunder.” And another says, ‘The twilight of God’s love
fell upon me; but when the eclipse was over, the sun shone out again, and I was
happy.” ‘Terror, or only sadness, anguish, grief, and love, are all alike really con-
viction. (H.W. Beecher.) The preciousness of Divine influence :—Watch, there-
fore, the gales of grace: we cannot purchase this wind for any money. This bird
when flown will not easily be brought back again. (J. Trapp.) The wind an
emblem of the Spirit :—The work of the Spirit is compared—I. To the Biowmne of
the wind. i. The wind blows vitally and refreshingly, causing the earth to fructify.
So it is the Spirit of God who imparts vital grace and makes us bring forth fruit
(Cant. iv. 16). When a man is drowsy a blast of wind freshens him: so doth the
Spirit awaken us from our spiritual slumberings. As God used the wind to bring
quails, and still does to bring in great tides of water; so by His Spirit doth He
bring all blessings to us, and the tides of repenting tears. The wind from the
bellows revives the fire—so does the Spirit the sparks of heavenly firein us. How
soon would the smoking flax be quenched but for this! 2. Winds dissolve the
clouds and cause an irrigation of the earth; this spiritual wind causes rain also,
even the tears of penitence. 3. Winds cause clearness and sereneness of the air:
likewise the Spirit having dissolved our iniquities causes the beauty and sunshine of
God’s favour to cheer the believer. 4. Winds refrigerate. In the heat of summer
how acceptable their comfort! So the Spirit allays the heat of our temptations and
afflictions, that we may with patience endure and overcome them. How could the
martyrs have so triumphed in the flames but for this? 5. Winds penetrate. So
the Word of the Spirit (Heb. iv. 12). 6. Winds terrify by their destructive power.
So under the power of the Spirit sinners tremble. 7. Winds carry all before them:
with what ease doth the spirit perform its duties when under the power of the
Spirit. II. To the nrerry of the wind. No creature has any power to raise or
check either. 1. In regard of the outward means of the ministry, for it is in that
blessed trumpet that the Spirit commonly blows. Once this wind blew in the East,
and how famous were those Churches! But it is now turned into the West. 2.
In regard to the efficacy of the means. 3. In regard to the measure of the efficacy,
piercing deeper, purging cleaner, acts more vitally in some than in others (1 Cor.
xii, 11). 4. In regard to the manner of His working. Sometimes using means,
sometimes not. 5, In regard of the time of working. III. To the sENsIBLENESS
of the wind. This voice is—1. Secret, within the heart of the regenerate, (1)
Arousing, as in conviction of sin, (2) Mild and sweet, alluring to holiness (Isa. xxx.
31; Hos. ii. 14). (3) Comforting (Matt. ix. 2; Rom. viii. 16). (4) Fervent, as in
prayer. 2. Open. (J. Dyke.) The wind a symbol of the Spirit’s working :—I.
LET US FORM SOME PRECISE IDEA OF THE WIND; which is just the atmosphere in
motion. The atmosphere is an envelopment of air that enwraps our globe and
rises to the height of from forty to fifty miles. It gets lighter and thinner as we
ascend, till it gradually disappears. The air consists chiefly of two gases in the
proportion of about one-fourth of the one to three-fourths of the other. It is the
element in which alone it is possible for us to live. It is just this air in motion
that constitutes wind. As still water stagnates, so would still air. A benevolent
Creator, therefore, has seen to it that it shall never be long still. And this motion


.
3
-
>,
-
s
.
*
s
=


CHAP, I11.] ST. JOHN. 223


is produced mainly by changes of temperature. II. Let us now pass to THE REALITY
ILLUSTRATED—the influences of the Divine Spirit inregeneration. These influences,
like the wind, are—1. Vital—absolutely essential to spiritual life (Gen. i. 2, ii. 7;
Psa. civ. 29, 30; Ezek. Xxxvili. 8-10). But will the Spirit come tome? Do you
ever ask, Will the vital air come? 2. Sovereign. For aught that we can do it
bloweth where it listeth. Come on us wheve it may, when, whence, and with what
result. It is absolutely beyond our control. We may indeed turn it to account,
and ought; and this very sovereignty of it is the strongest reason why we should.
Equally sovereign is the Spirit: ‘‘ He divideth to every man severally as He will.”
Nevertheless, He is benignly here for us all. Though absolutely sovereign He is
Love; and it sovereignly pleases Him to be here, striving at every heart. When
sovereign love has done its best, vain will be our cries and tears. 3, Mysterious
(Eccles. xi. 4-6). ‘‘ Wind,” “‘ Spirit,” ‘ Birth,” all are here. These strongly set
forth that so far from discouraging action, they are strongest incentives to it. For
the wind is not ‘mysterious ” in any such sense as to mean causeless or capricious.
It is not independent of law. Mathematicians can go far in describing the properties
of curves ; but fire a rifle, twirl a half-crown, or toss a ball into the air, which are
the simplest and most familiar of acts, and though every convolution exactly obeys
mathematical and physical laws, yet where is the Newton or the Leibnitz that could
trace these in detail, and sum up for us so complex and intervolved a computation ?
So the Spirit’s influences are inscrutable, in great part, from the nature of the case:
They deal with the most involved and interwarped of all problems. They have to
do with free agency, duty, destiny, and diversities of individual temperament and
circumstances. How stumbling oftentimes to see some highly privileged one
resisting to the last the influences of the Spirit; while another, much less privileged,
or a third, even openly profligate, is seen to surrender himself to the overpowering
influence o! gospel truth and love. But this is the time for such mysteries now
that the mystery of iniquity doth work. Only the antagonistic mystery of godliness
can counterwork it. 4. Discernible. With all its mystery there is no mystery
about its presence. A regenerated man will not be able to veil off his character.
Sound is itself a sort of wind, in its vibration on the auditory nerve: therefore
genuine Christians will tell personally on others with the self-same infivence in
varying degrees that told on themselves. 5. Benignant (Psa. cxxxv.7). The breeze
is—(1) Healthful and reviving. (2) Purifying. 6. Universal— where it listeth ;”
yes, but then it listeth to blow everywhere; not in short detached breaths, but in
broad, boundless, interblending currents that benignly embrace, belt, and begirdle
the globe. So is it with the Holy Spirit (Heb. iii. 7; Acts ii. 17, vii. 51; Rev. xxii.
17). (7. Guthrie, D.D.)


Ver. 9. How can these things be ?—Religious revivals :—This question is often
asked concerning revivals of religion, and in dealing with it I would show—I. Tuar
THERE ARE SOLID GROUNDS ON WHICH TO BUILD A HOPE OF THE DISPENSATION OF THE
SPIRIT TO PRODUCE REVIVALS OF RELIGION IN OUR cHuURCHES. 1. We should endeavour
to obtain a correct estimate of the real condition of the primitive churches of whom
we read that they received the Holy Ghost. On this subject there are two opinions.
(1) Some regard them as bordering on perfection. (2) Others as discovering the
weaknesses of an infantile state emerging from barbarism. The truth lies between
the two extremes. They were distinguished by peculiar privileges and exalted at-
tainments, but many of them were possessed of weakness, imperfections, and sins.
Yet nothing is more indisputable than that they were in constant receipt of the
influences of the Spirit of God. 2. The Holy Spirit chooses oftentimes to display
His Divine prerogative of sovereignty as to the time, place, and modes of His opera-
tions; and He displays it in such a manner that not unfrequently He gives no
account of it to us. How is it that of two men brought up under the same influences
one is converted and the other not? ‘There is an analogy between the operations
of God in nature and in grace, as different countries will yield different productions,
each excellent in their kind; as oaks are of slow, and parasites of rapid growth, so
is the work of conversion. Read the explication of the subject in 1 Cor. xii. So
one country is visited with a dispensation of the Spirit which issues in marked and
numerous conversions, while another is visited with one which issues in works in
defence of the gospel, and yet another with the missionary spirit. 3. There are
circumstantials often connected ‘with revivals which are by no means essential to
their general character. (1) It is no indication of a genuine revival that there is
great excitement. There may be real spiritual excitement, but often itis of an empty


224 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. 11%.


—


character; and there may be a true revival when all is calm and noiseless. (2)
Nor is it a certain evidence that great numbers profess to be converted. 4. There
are facts frequently occurring amongst ourselves which prove that the Spirit has
not forsaken us. (1) Individual sermons are known to produce great results. (2)
Churches often receive members into fellowship without special efforts. (3) Indi-
vidual cases of conversion show the Spirit’s operation, 6. Inference that if the
means be employed we may expect yet greater things in the way of the Spirit’s
manifestations. II. THERE ARE PREPARATORY MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED IN ORDER TO
THE ATTAINMENT OF THESE HIGH AND GRACIOUS DISTINCTIONS. 1. Cultivate a solemn,
deep, and abiding conviction of the necessity and importance of the Spirit’s
influences to advance the cause of religion. (1) In your own hearts. (2) In your
congregations and churches. 2. Labour to put out of the way all those impedi-
ments which tend to obstruct the descent of the Spirit. Trifling with prayer, specu-
lating on gospel verities, hypocrisy in worship, conformity with the world,
uncharitableness and all those things which “ grieve the Holy Spirit of God.” 3.
Acknowledge thankfully what God has already done by His Spirit. (1) Not to do
so displays ignorance and ingratitude. (2) To do so will open the eye to God’s
wonderful working in many particulars, church building, Bible circulation, Sunday
schools, missions, &c. 4. Consecrate more time to fervent and importunate prayer—
private, family, social, &c. 5. Expect great things from God. (J. Clayton.)
Genteel ignorance :—John Wesley always preferred the middling and lower classes
to the wealthy. He said, ‘‘ If I might choose, I should still, as I have done hitherto,
preach the gospel to the poor.’’ Preaching in Monkton Church, a large old, ruinous
building, he says, “‘I suppose it has scarce had such a congregation during this
century. Many of them were gay, genteel people, so I spoke on the first elements
of the gospel, but I was still out of their depth. Oh, how hard it is to be shallow
enough for a polite audience!” (Anecdotes of the Wesleys.) Man naturally
ignorant :—To unconverted persons a great part of the Bible resembles a letter
written in cipher. The blessed Spirit’s office is to act as God’s decipherer, by letting
His people into the secret of celestial experience, as the key and clue to those sweet
mysteries of grace, which were before as a garden shut up, or as a fountain sealed,
or as & book written in an unknown character. (Toplady.) Christ and the
enquiry room :—I, Tur rnquimmeR. Nicodemus was—l. A sincere inquirer; his
sincerity was based on a conviction of Christ’s Divine mission. He knew there could
be no trickery or magic in His wonderful works. Hence his unequivocal confession.
2. An anxious inquirer. 3. A perplexed inquirer. (1) Perplexity results from
thought and imperfect knowledge, In the multitude of his thoughts Nicodemus is
bewildered. He is learned in the law, but ignorant of Christ’s true character as
witnessed by the prophets. (2) Prejudice begets perplexity ; and to receive Jesus as
the Messiah was to do violence to all orthodox views. But blessed is the perplexity
that profapts to inquiry. 4, A reverential inquirer. II. Tum supyEcTs TAUGHT IN
THE Inquiry Room: 1. The kingdon of God. This kingdom is—(1) Real, though
not of this world. (2) Spiritual; hence it cometh without observation. (3) Vic-
torious, its weapons being mighty through God. 2. This kingdom has conditions,
Entrance to it could not be—(1) by natural birth; (2) by nationality ; (3) circum-
cision; (4) pharisaical righteousness; (5) but by Divine birth, I. Tur mersop
ADOPTED WAS CONVERSATIONAL. IV. THe rusuutts. 1. For a time doubtful. 2.
Afterwards most satisfactory. (Joseph Heaton.)  Nicodemus’s perplexity :—1. We
live in a world of wonders : vegetable growth, insect evolution, human birth; about
each of which we might well say, ‘‘ How can these things be?”? 2. There are greater
wonders in the world towards which we are hastening—resurrection, &. 3. Not
less wonderful is the work of grace within a man’s soul. I. WHAT THESE THINGS
WERE WHICH PERPLEXED Nicopemus. ‘The new birth. 1. This doctrine is one of
which the Bible is full, See Johni.13; 2 Cor. v.17; Eph. i. 20; 1 Pet. i. 23, which
teach that only by the almighty power of God can a dead sinner be born again, and
that this power is exercised through the Word of Truth. 2. This doctrine presup-
poses the corruption of human nature—not that it has simply gone wrong through
bad example and vicious training. It does not want mending, but renewing. 3.
David found this out—“I was shapen in iniquity.” So did St. Paul—‘“*In my flesh
dwelleth no good thing,” “ They that are in the flesh cannot please God.” 4. This
doctrine is very humbling to pride of birth and intellect. 5. This doctrine conveys
a blessed truth. Man may become a child of God, holy and meet for heaven, 6,
Heaven being a character as well as a place no man can enter without being born
again, II. Tumsz ARE THE THINGS WE MUST KNOW IF WE ARE TO BE SAVED, 1, The


‘
;


OHAP. 111] ST. JOHN. ' 225


very worst may be saved. 2. To be saved we must go to the author of the new birth.
3. Whatsoever may be our wants with regard to the present life nothing can stand
in the place of His. Philanthropic schemes are good in their place, but are as the
small dust of the balance compared with this. 4. The new birth is a personal
experience, and each sinner must come individually, prayerfully, believingly and
now. (Canon Miller.)


Ver. 10. Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things ?—The truths
which Christ came to declare, He did but recall in great measure to minds which
had lost the memory of what was from the first. I. THE NEED OF SPIRITUAL CIRCUM-


CISION, CLEANSING OR RENEWAL OF THE HEART, WAS NO NEW DOCTRINE OF CHRIST (see


Deut. x. 16, xxx. 6; 1 Sam. x. 9; Psa. li. 10; Jer. xxxi. 33; Ezek. xi.19). IL. Tux
COMING oF THE HoLy SPIRIT AND HIs PRESENCE IN MAN’S HEART HAD BEEN FORETOLD BY
THE PROPHETS (Ezek. xxxvi. 25-27). III. Hencz THE IGNORANCE OF THIS DISTIN-
GUISHED TEACHER WAS INEXCUSABLE. (W. Denton, M.A.) The doctrine of the new
birth was according to Jesus exhibited in the Old Testament. I. Tu pocrrine or
THE FALL IMPLIES 1T, especially when viewed in connection with the Divine purity
and holiness as the only moral standard for humanity (Gen. xvii. 1; Exod. xxii. 31;
Lev. xi. 44; Psa. xxiv. 3,4; Isa. xxxv. 8). I. Circumcision oF THE HEART WAS AN INDIS-
PENSABLE QUALIFICATION for serving God (Deut. x. 16, xxx. 6), which was symbolized
by circumcision (Rom. ii, 29) as it is now by baptism (1 Pet. iii. 21), III. Ir was
PREFIGURED IN THE CHANGE OF HEART CONFERRED on Saul and David (1 Sam. x. 9,
xvi. 13). IV. Ir was RECOGNIZED IN Davip’s PRAYER For Punriry (Psa. li. 10). V. It
aWAS EXPRESSLY PROMISED AS A MxEssIANic BLESSING (Ezek. xi. 19, xviii. 31, xxxvi. 26;
Jer. iv. 4, xxxi. 33). VI. EvzN THE TERM ‘‘ REGENERATION ” WAS NOT UNKNOWN (Job
xi. 12; Psa. Ixxxvii. 25). The reasonableness of regeneration :—What phraseology
was more familiar with the infidel revolutionists of France than the regeneration of
their country? And is the idea of a regenerated individual an extravagant one, to
be sneered at, when that of a regenerated nation is one to be treated with respect ?
Yea, infidel speculators will discourse of a regenerated world, and yet make sport to
themselves of our faith, as if it were fantastic and visionary, when we speak of the
regeneration of a single man! How is it that, being such masters in philosophy
and politics, they know not these things? (W. Anderson, D.D.)


Ver. 11. We speak that we do know.—Divine certainties :—I. Consider THE
PLACE THE BIBLE HOLDS as an evidence of Christianity. 1. The Bible is the history
of the Jewish people, and their existence to-day is a guarantee that the basis of
the book is firm and undeniable. 2. Every contemporaneous and collateral
witness adds to this assurance. The remains of Egypt and Assyria, the traditions
of the Jews, allusions in Greek and Roman monuments and classic authors are
grounds upon which we are assured of the historic character of the Scriptures. 3.
The Bible is a whole literature. 4. It is the history of a religion. The funda-
mental ideas of the various books are the same—but there is a manifest progress.
The earlier writers look forward to a greater revelation, The ideas become clearer
and clearer. The advancing faith never contradicts the past, and at length the
culmination appears in Jesus. II. TH aparrTaTIoN OF CHRISTIANITY TO THE
SPIRITUAL NEEDS oF MAN. Christ makes great assertions, but never attempts to
prove them. Here He makes His hearer’s hesitation the consequence, not of defect
in the evidence, but of defect in the man. For such a truth as the new birth
admitted of no other evidence than its own light. Salvation must be based on 4&
voluntary self-surrender. No more proof must be given therefore than will leave
room for doubt, if men desire to doubt. Mathematical truth admits of perfect
demonstration, but if religious truth leaves no room for doubt, then faith ceases to
be religious, Its evidence is a probation for man. The force of this evidence
varies according to spiritual condition. If a man is debased by sin, he will not
readily open his heart, but if he is convicted of sinfulness, he will respond to the
gospel and perceive how exactly Divine revelation is adapted to his need. Then
its certainty will be felt in proportion to what he has found of peace and gladness.
Just as the correspondence between the eye and light makes it absolutely certain
that the one was made for the other, so it is with Christianity. Water cannot rise
above the level of its source, and that men should of their own accord produce the
Bible, and infuse into it such a marvellous power of raising men near its standard,
is incredible. We shall feel the force of this far more if we can bring our own
experience forward as a testimony. In this way each Christian becomes a living


oo


226 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, . [cHaP. III,
issn nUnEn ovens SER
proof. (P. W. Darnton, B.A.) Christian faith a reality :—It seems a moderate
claim that the alleged truths of our religion should be respected as realities. But
this demand covers the whole ground. Admit—1. That God is a real Father and
Sovereign. 2. That each soul is His child and subject. 3. That separation from
Him is the most terrible of disasters, to be healed at any cost. 4. That Jesus
is the Christ who achieves that reconciliation. 5. That a righteous life is the
fulfilment of human destiny. Admit this, and you have granted the whole conclu-
sion. The terms imply something more than intellectual assent. There is such a
thing as an ineffectual creed, To realize a doctrine is to have it wrought into the
roots of our life, This realization only takes place when the truth emerges from
the nebulous haze of conjecture into clear, sharp light—when it takes hold of feel-
ing and is taken hold of by faith. This is needed now for the true efficiency of
religion, For our religion is not dogma, or theory, or dream, but a spiritual power.
Let us examine a few facts,in the Christian faith which authenticate its claim as a
religion of realities, I. Tux mga or Gop. Christianity did not create this. It
simply places itself on the basis of a natural reality affirmed by the consenting
feelings and philosophies of the nations; and then proceeds to nourish and satisfy
it. 1. It is a real authority that speaks (ver. 11). 2. There is reality in the
very attitudes and occasions of its revelations. 3. Reality in its substance. ‘ God
is a Spirit,” and with that simple announcement old idolatries that materialized
the gods, and mythologies that multiplied them, vanished. 4. Reality in its dis-
closures of God’s nearness and condescension. Heis the God of houses, streets,
schools—not distant or etherealized. II. This opens the true doctrine of InTER-
COURSE WITH Gop, or prayer. What is natural if not that a child should speak to
his parents, that man should ask for what God only can give? Prayer is a reality—
something yearned for, something satisfying. So speaks the world’s best experience.
To pretend to ask things we do not really desire, or things we have heard others
ask for, is not prayer, but speculation or traditional mummery. Christ brings
prayer back to reality. ‘Ask, and ye shall receive.” III. Co-ordinate with this is
LOVE FOR MAN. Here again Christianity does not create the faculty, but out of it
weaves the bond of spiritual brotherhood. In training this social instinct Christianity
gives it the brightest tokens of reality. 1. It stimulates fellowship, and by the
healthiest motive—disinterested mercy, of which its central and crucified Form is
the incarnate example. 2. It regulates it by the wisest law—broad, far-sceing,
equity, saving it from wronging one class by righting another, from destroying
without constructing. 38. It directs it to the purest object—the personal relief,
the universal liberation, the spiritual rectitude of each soul, IV. Turning from
the social to the private offices of Christianity, we encounter the only satisfactory
interpretation of the natural YEARNING TOWARDS AN IDEAL MORAL PERFECTION. It
is only in very inferior natures that this sensibility to exalted goodness is utterly
depraved. Baseness secretly confesses the beauty of magnanimity. The story of
incorruptible conscience is the perpetual charm of literature. With all select souls
there is a tantalizing disparity between the aspiring aim and the lagging perform-
ance. How does the gospel justify this real passion for the best? 1. By blessing
these native aspirations as the Divine seal set on humanity. 2. By encouraging
them, 3. By furnishing them nutriment and discipline to ripen their vigour. 4.
By holding up one in whom all their promises are realized. 5. By giving them a
hereafter where they shall mature into open vision and into calm and balanced
power, V. Not less does the gospel fit the varieties of human consciousness in its
great doctrine of A RULING CHOICE DETERMINING CHARACTER. It divides the world
into two classes by the inexorable line of that voluntary consecration. There is
one differencing point, the point of motive, where the world’s people and God’s
divide. WI. But there is one reality darker and more fearful. Tum LAW AND GUIDE
OF LIFE HAS BEEN BROKEN. I know I am frail, offending, and guilty. Who shall
deliver-me? Christ. He has come for that. VII. Infer, then, THz REALITY oF
Curistianity. 1. In its ministry to the cravings of simple, honest hearts. 2. In
its marvellous adaptation to the pain and gladness, fear and hope of our humanity.
3. In its unpretending address to our common habits, speaking the language of life. 4,
In its boundless relief fora boundless difficulty. 5. In its expanding and exhaustless
fulness for all glowing souls. VIII. Tum marty CHRISTIANS PREACHED, LIVED,
DIED, FOR THIS.REALITY, AND CONQUERED THE WORLD. (Bp. Huntington.) The
posttiveness of Christianity as a truth and a practice :—Whatever exists, exists
positively, has existence and also energy. Positiveness is the very soul of
growth. I, Curisrianrry 1s posrrive. 1. God is a positive Being. 2. Man is a


——


—


co eee


CHAP. I11.] ST. JOHN. 227


positive being. 3. Sin is a positive condition. 4, Holiness is a positive state,
II, CHRISTIANITY MUST BE POSITIVELY APPLIED. 1. It is to honour God. 2, It is
to be serviceable to man. 38. It is to prove victorious over sin. 4. It is to ha
potential unto holiness. III. Tau posiriveness or CHRISTIANITY IS NEUTRALIZED—
1. When it is interpreted as a system of polite moral and msthetic education.
There is a class of writers and preachers who blot out of the Scriptures everything
that is positive, who drop every word that bristles with damnatory energy, theorize
the birth of Jesus, reduce the atonement to heroism, treat human depravity as a
misfortune, speak patronizingly of hell as an exploded idea, and allude pleasantly
to heaven as a benevolent myth. Many people are frightened by this ‘modern
thought.” They need not be, for this is a positive age, and a negative religion can
make no headway. 2. When it is over-organized. Christ did not organize it
because He saw that truth was over-organized, and therefore cramped. Christianity
is a power only when it is organized in human hearts. (W. H. H. Murray.)
The positiveness of Christianity :—You may judge of this—I. By 1rs worps. Its
‘*shalls” and ‘“‘shall nots” are like so many bugle notes put into print. They
sound with the energy of the Apocalyptic trumpets. Its commandments fall upon the
conscience as a hammer of steel falls upon the anvil. Its warnings sound like the
solemn protest of an indignant universe. Its threatenings roll over the guilty soul
like the dreadful reverberations of ponderous thunder, Even its invitations suggest
the tension of anxiety, and its entreaties come to our ears impelled by the urgency
of anxious and infinite affection. Its very words are charged with significance
almost to the limit of explosion. Heaven and hell, sin and holiness, faith and
unbelief, life and death, salvation and damnation—these are glorious or dreadful
words, mighty affirmations, expressions which challenge the attention of the most
sceptical, and fill the thoughtful mind with solemn awe. No other religion has
ever weighted the pages of its sacred books with such dreadful emphasis ; no other
religion has ever brought its believers face to face with such stupendous positiveness
of assertion and conception. But if the verbal expression of Christianity is thus
positive, what language is adequate to describe the positiveness of—II. Irs sprarr?
If its body is so tense and vibrant with energies, who may pourtray the vigour of
its animating spirit? If the unlighted orb, as it hangs rayless overhead, can draw
every eye to its dark circle, and compel human attention, what would be its power
if its inherent fires should break through the shell of sombre surface, and the
mighty sphere should suddenly be ablaze with beams? ‘Tell me, you who know
the words of Scripture, and have also felt the movings of its matchless and
irresistible spirit, which is the stronger? Tell me, you who once heard in the word
heaven the sound of sweet but far-off music, but who now have the resonance of
the Divine harmonies sounding in you, did you know aught of that melodious word
until the chime of it made music in your soul? No. Not till the spirit of
Christianity is received into his heart can man know or dream how positive are its
operations. Nor can man know what hell is until he lies enfolded within the coils


of some serpentine remorse, and the dreadful stricture tightens on his conscience


until he screams and moans in the agony of a tormented spirit. Do not say
“ exaggeration,” for you know that what I say is true, when I declare that men
and women there have been who have committed crimes so dark, dreadful, and
damning, so obnoxious even to their blurred moral vision, that the memory of their
deed has haunted them—yea, haunted them so that they could not eat, nor sleep,
nor forget : the fires of remorse were within their bosom, and they could not quench
them ; the “damned spot” was on their hands, and all the seas could not wash
the awful stain away, and at last. they died: died screaming in agony, as if the
torment of hell had already got hold of them; and it had, (Ibid.) God’s
message is but carelessly listened to:—Massilon, in the. first sermon he ever
preached, found the whole audience, upon his getting into the pulpit, in a disposi-
tion no way favourable to his intentions, Their nods, whispers, or drowsy
behaviour showed him that there was no great profit to be expected from his
sowing in a soil so improper. However, he soon changed the disposition of his
audience by his manner of beginning. “If,” says he, ‘‘a cause, the most
important that could be conceived, were to be tried at the bar before qualified
judges; if this cause interested ourselves in particular ; if the eyes of the whole
kingdom were fixed upon the events; if the most eminent counsel were employed
on both sides; and if we had heard from our infancy of this yet undetermined
trial—would you not all sit with due attention and warm expectation to the plead-
ings on each side? Would not all your hopes and fears be hinged on the final


228 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. — (cHAP. mm.


decision? And yet, let me tell you, you have this moment a cause where not one
nation, but all the world, are spectators; tried not before a fallible tribunal, but
the awful throne of heaven, where not your temporal and transitory interests are
the subject of debate, but your eternal happiness or misery ; where the cause is
still undetermined, but, perhaps, the very moment I am speaking may fix the
irrevocable decree that shall last for ever; and yet, notwithstanding all this, you
can hardly sit with patience to hear the tidings of your own salvation. I plead the
cause of heaven, and yet I am scarcely attended to.”


Ver, 12. If I have told you of earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye
believe, if I tell you of heavenly things ?—The question in its bare form is easily
grappled with, but in its application to the subjects before us we encounter a great
obstacle. Earthly things are the deep things of the new birth; heavenly things
are the lifting up of the Son of man, the gift of the Only-Begotten, that the world
through Him might be saved. Regeneration and santification are by comparison
earthly things; redemption, atonement, justification are by contrast and pre-
eminence heavenly. He who believes not the former, how can he believe the latter?
We notice—I. AN INVERSION OF OUR COMMON ESTIMATE OF THE MYSTERIES OF
Curist’s KINGDomM. 1. It is usual to speak of the work of Christ as far easier of
apprehension than the work of the Spirit. The idea of atonement is treated as
self-evident, and theory after theory has been constructed to explain it. But Christ
says difficult asit is to understand a Divine influence, it is more difficult to apprehend
a Divine sacrifice; that He only who is from heaven can reveal the latter, while a
master of Israel is culpably ignorant if he knows not of the former. 2. The same
persons exaggerate the mystery of the doctrine of grace, whereas Christ treats it as
a plain earthly thing. The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews treats it in thesame
way, bidding us leave theelements, baptism, &c., to go on to perfection—the strong
meat, the profounder study of the fulfilment of type and shadow in the atonement
and mediation of Jesus Christ. II. CAN WE EXPLAIN THIS INVERSION? 1. With regard
to the new birth. (1) It is not that it is discoverable by man in its nature, or re-
cognizable in its process, or practicable in its realization, and so an earthly thing.
It is as much above reason, as secret, as independent of man’s interference as the
deepest mystery of redemption. But—(2) The idea of a spiritual influence has
obvious illustrations from earthly experience. Life itself is a putting forth and
taking in of the authority of mind over mind. Therefore there can be no ante-
cedent improbability of a Divine influence affecting the soul. (3) When we think
of our indebtedness to God as Creator, Preserver, Benefactor, there can be nothing
difficult in the thought that the Author of our spirit can quicken and bless it. (4)
Although the work is secret in its processes, it is cognizable in its effects. When
you see a proud man humble, the worldly man religious, you have proof which
carries the matter into the region of sight. (5) The doctrine was earthly to Nico-
demus because it was in his Old Testament. 2. How different with the topics that
follow! At first sight less mysterious, for was not Christ really man, and was not
His sacrifice a human death? Yet when we turn to that which the human en-
shrined, the mystery of Christ’s Person, we see the appositeness of the term heavenly.
(1) Divine incarnation and Divine suffering are absolutely incomprehensible revela-
tions. The more men argue over them the more danger there is of darkening
counsel by words without knowledge. (2) Ifthe Divine passion is a mystery, how
much more the connection between that suffering and man’s release! (3) The
individual appropriation of Christ’s sacrifice is incomprehensible, (4) The work of
grace shows itself by infallible signs, but the absolution is the secret act of God
alone. III. Let us press upon ourselves the thought of THR HEAVENLINESS OF THE
ONE ALL-SUFFICIENT SACRIFICE. We have in our Lord’s question the key to much
of modern unbelief, Christ tells us of our need of Divine grace to change us into
new men, and we believe not that. Men confess that they must be moral, but
contend that they can secure that for themselves, and that it is weakness to look
out of themselves for help. Nature refuses grace. Who, then, can wonder if the
same unbelief shall spread into the region of the heavenly, and the scoffer at grace
scoff at atonement? (Dean Vaughan.) The moral and the revealed truths :—We
may distinguish between these. Christ’s teaching in its practical applications ig
its earthly side; His revelation of God, His nature and will its heavenly side, I,
phar ronaips phere or CHRIST MUST BE ACCEPTED BY EVERY UPRIGHT CONSCIENCE,

ere else do you find the idea of the sovereign and eternal value of right more
clearly and firmly expressed? 2. The same applies to holiness. He opposes the


ae a aie | a) i


OMAP. 111.] . ST. JOHN. 229


systems which make it consist in outward performances, and places stress on the
intention. 3. None more than Christ have preached the necessity of sacrificing
one’s self for the sake of truth. 4. Whoever taught as Christ the relations of men
with one another and the bonds of justice and mercy which should unite them?
Christ alone has made love the supreme law of mankind. 5. Not only has He
taught all this; He has acted all He has taught. 6. This is why He has a
right to the authority He claims over our consciences, and why when He tells us of
earthly things He has a right to be believed. II. Curist cLaiIms THE SAME FAITH
AS THE REVEALER OF RELIGIOUS TRUTH. He is not merely a teacher of morals; He
speaks of the things which are far beyond our human vision: of God, His govern-
ment, providence, saving purposes, judgment. In the presence of these affirma-
tions our situation changes. So long as His moral teaching was in question we
could judge of it by our consciences, but here are declarations we cannot control.
1. Are we justified in putting faith in Christ? If we set aside this faith, no other
means of access to religious truth remains. Science can teach us nothing. Are
we then to remain in the dark? Men have tried to do so, but alwaws unsuccess-
fully. 2. Is Christ to be believed? (1) The very accent of His affirmations leads
us to reflection, Noman ever spoke with such authority. We believe the asser-
tions of Christ when He tells us of heavenly things, because He has always spoken
truth when He has told us of earthly things, (2) If we believe the religious truths
revealed by Christ it is because they are the necessary complement of the moral
truths our conscience compels us to believe; so that accepting the latter, we are
led by an invincible logic to believe the former. There is no moral truth in the
gospel that does not expand into a religious truth. (EH. Bersier, D.D.) Earthly
and heavenly things :—Heavenly things, being represented unto us in an earthly
form (ver. 8), come clothed to us with our own notions. We can see the sun better
when reflected in the water of a vase than in the firmament; and we can inter-
pret heaven’s language best when it speaks to us in the language of earth. (T.
Manton.) “


Ver. 13. No man hath ascended up to heaven, but He that came down from
heaven.—Christ comforting Nicodemus :—Christ having reproved Nicodemus for his
ignorance, now shows the remedy thereof in Himself. 1. Christ’s sharp word is
not His last. Having inflicted a wound He offers Himself, the only remedy, to cure
it. 2. It is alike impossible for men, by their own parts and natural endowments,
to comprehend spiritual mysteries and enter into God’s counsels, here called
an ascending up to heaven. 3. In so far as sinners come to a true and saving
knowledge of heavenly mysteries, they are in a sort transported up to heaven. If
Capernaum were exalted to heaven by the offer of these things, what are they who
embrace them? 4. It is proper in Christ only, in some sense, to ascend to heaven,
both for the measure and degree of knowledge which, as God, is infinite, and, as
man, is large as human nature is capable of, and for the kind of knowledge which,
as God, is of Himself, and can only be man’s by communication from Him who
came down from heaven. 5. The Son of God in the boson of the Father mani-
fested Himself in our nature, that He might in our nature understand and commu-
nicate the heavenly mysteries; therefore it is marked as the ground of His
ascending or comprehending these things that He came down, hereby showing that
His abasing of Himself did exalt Him as Mediator to that dignity, to be the store-
house of wisdom to His people. 6. Christ, by His Incarnation, did not cease to be
God, for He is still in heaven. 7. The Son of God has assumed the human nature
into so strict a personal union that what is proper to either nature is ascribed unto
the Person under whatsoever name. And hereby Christ shows His love to our
nature that under that name, “Son of Man,” He ascribes what is proper to His
Godhead to Himself. (G. Hutcheson.) The text in relation to error :—Three dis-
tinct heresies are overthrown by these words. I. That of the Nxsrorians, who
affirm a duality of persons as well as of natures in Christ; for unless our Blessed
Lord were one Person, it could not in truth be affirmed that the Son of Man, even
whilst on earth, was in heaven. II. That of the CerinTHians and all others who
deny the pre-existence and Divinity of Christ ; for unless He had been God, it could
not have been said that He came down from heaven even whilst still in heaven.
III. That of the Manicumans, who deny the proper humanity of our Blessed Lord;
for unless He had been really man, of the substance of His mother, it could not be
said that He was the Son of Man. (Toletus.) The Son of Man :—The name is
used—I, Not only because of His Incarnation, but also because of the manner of


i


230 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (car. mt.
Soe. OE eee eee eee ee
that Incarnation. When He came into this world and manifested Himself, so that
we were able to see Him who by nature is invisible, He might have taken new
flesh and a body created especially for Him, other than that of man. He, how-
ever, took man’s flesh, and calls Himself here the Son of Man, and so assures us
that He was really born of woman; otherwise He would not be really the Son of
Man, These words also declare, not only that He took our flesh, for this alone
would not have made Him the Son of Man, but that He took it by being born. II.
These words remind us for our comfort that He is truly our Brother, and that we
are all brethren of Christ by virtue of His birth as the Son of Man. III. He uses
these words to certify us of the fulfilment of those promises which declared that He
should take our flesh and be the seed of man, the Son of David and of Abraham.
LV. Again, He uses these words in confirmation of our being made the sons of God ;
for if Christ for our sake became the Son of Man, we through His humiliation and
Incarnation were therefore made the sons of God. Y. By using the name, Son of
Man, the mark of His humiliation, He would teach us humility. (Ibid.)


Vers. 14,15. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness.—The brazen
serpent :—Nicodemus’s confession of faith was substantially that of many amongst
us, only he went a bit further. Because he was honest he deserved, and because he
was half blind he needed, Christ’s instruction for the expanding of his creed. Com-
plete Christianity, according to Christ, involyes—(1) A radical change comparable
to birth. When Nicodemus staggers at this, our Lord (2) unveils what makes it
possible—the Incarnation of the Son of Man who came down from heaven. Buta
Christianity that stops at the Incarnation is incomplete, so our Lord (3) speaks of
the end of incarnation and ground of the possibility of being born again. I. THE
PROFOUND PARADOXICAL PARALLEL BETWEEN THE IMAGE OF THE POISONER AND THE LIVING
HEALER. The correspondence between the lifting up of the serpent and the lifting
up of Christ, the look of the half-dead Israelite and the look of faith, the healing in
both cases, are clear; and with these it would be strange were there no corre-
spondence between the two subjects. We admit that Jesus Christ has come in the
likeness of the victims of the poison, ‘‘made in the likeness of sinful flesh,’’ without
sin; but in a very profound sense He stood also as representative of the cause of
the evil. ‘God hath made Him to be sin for us,” &c, And the brazen image in
the likeness of the poisonous creature, and yet vith no poison in it, reminds us that
on Christ were heaped the evils that tempt humanity. And Paul, speaking of the
consequences of Christ’s death, says that ‘‘He spoiled principalities and powers,
and made a show of them openly ”’—hanging them up there—‘‘ triumphing over
them init.” Just as that brazen image was hung up as a proof that the venomous
power of living serpents was overcome, so in the death of Christ sin is crucified and
death done to death. II. Tue sHapow or THE cross. 1. The serpent was lifted
for conspicuousness ; and Nicodemus must have understood, although vaguely, that
this Son of Man was to be presented not to a handful of people in an obscure
corner, but to the whole world, as the Healer. 2. But Christ’s prescient eye and
foreboding heart travelled onwards to the cross. Thisis proved from the two other
occasions, when He used the same expression. 3. So from the beginning Christ’s
programme was death. He did not begin as most teachers, full of enthusiastic
dreams, and then, as the illusions disappeared, face the facts of rejection and death.
4, Notice, too, the place in Christ’s work which the cross assumed to Him. There
have been many answering to Nicodemus’s conception—teachers, examples,
righteous men, reformers; but all these have worked by their lives: this Man
comes to work by His death. He came to heal, and you will not get the poison out
of men by exhortations, philosophies, moralities, social reforms. Poison cannot
be treated by surface applications, but by the cross. 5. The Divine necessity which
Christ accepts—‘‘ must.” This was often on His lips. Why? (1) Because His whole
life was one long act of obedience to the Divine Will. (2) Because His whole life
was one long act of compassion for His brethren. III. Tux toox or ratra. The
dying Israelite had to look. Suppose he had looked unbelieving, carelessly,
scoffingly, there would have been no healing. ‘The look was required as the
expression of (1) the consciousness of burning death; (2) the confidence that it
could be taken away because God had said so. (3) The conviction of the hope-
lessness of cure in any other way. IV. THE promisE or Hratinac. 1. In the one
case of the body, in the other case of the soul. 2. The gift of life—something
bestowed, not evolved. 3. This eternal life is present, and by its power arrests the
process of poisoning, and heals the whole nature. 4. It is available for the most


CHAP. I11.] ST, JOHN. 231
desperate cases. Christianity knows nothing of hopeless men. (A. Maclaren, D.D.)
The brazen serpent :—The difference between the Gospels and the Epistles is that
between seed and flower. Christ gave men the seeds of truth, and left inspired
apostles to develop them. Paul has been charged with inventing the doctrine of
the atonement, but it isin this verse in germ. Notice here three analogies—I. In
THE DISEASE. The poison of the fiery serpents was fermenting in the Israelites ;
that of sin is fermenting in us. 1. Men are sinners: a trite observation, but Paul
devoted three chapters in Romans to prove it. Our very righteousness is as filthy
rags, and you may endeavour by moral improvements to wash them, but you can
no more wash them clean than an Ethiop can his left hand by rubbing it with his
right. 2. We are all sinners. There is no difference. Irrational animals come
short of the glory of God; but men “fall short.’”’ The idea of a fall underlies all
human history: hence culpability. Some men have fallen more deeply, but
there is no difference in the fact, 3. All are under sentence of death. ‘‘ Guilty
before God,” subject to penalty—death. The wages never fall below that. 4. Not
only so, but we are polluted, morally sick. What brought death upon us wrought
itin us. The venom of the serpents would assutedly terminate in death, in spite
of all self or otherhelp. We all sinned in Adam, but Adam continues to sin in us.
Sickness is contagious, health never. The Jew transmitted his depravity, not his
circumcision: you impart your sin to your posterity, not your holiness. Hach has
to be regenerated anew. II. In roe remepy. 1. Our salvation comes through
man. The Israelites were bitten by serpents, and by a serpent they were to be
healed. By man came sin; by man comes salvation. 2. Not only by man, but the
Son of Man, one who in the core of His being is closely united to every other man.
According to the ancient law, the Goel or nearest relative alone had the right to
redeem. Christ is the nearest relative any man can have. 3. The Son of Man
lifted up. The tendency is to make the Incarnation the centre of Christianity :
the Bible makes the Cross that. A glorious display of condescending grace was
made at Bethlehem; but on Calvary God and man were reconciled. Christ suffered
(1) with man in virtue of His keen sympathies; (2) for man, in that He suffered
martyrdom rather than forsake the path of duty; (3) instead of man, for He bore
the wrath of God. 4. The necessity for our atonement, Not shall, but must.
The “must” of ver. 10 indicates the necessity for a radical change in order to
salvation; that of our text the necessity of an atonement on the part of God. Sin
must be punished. God’s righteousness must be upheld, and all its demands met.
5. Jesus Christ uplifted is now both physician and remedy to His people. The
brazen serpent could only heal our disease : Christ saves to the uttermost (1) degree
of perfection, (2) degree of continuation. ILI. IN THE APPLICATION OF THE REMEDY
FOR THE DISEASE. ‘The Israelites were not bidden to apply poultices, but to look.
You are not enjoined to improve yourselves, but to believe. 1. Through faith
in Christ the sinner has permission tolive. Two words are used in this connection ;
forgive—give for; remit—set free; corresponding to yapiZopat, to show grace, and
agin, to discharge. These must not be confused. As Broad Church theologians
contend every one has been forgiven, but in the first sense. God has “given for” man
all that Almighty Love could offer. But men are only forgiven in the second sense
when they accept God's pardoning grace. 2. By faith we acquire the right to live—
this is justification and more than pardon, permission to live. 38. The power to
live—regeneration. Conclusion: 1. In Christ’s days faith in everlasting life had
become practically extinct. 2. Christ revived it, not simply teaching it, but impart-
ing it. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) The brazen serpent :—I, Ir was TO BE MADE
IN THE LIKENESS OF THAT WHICH WAS DESTROYING THEM. Around are serpents vic-
torious: here the serpent conquered and exhibited as a trophy, and the people who
see it live. Around us the powers of darkness and death are victorious, and sinning
souls are dead in trespasses and sins. Behold on the cross sin, but sin judged,
condemned, executed, held up as a specatcle. “He was made sin,” &c. II. When
the wounded Israelite looked on the brazen serpent, he found a PRoor oF Gop’d
ABILITY AND A PLEDGE oF Gop’s WILLINGNESS TO SAVE HIM. As we turn to the cross,
the old man is crucified that the body of sin might be destroyed, Ill. Toe new
LIFE WAS MIRACULOUS IN ITS CHARACTER: it was not by any natural process of im-
provement or gradual restoration. IV. How may we APPROPRIATE THE BENEFITS OF
CiHRist’s REDEMPTION? Let us take a walk round the camp. 1. In one tent 1s 4
man who declines to look because he has tried every remedy that science can pro-
vide, and who says, ‘‘ How can I be saved by looking at a mere bit of brass?” and
dies because he is too proud to be saved in God’s way. And so people plead that


“Ola ee


232 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fone. iit.


a


they cannot understand the doctrine of the atonement, and seem to regard them-
selves as under no obligation to trust Him who has made that atonement. Will
not a general trust in the mercy of God.suffice? But the Israelites were not told to
discover the mode of the Divine operation. 2. There is another very far gone who
says, ‘' Not for me—too late,” and dies. So many now regard their case as hope-
less, but Christ came to save the chief of sinners. 3. We meet with another who
says, ‘I am all right, but I had a narrow escape. The serpent didn’t bite; it was
only a scratch.” ‘ Buta scratch is fatal; go at once and look.” **Oh, no! there’s
no danger; but if anything should come of it I will act on your suggestion. At
present Iam in a hurry; I have some business.” By and by the poison works.
Oh for a look at the serpent now! So many perish now by making light of their
danger. 4. Here is a man suffering acute agony, who listens with eagerness but
obstinate incredulity. ‘*If God wished to save, He would speak. Besides, the middle
of the camp is a long way, and how can healing influence extend so far ? Well, to
oblige you, I will look; but I don’t expect anything will come of it. There; I
have looked, and am no better.” So, too, many amongst us try @ series of experi-
ments. ‘I’m trying to believe, but I feel no better.” 5. We turn aside into a
home of sorrow. A broken-hearted mother is bending over her little girl. But
lamentation will not arrest the malady. ‘‘ Mother, your child may live.” The
mother listens with the incredulity of joy, but the little one cries, ‘‘ Mother, I want
to look at Moses’ serpent.” Instantly the mother’s arms are around her, and the
child is borne to the door. She lifis her deep blue eyes, while the mother, in an
agony of hope and fear, stands waiting. ‘‘Mother! I am healed.” There is life
for a look at the crucified One. Look and live. (W. H. M. H. Aitken, M.A.)
The brazen serpent:—I. AN HISTORICAL FACT DIVINELY ACKNOWLEDGED (Numb. xxi.
4-9). Christ’s entire belief in the Old Testament Scriptures. Il. AN INTIMATE
CONNECTION CLEARLY REVEALED, 1. Each divinely appointed. 2. Each met a
terrible necessity. 8. Benefit in each case secured by faith. II]. A Great
NECESSITY INSISTED UPON. ‘* Must.” Without Christ’s death none can have life. IY.
A BLESSED PURPOSE CROWNING ALL. 1. A calamity from which we may be delivered.
2. Ablessedness to which we may attain. 3. The means of deliverance. 4. The
universality of the statement. The only way of mercy and salvation. (J. James.)
The brazen serpent:—I. Tue Bane, Sin under the aspect of the serpent’s bite.
This symbol has a twofold significance. 1. It glances back to the Old Serpent in
Eden ; as do also, more or less, that singular phenomenon among so many heathen
nations, serpent-worship. 2. The main significance is the light which it throws
on sin itself. Its character is spiritual venom; its effects are anguish and death.
Those who say, I feel none of those poisonous effects, only prove themselves by
that to be the more fatally steeped in sin’s sweltering venom; for they bewray the
awful state described in Scripture as ‘‘ past feeling,’’ or having the * conscience
seared as with a hot iron.” II. Tue anripors. Christ uplifted on the Cross and
upheld in the gospel as the propitiation for the sins of the whole world. The atone-
ment is the only healing balm, Penances, moralities, and all other substitutes are
vain, 1. There is a marked significance in the serpent itself and the very pole.
The atonement is as eloquent of sin as it is of salvation, The most awful exhibi-
tion of sin ever given was that given on the Cross. Hence our guilt is represented
as superscribed thereon—as a handwriting against us legible to the entire universe.
In the cross, and on the Crucified, God emphatically “condemned sin.” 2. The
human race have been so infected with the serpent’s venom as to be called after
the name of their father, ‘‘serpents,” ‘ scorpions,” a ‘generation of vipers.”
Now Christ came not in sinful flesh, but in its “likeness.’? The Lord laid on Him
the iniquity of us all as the representative of humanity. Even as the serpent of
brass on the pole was in the likeness of the fiery serpents, but, unlike them, had
no venom in it. In this vicarious way was human guilt declared, exposed, con-
demned. 3. The sin, by being condemned, was “put away.” As in the ancient
sacrifices the fire symbolically burned up the imputed sin along with the victim,
80, on the Cross, the world’s sin was put away in Christ’s sufferings, considered as
a barrier to salvation. This blow to sin was a death-blow to Satan. It was the
bruising of the serpent’s head (Heb. ii. 14, 15). III. The mans by which the
antidote becomes available for the removal of the bane; viz., faith. The wounded
Israelites were healed by seeing ; the perishing sinner by believing. Notice here in
its proper place the significance of the pole. It was the chief military standard—
not the minor or portable ones that were borne about, but the main standard that
stood conspicuous in the most prominent part of the camp, fixed in the ground,


ona. m11.] ST. JOHN. 233


and from which floated a flag (Jer. li. 27; Isa. xlix. 22. See also, Isa. xiii, 2;
xviii. 3; lxii. 10,11). These texts amply illustrate the use and meaning of the
large banner-poles, with their floating insignia, as the symbol of universality of
promulgation, and thence of Divine interposition of world-wide scope. The texts
cited, or referred to, though beginning with the ordinary uses of the symbol, soon
run it into Gospel moulds; and most fitly, for very ancient predictions had declared
that ‘unto him,” the Shiloh, “shall the gathering of the people be” (Gen. xlix.
10; Isa. xi. 10; John xii. 32). (T. Guthrie, D.D.) The brazen serpent :—1.
THERE IS A STRIKING SIMILARITY BETWEEN THE CONDITION OF THE WOUNDED ISRAELITES
AND THE STATE OF MAN BY NATURE. 1. Theirs wasa degraded condition. Their pain
was the result of their transgression. 2. Miserable. 3. Guilty. 4. Helpless.
II. THERE Is A STRIKING RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN THE MEANS EMPLOYED FOR THE RELIEF
OF THE WOUNDED IsRAELITES AND THE METHOD OF OUR RECOVERY FROM SIN AND DEATH
By Jesus Curist. 1. The brazen serpent in shape exactly resembled the fiery ser-
pent. So Christ was made in the likeness of sinful flesh. 2. The serpent was
lifted up, which is emblematical of—(1) Christ’s crucifixion. (2) Christ’s ascension.
(3) The public exhibition of the Redeemer’s Cross in the ministry of reconciliation.
III, THE RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN THE FEELINGS OF THE WOUNDED ISRAELITES AND THOSE
OF THE AWAKENED PENITENT IN THE ACTS OF LOOKING AND BELIEVING RESPECTIVELY.
They were—1. Sensible of their calamity. 2. Filled with humility. IV. Tue
RESEMBLANCE AS TO THE EFFICACY OF THE REMEDY IN BOTH caAsES. In their—l.
Instantaneousness. 2. Efficacy to work in the first or last stages of the disease,
8. Completeness of cure. Learn: 1. That salvation can only be ascribed to the
free grace of God. 2. The freedom with which this salvation is bestowed. 3. That
gratitude becomes those who have received mercy. (T.Gibson, M.A.) The brazen
serpent :-—I, THE INCIDENT REFERRED TO, This typical event occurred towards the
close of the wanderings. The people’s discouragements had been many, and now
the king of Edom suffered them not to pass through his border. The Church must
lay its account with difficulty and checks and foes. The Christian who turns out
of the straight path at the first menace of the Edomite will find more formidable
difficulties before he gets to the heavenly Canaan. Now see the form their mur-
murings took. Aaron and Miriam are dead, and as Moses is not enough to receive
all their taunts they ‘spo!e against God.” ‘There is no bread, neither is there
any water,” and this when they had the best of both; so easily does a fretful
spirit turn into bitterness the best gifts of God. There was something of peculiar
aggravation in this sin, and the retribution was awful. ‘Would God we had died
in the wilderness!” and the prayer was answered. Now they humble themselves.
What powerful teachers are sharp afflictions! Moses prayed for them, and God
heard his prayer. To have destroyed the serpents would have been as easy as to
command the setting up of the brazen one; but God would give His people a part
in their own salvation. 1. Of this event there could be no doubt. (1) The wit-
nesses were many. (2) The serpent was preserved as a memorial of it. 2. The
serpent had a sacramental character. 3. When this sacramental character
encouraged superstition, the serpent was destroyed. II. Tua Lessons FORESHADOWED.
1. The significant intimation that Christ should die. It was placed on a level with
the sacrifices and other symbols which typified the atonement. 2. Salvation does
not come to us through Christ’s being lifted up merely, but through our looking at
Him. In the other miracles everything was done by Mosesalone. In this case the
symbol had no power but that which the faith of the people gave it. The Cross is
not a mechanical charm. We must believe. Conclusion: 1. As the Old Testament
and the New are one book, so the Old Testament way of saving is the same as that
of the New. 2. Salvation is the free gift of God received by faith. (D. Moore,
M.A.) The brazen serpent :—The type and the antitype-correspond—I. In THE
OCCASION OF THEIR INSTITUTION. The Israelites were wounded by the serpents; we
are wounded by sin. II. In rere quarries. 1. The serpent was made of an
inferior metal; Christ was a root out of adry ground. 2, There was only one
brazen serpent for the whole Jewish camp; there is only one Mediator between
God and man. 3. The serpent was appointed of God; Christ was appointed by the
Father. 4. The serpent was publicly lifted up; Christ is uplifted by His ministers.
III. In THz MANNER IN WHICH THE BENEFIT IS DERIVED. 1. By looking personally.
2. Instantly. 3. Steadily and constantly. 4. Exclusively. IV. In THE EFFECTS
wHEY PRODUCE. 1. The completeness of the cure. 2. Its universality, (1) Every
one may be healed. (2) The whole of the surviving camp was healed. So all the
world will one day be saved by Christ. Conclusion: 1. How simple is the


Ra.


234 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. 111.


way of salvation. 2. How injurious is unbelief. If we despise this ordinance
of God we shall perish. (S. Sutton.) The mysteries of the brazen serpent :—
All languages are based on figures. When we teach children we employ
figures. And so Christ employed figures to teach this spiritual child the
things of the kingdom: a better way than by the use of abstract terms. I.
THE PEOPLE IN THE wiILpErness, the representatives of sinful men. 1. They
had stood valiantly in fight, but the serpents were things that trembled not at
the sword. They had endured weariness and thirst and hunger, but these were
novelties, and new terrors are terrible from their very novelty. If we could see our
condition we should feel as Israel when they saw the serpents. 2. Behold the
people after they were bitten—the fire coursing through their veins. We cannot
say that sin produces instantly such an effect, but it will ultimately. Fiery serpents
are nothing to fiery lusts. 3. How awful must have been the death of the serpent!
bitten, and how awful the death of the man without Christ. II]. Taz BRAzEN
BERPENT. The type of Christ crucified; both remedies. 1, A number, perhaps,
declared it absurd that a brazen serpent should do what physicians could not. So
many despise Christ crucified. 2. Some say the cross will only increase the evil,
just as old physicians averred that the sight of anything bright would intensify the
effect of the poison. So many make out that salvation by the Cross destroys
morality. 3. Much as those who heard of the brazen serpent might have despised
It there was no other means of cure. So ‘‘there is none uther name,” &c. III.
WHAT WAS TO BE DONE TO THE BRAZEN SERPENT? It was to be lifted up—so was Christ.
1. By wicked men. 2. By God the Father. 3. By ministers. Let them so preach
Him that He may be seen. IV. WHat were IsrazrL To po? To look; the con-
vinced sinner is to believe. 1. There were, perhaps, some who would not look, and
some will not come to Christ for life: perhaps—(1) Through unbelief. (2)
Through insufficient conviction. (3) Through procrastination. (4) Through belief
in other means. (5) Through looking too much at their sores, and seeming
incurability. 2, Those who would be saved must look. (1) Whosoever. (2) Look
now. V. Encouragement. 1. Christ was lifted up on purpose for you to look at.
2. He invites you to believe. 3. He promises to save. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The
lifting up of the brazen serpent :—-I. THm PERSON IN MORTAL PERIL for whom the
brazen serpent was made. 1. The fiery serpents came among the people because
they had despised God’s way and God’s bread (Numb. xxi.), The natural consequence
of turning against God like serpents is to find serpents waylaying our path. 2.
Those for whom the brazen serpent was uplifted had been actually bitten by the
serpents. The common notion is that salvation is for good people, but God’s
medicine is for the guilty. 3. The bite of the serpent was painful. So many by sin
are restless, discontented, and fearful. Jesus died for such as are at their wits’ end.
4. The bite was mortal. There could be no question about that—nor about the
effects of sin. 5. There is no limit set to the stage of poisoning: however far gone,
the remedy still had power, So the gospel promise has no qualifying clause. II.
THE REMEDY PROVIDED FoR HIM. 1. It was purely of Divine origin: and God will
not devise a failure. 2. Exceedingly instructive. Wonder of wonders that our
Lord Jesus should condescend to be symbolized by a dead snake, 38. There was
but one remedy for the serpent bite: there was only one brazen serpent, not two.
If a second had been made it would have had no effect. 4. It was bright and
lustrous, made o? shining metal. Soif we do but exhibit Jesus in His own true
metal He is lustrous in vhe eyes of men. 5. The remedy was enduring. So Jesus
saves to the uttermost. III. Tue aprpiication or THE REMEDY, 1. The simplest
imaginable. It might, had God so ordered, have been carried into the house,
rubbed on the man, and applied with prayers and priestly ceremonies. But he haa
only to look; and it was well, for the danger was so frequent. 2. Very personal.
A man could not be cured by what others could do for him—physiciang, sisters,
mothers, ministers. 3, Very instructive—self-help must be abandoned and God be
trusted, IV. Tue curr errecrep. 1. He was healed at once. He had not to wait
five minutes, nor five seconds. Pardonis not a work of time, although sanctification
is. 2. The remedy healed again and again, The héaled Israelites were in danger.
The safest thing is not to take our eye off the brazen serpent at all. 3. It was of
universal efficacy, and no man who looks to Christ remains under condemnation,
V. A LESSON FOR THOSE WHO LOVE THEIR Lorp. Imitate Moses. He did not
‘‘ incense ” the brazen serpent, or hide it behind vestments or ceremonies, but
raised it on a bare pole that all might see. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Three simili-
tudes :—I. Tue srune@ IsRAELITE AND THE GUILTY SINNER, 1. As the Israelite had


7 a


CHAP. 111.] ST. JOHN. 935


death in his bosom, so the sinner (Heb. ii. 14); although the latter sting may not
be felt as was the former. 2. The Israelite wanted all means of cure, and had not
God appointed the serpent he had perished. As helplessis the sinner till God shows
us His Christ. JI. THE BRazEN SERPENT AND Curist. 1. The serpent was accursed
of God. Christ was made a curse for us (Gal. iii. 13). 2. The brazen serpent had
the likeness of the serpent, but not the poison. Christ came in the similitude of
sinful flesh without sin. 3. The brazen serpent was uplifted on a pole; Christ on
the Cross. 4, As the poison of a serpent was healed by a serpent, so the sin of
man by man (Rom. y.; 1 Cor. vx. 21). But Christ had power in Himself to heal us
which the other had not. 5. The brazen serpent was not the device of an
Israelite, but of God; so no man could have found out such a means of salvation as
that established by Christ. III. Tur IsrazLires LOOKING ON THE SERPENT, AND THE
SINNERS BELIEVING IN Curist, 1, The Israelite was healed only by looking; so the
sinner is justified only by believing. 2. As looking, as well ‘as the rest of the
senses, is a passion rather than an action; so in justification thou art a patient
rather than an agent: thou holdest thy beggar’s hands to receive, that is all. 3.
The Israelites before they looked up to the brazen serpent for help—(1) Felt them-
selves stung; (2) Believed that God would heal them by that serpent. So the
sinner must—(1) Feel himself a sinner, be burdened and heavy laden (Matt. ii. 28),
before he will or can come to Christ. A man that feels not himself sick, seeks not
the physician; (2) He must believe that in Christ there is all-sufficient help. 4.
The stung Israelite looked on the serpent with a pitiful, humble, craving, wishly
eye, weeping also for the very pain of the sting: with such an eye doth the believing
sinner look on Christ crucified (Zech. xii. 10). 5. The Israelite by looking on the
brazen serpent received ease presently, and was rid of the poison of the living
serpent, and so therein was made, like the brazen serpent, void of all poison. So
the believer, by looking on Christ, is eased of his guilty accusing conscience (Rom.
v. 1), and is transformed into the image of Christ (2 Cor. ili. 18). 6. Even the
squint-eyed or purblind Israelite was healed; so the-weak believer, being a true
believer, is healed by Christ. 7. Though the Israelite were stung never so often,
yet if he looked up to the serpent he was healed. As we are daily stung by sin, so
we must daily look up to Christ crucified. Every new sin must have a fresh act of
faith and repentance. Yet there are two differences betwixt their looking on the
serpent and our looking by faith on Christ. 1. By looking they lived, but yet so
that after they died; but here, by believing in Christ, we gain an eternal life. 2.
They looked on the serpent, but the serpent could not look on them; but here, as
thou lookest on Christ, so He on thee, as once on Peter, and on Mary and John
from the Cross, and thy comfort must rather be in Christ’s looking on thee, than in
thy looking on Him. (J. Dyke.) Sin and salvation through Christ :—I. Sin.
This was the occasion, with its consequent misery, of the setting up of the brazen
serpent; so the occasion of Christ’s coming was man’s being bitten by the old
serpent (Rev. xii. 9; 2 Cor. xi. 3). Among the Israelites few were stung, here all;
there their bodies, here the soul; there temporal death followed, here
eternal. 1. The sting is painful, although not always. It is a great part
of our misery not to know our misery. Yet Satan’s darts are often
painful (Eph. vi. 16). Sin im life will make hell in conscience (Prov. xviii.
14; Job vi. 4; 1 Cor. xv. 56). 2. The sting is deadly (Rom. v. 12, vi. 23; Gen.
ii. 17). Not only death temporal, but spiritual and eternal (Mark ix. 44; Prov. viii.
36). II. Curist SET FORTH BY THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 1, The resemblance between
the two. (1) Both were remedies devised by God’s mercy and love (ver. 16). We
neither plotted nor asked it. The Israelites did ask through Moses; but in our case
God, the offended party, makes the first motion (1 John iv. 19). (2) Christ’s
humiliation set forth. (a) A serpent was chosen to show that He came in a mean
estate (Psa. xxii. 6; Isa. liii. 3; Mark ix. 12) ; (b) because the serpent was cursed of
God (Gen. iii. 14). (c) The serpent was made of brass, not of gold. (3) The serpent
had the form, but not the poison. So Christ (Heb. iv. 15). (a) God would cure a
serpent’s bite by a serpent (Rom. viii. 3). (0) The parties to be cured were men;
therefore the Son of Man must be lifted up. (4) The place where the brazen serpent
was uplifted was Punon (Numb, xxxiii. 42, 43), for from Punon they came to Oboth
(Numb. xxi. 10). This was in Idumza, famous for mines of brass or copper—known
among the ancients as “the metal of Punon.” Eusebius (“ Eccl. Hist.,” bk. viii.)
tells us that Sylvanus and thirty-nine more were beheaded for the faith’s sake near
the mines of brass in Punon; and Eutychius, Epiphanius, and Theodoret speak
5f Christians condemned to work in these mines. So that the brass out of which


236 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. , [cHaP. II.


the serpent was made was found in the place where they were bitten. That body
which Christ assumed was not brought from elsewhere. Where the mischief was
the remedy was at hand. (5) The brazen serpent was lifted up on @ pole. So
Christ on the Cross (1 Pet. ii. 24). The serpent first stung us by the fruit of a tree,
and Christ saved us by suffering on one. 2, The super-excellency of Christ to the
type. The brazen serpent—(1) Was but a sign of salvation (Wisd. xvi. 6), but
Christ is the author of it (Heb. v. 9). (2) Benefited the Israelites only, but Christ
all nations (Isa. xi. 10). (3) Freed them from present death only, Christ from
eternal death (John xi. 26). (4) Became a means of idolatry (2 Kings xviii. 4),
whereas Christ is to be equaily honoured with the Father (John v, 23; Heb. i. 6;
Phil. ii. 9,10). (5) Was broken in pieces; but they shall be broken in pieces who
deny Christ (Psa. ii. 9; Dan. ii. 44; Luke xix. 27). III. Farrn THE MEANS OF
BENEFITING BY Curist, 1. The necessity of faith. None had benefit but such as
looked (Numb. xxi. 8). 2. The encouragement of faith—(1) To broken-hearted sinners.
If you are stung by sin, look to Christ. A felt sense of sin is warrant enough. The
Israelites cried out, ‘Oh! what shall we do?’ So Acts ii. 37, xvi. 29, 30. (2)
To lapsed believers. God did not take away the serpents, only He gave a remedy.
Sin is not abolished, but 1 Johnii.1. 3. The nature of faith, which is a looking
unto Christ. The act of faith is expressed by seeing or looking (Zech. xii. 10; Isa.
xvii. 7; John vi. 40; Heb. xi. 1, 27, xii. 2). Faith itself is said to be the eye of the
soul (Eph. i. 18; Gal. iii, 1), and its hindrance blindness (2 Cor. iv. 4). (1) The
objects proper to faith are things that lie out of the view of sense (John xx. 29).
(2) What kind of sight faith is. (a) Serious; not a glance, but a fixed eye. (0)
Applicative (Job v. 27; John xx. 28). (c) Affectionate, with desire and trust
(2 Chron. xx. 12; Psa. cxxi.1; 1 Pet. i. 7; Isa. xvii. 7; Psa. cxxiii. 2, xxxiv. 5).
(d) Engaging (Phil. iii. 8; Eph. i. 17). The saving sight :—Two great historical
facts—the uplifted serpent and the uplifted Saviour. Infinite is the difference
between them in point of dignity and momentousness. The one had a narrow circle
of a few thousands for its witnesses, and the desert for its theatre; the other a
universe. From the one came body-healing, soon to be interrupted by death; from
the other flows soul-healing unto life everlasting. Butthe one sheds much light on
the other. Compare them—I. In THE DESPERATE NATURE OF THE MALADY. 1. What
could be more fatal or terrible than this judgment? 2. Like the camp of Israel,
this is a world of dying men. II. IN THE sURPRISING CHARAOTER OF THE DIVINELY-
PROVIDED REMEDY. 1. God alone could stay the judgment. All the virtue of the
serpent of brass lay in the fact that it was appointed by God expressly for a sign of
His merciful interposition, 2. Both were lifted up. III. In THe appiicatTion oF
THE DIVINELY-APPOINTED REMEDY AND THE CERTAINTY AND INSTANTANEOUSNESS OF THE
cure. (A. Wilson, B.A.) Regeneration: tis objective cause :—In speaking about
the subjective work of Christianity Christ mentions only the initiatory acts in the
new birth. In speaking of its objective work He introduces us to the central act.
Around this very fact objective Christianity clusters, I. THe xnirTIna UP oF
tHE Son of Man. Our Lord dealt much in illustrations. In this chapter He
borrows one from human life—birth ; one from nature—wind; and now one from
the Scriptures, showing how rich the historical events of the Old Testament were
in types and symbols. This illustration is intended to set forth—1. The great fact
that Christ was to be a healing medium. 2. The symbol of the devil is made the
symbol of his Destroyer in the very act of bruising his head. 3. The virtue by
which He should become the healing medium (chap. xii. 32, 33). 4. Christ’s moral
as well as physical exaltation (see chap. xiii. 31, 32) glorifying both Himself and
His Father. 5. Christ’s transcendent greatness of mind, enabling Him to take
cognizance only of the glory, and not of the degradation, of His suffering. 6. His
“ lifting up” by many tongues made eloquent by a love kindled from Calvary, II.
THIS GREAT TRANSACTION HAD FOR ITS OBJECT THE SALVATION OF MEN. 1. This salva-
tion is negative and positive—meeting the twofold nature of sin, which is—(1)
Positive—entailing misery ; (2) punitive—depriving of positive blessedness. Christ
delivers from the first—‘ shall not perish”; and restores the second—* eternal
life.” 2. This perishing is not annihilation, but a deprivation of vital relation to
God; eternal life is a restoration of this relation. 8. These effects are the results
of Christ’s “ lifting up,” and connect the objective transaction with the subjective
effects, and goes back to the matter of the new birth, which is organically connected
with eternal life. III. Taz Divine Love, aS AN IMPELLING MOTIVE, WAS EQUAL TO
THIS (ver. 6), Here, then, are five links in the wondrous chain. (1) Men are
delivered from the perdition of sin, and restored to the Divine life. (2) This ig


ee PE) eee ee ee re ee ee "
yi eae
Zz


OHAP, I1I.] ST. JOHN. 237
secured by the lifting up of the Son of Man. (3) But this Son of Man is the only-
begotten Son of God. (4) This only-begotten Son was made incarnate, that He
might be lifted up. (5) This required some mighty motive. It is implied—1. That
the objects were so unworthy, that the method of redeeming them required so much
humiliation and sacrifice, that the motive could only be found in the infinite love of
God. 2. That this love is not to be described by word, but by action. ‘' God so
loved.”” Here are two loves contending—God’s complacent love for His Son and
His love of commiseration for the world. IV. Tsar Gon’s oBJECT IN ALL THIS 18
BENEVOLENT (ver. 17). The declaration that Christ’s object was to save men, given
in vers. 15 and 16, is here emphasized. It was His sole object. 1. This is an
important reminder to all engaged in promulgating the kingdom, of the spirit which
should actuate them (Luke ix. 55, 56). 2. An invitation of men’s confidence in the
gracious intentions of God (Isa. lv. 8,9). (4. J. Parry.) The scene referred to :—
Not long ago I saw 8 picture of this by Guido. In the foreground strong men were
writhing in the death agony; some are pallid in death; some hopelessly lifting
eyes, bloodshot and ghastly, to the sacred emblem at the right hand of the picture,
and already a new life throbs within them ; joy flushes the countenance with unex-
pected hues of health. But in the centre is a mother, despair in her eye, lifting her
babe with both hands, that it may gaze on the saving sight. Why does not the
child look up? Ah! itis too far gone; the deadly bite has penetrated to the central
springs ; it hangs its head; it droops ; it will not look ; it gives one throe of anguish,
and dies in the mother’s uplifted hands. Oh! the unutterable pathos of that
mother’s look ! Often, alas! do parents, teachers, pastors, hold up their dear charge,
with agonizing solicitude, before the Saving Sight, without saving results, But the
fault lies not with God, but with you. (A. Wilson,B.A.) The agony of sin :—What
a moment of agony and terror it must have been as all around unfortunate victims
were being attacked with these messengers of death. Young and old, rich and poor;
for with them there was no respect of persons. On all sides you might see the
Israelites writhing in mortal pains. You might hear the mother’s agonized screams
as the poisonous reptile fastened its fangs in her darling’s breast. See that strong
man tottering along; he has just been bitten. A moment ago he was in full health
and strength, but now the deadly venom is flowing through his veins, and he is a
dead man already. In this terrible emergency the people cried unto God, and
Moses was instructed to make a serpent of brass and set it on a pole, and whosoever
looked on this should live. (W. M. H. Aitken.) The serpents :—To this day a mottled
snake, with fiery red spots upon its head, abounds at certain seasons in the Arabah.
It is the dread of the fishermen, and is peculiarly dangerous to the bare-legged,
sandalled Bedouin. So inflammable is its bite, that it is likened to fire coming
through the veins; so intense its venom, and so rapid its action, that the bite is
fatal in a few hours. The body swells with a fiery eruption; the tongue is con-
sumed with thirst; and the poor wretch writhes in agony till death brings’ relief.
This horrible pest suddenly appeared in the camp of Israel in prodigious numbers.
From crevices in the rocks, from holes in the sand, from beneath the scanty herbage,
these fiery-headed snake-demons swarmed into every tent. There was no running
away from them, and killing seemed hardly to diminish their numbers. On every
side there was a cry of anguish; men, women, children, racked with the fiery
torture; none able to save or even to help another. ‘‘ And much of the children of
Israel died ” (Numb. xxi. 6). The serpent’s bite :—Some of you recollect the case
of Gurling, one of the keepers of the reptiles in the Zoological Gardens, in October,
1852. This unhappy man was about to part with a friend who was going to
Australia, and he must needs drink with him. He went back to his post in an
excited state. He had some months before seen an exhibition of snake-charming,
and this was on his poor muddled brain. He must emulate the Egyptians, and play
with serpents. First he took out of its cage a Morocco venom-snake, put it round
his neck, twisted it about, and whirled it round about him. Happily for him it did
not arouse itself so as to bite. The assistant-keeper cried out, ‘‘ For God’s sake put
back the snake!” but the foolish man replied, “‘I am inspired.” Putting back the
yenom-snake, he exclaimed, ‘‘ Now for the cobra.” This deadly serpent was some-
what torpid with the cold of the previous night, and therefore the rash man
placed it in his bosom till it revived, and glided downward till its head ap-
peared below the back of his waistcoat. He took it by the body, about a
foot from the head, and then. seized it lower down by the other hand,
intending to hold it by the tail and swing it round his head. He held it
for an instant opposite to his face, and like a flash of lightning the ser-


=


238 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. II,
ih ET STE WANED INGOs rte ed SAT

ent struck him between the eyes. ‘The blood streamed down his face, and —

e called for help, but his companion fled in horror. When assistance arrived
Gurling was sitting on a chair, having restored the cobra to its place. He said,
“Tama dead man.” They took him to the hospital. First his speech went, then
his vision failed him, and lastly his hearing. His pulse gradually sank, and in one
hour from the time at which he had been struck he was a corpse. There was only
a little mark upon the bridge of his nose, but the poison spread over the body, and
he was a dead man. I tell you that story that you may use it as a parable and
learn never to play with sin, and also to bring vividly before you what it is to be
bitten by a serpent. Suppose that Gurling could have been cured by looking at a
piece of brass, would it not have been good news for him? There was no remedy
for that poor infatuated creature, but there is a remedy for you. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
A beautiful legend is related respecting a scene in the camp of the Israelites at the
time of the setting up of the brazen serpent. A woman had been bitten, and was
lying in her tent, while the poison was doing its deadly work on her system. It
was the day and the hour when the serpent of brass was to be set up in the camp;
but such headway had the poison made that it seemed likely that in that case it
would prove too late. But the image was at length raised; and the two daughters
of the dying woman brought her to the door of the tent, with her face turned
towards the image, when apparently swooning in death; the image of the brazen
serpent fell upon her eyes, and she was healed. (D. Curry, D.D.) “ The
serpent... . eternal life” :—It is a noteworthy fact that in many of the ethnic
religions the serpent was adored as a symbol of life. MHorapollon, explaining
(wrongly) a particular Egyptian hieroglyph, remarks that among the ancient
Egyptians a serpent with its tail in its mouth was a symbol of eternity. The
ordinary word for eternity in Egyptian begins with a figure of a serpent. This
ancient symbolism, which leaves its traces also in the classics, may have owed
something of its origin to the fact of the apparent renewal of the serpent’s life when
it awakens from its dormant condition, and when it casts its old skin. The adora-
tion of Aisculapius, the Greek god of healing, was always connected with serpent
worship. In the chief temple at Epidaurus tame serpents had a place of honour;
and the god was said frequently to take the form of a serpent when he appeared to
men. In the third century before Christ the help of Asculapius was invoked by
the Romans to avert a pestilence. In response, Aisculapius is said to have appeared
in the form of a serpent, to have gone on board the Roman ship, and when the
ship arrived in the Tiber to have glided over the side and to have taken possession
of an island, where a temple was erected to him. It-will be remembered also that
Cadmus was changed into a serpent at his own request, when he discovered that
serpents were dear to the gods. Among the Arabs the serpent is still the living
thing of living things. This is seen in their ordinary speech. The Arabic word
for “life” is haya; a common word for a serpent is hayydt, a plural form from
hayyd, a living thing. When Moses, therefore, lifted up the serpent in the wilder-
ness, it would be recognized by the Jews as ‘a symbol of that life which God had
promised to give to those who would look to it in faith. To them it was a most
natural symbol; when it ceased to be a mere symbol, and became an object of
idolatrous worship, it was destroyed. (Sunday School Times.) Jesus lifted wp :—
During the American Civil War there was a man on one of the boat-loads of
wounded from the field who was very low and in a kind of stupor. He was entirely
unknown. Mr. Moody called him by different names, but could get no response.
At last, at the name ‘ William,’ the man unclosed his eyes and looked up, and
revived. He was asked if he was a Christian. He said, “No,” but manifested
great anxiety upon the subject. “I am so great a sinner that I can’t be a
Christian.” Mr, Moody told him he would read what Christ said about that, so
turning to St. John’s third chapter he read, ‘And as Moses lifted up the serpent
in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up: that whosoever
believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life,” &. “ Stop!” said
the dying man; “read that over again, will you?” It was read again. “Is that
there?” ‘“ Yes,” said Mr. Moody; ‘ that’s there just as I read it to you.” ‘And
did Christ say that?” “ Yes.” The man began repeating the words, settling
back upon his pillow as he did so, with a strange, solemn look of peace on his face.
He took no further notice of what was going on about him, but continued mur-
muring the blessed words till Mr. Moody left him. The next morning when the
soldier’s place was visited it was found empty. Mr. Moody asked if any one knew
aught about him during the night. A nurse who had spent the hours with him till


a oe ee


eRAP. 1I1.] ST. JOHN. 239


he died, replied, ‘* All the time I was with him he was repeating something about
Moses lifting up a serpent in the wilderness. I asked him if there was anything
I could do for him, but he only answered, ‘As Moses lifted up the serpent.’ Just
before he died, about midnight, I saw his lips moving, though there was no sound
escaping. I thought he might have some dying message for home, soI asked him
for one. But the only answer was the whispered words, ‘As Moses lifted up the
serpent. in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up: that whosoever
believeth in Him—’ and so on until his voice died away, and his lips moved no
longer.” (D. ZL. Moody.) Looking at Christ:—Mr. Barnes, of the Jewish
Mission, Mildmay, London, said: ‘I was visiting in a Jewish neighbourhood in
the East End of London, and called upon a Jewess, whom I had known for a long
time as a very hard-hearted unbeliever in Jesus Christ. I did not know what to
say to her; in fact, I had given her up as almost hopeless. When, however, I
called on this occasion she said, ‘I love Jesus, I have got Jesus now as my Saviour.’
I said, ‘You have! How came you to love Jesus?’ ‘ Well,’ she said, ‘I will tell
you. You know my little girl attends your school, and she comes home and sings
the hymns you teach her. She has been singing a good deal lately, ‘‘ There is life
for a look at the Crucified One.” She kept on singing and singing, and at last it
broke my heart, and I wondered, is it true there is life fora look. I have been
induced to search the Bible, and I believe Jesus is now my Saviour.” Christ
exalted :—Describing the artistic glories of the Church of St. Mark at Venice, Mr.
Ruskin says: ‘“ Here are all the successions of crowded imagery showing the
passions and the pleasures of human life symbolized together and the mystery
of its redemption; for the maze of interwoven lines and changeful pictures lead
always at last to the cross, lifted and carved in every place and upon every stone ;
sometimes with the serpent of eternity wrapped round it, sometimes with doves
beneath its arms and sweet herbage growing forth from its feet ; but conspicuous
most of all on the great rood that crosses the church before the altar, raised in
bright blazonry against the shadow of the apse. It is the Cross that is first seen
and always burning in the centre of the temple; and every dome and hollow of its
roof has the figure of Christ in the utmost height of it, raised in power, or returning
in judgment.” Saved by a sight of Christ :—‘‘I have seen Jesus.” This was the
saying of a half-witted man, who had turned away from living a very wicked life,
when he was asked what had led to this great change. The late Dr. Bushnell,
of Hartford, Connecticut, tells this story. He was well acquainted with the person
to whom it refers. In addition to his being naturally weak-minded, he had fallen
into very wicked ways. He swore dreadfully; he was a confirmed drunkard; he
would tell lies, and steal, and do almost anything that was sinful. At one time
there was a revival of religion in connection with Dr. Bushnell’s church. Among
others who came to see the doctor then with the earnest inquiry, What must we do
to be saved? was this weak-minded, wicked man. Thoughtless people, when they
saw him going to church, supposed he was only going in mockery, and to make
sport of it, And even serious Christians looked on him with pity, and rather
wished he would not come. But when Dr. Bushnell came to converse with him
he found him so earnest, and apparently so sincere, that he did not hesitate to
receive him into the communion of the church. And the whole course of the poor
man’s life after this showed that the doctor was right in doing so. From that time
onward everything about the man showed that “old things had passed away ” with
him, “and all things had become new.” He became an humble and consistent
follower of the Lord Jesus Christ. All his bad habits were given up. He never
drank intoxicating liquor again. A profane word was never heard from his lips.
He was truthful and honest; regular in attending church ; diligent in reading the
Bible, and faithful in practising what it taught. To those who had known him in
former years this change seemed wonderful, And when he was asked by some one
to tell what it was which had led to it, his answer was, in the words already quoted,
“T have seen Jesus.” This explained it all. (D. Newton.) We are saved by
looking to Christ:—As a general rule, self-contemplation is a power towards
mischief, The only way to grow is to look out of one’s self. There is too much
introversion among Christians. A shipmaster might as well look down into the
hold of his ship for the north star as a Christian look down into his own heart for
the Sun of Righteonsness. Out and beyond is the shining. (H. W. Beecher.)
We must look away from ourselves .for peace :—Did you ever hear of a captain of a
vessel driven about by rough winds who wanted anchorage and tried to find it on
board his vessel? He desires to place his anchor somewhere on board the ship where


 ”
™


240 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP. IX,
nnn STS
it will prove a hold-fast. He hangs it at the prow, but still the ship drives; he
‘exhibits the anchor upon deck, but that does not hold the vessel; at last he puts
it down into the hold; but with no better success. Why, man alive, anchors do
not hold as long as they are on board a ship. They must be thrown into the deep,
and then they will get a grip of the sea-bottom, and hold the vessel against wind
and tide. As long as ever you have confidence in yourselves you are like a man
who keeps his anchor on board his boat, and you will never come to a resting-
place, Over with your faith into the great deeps of eternal love and power, and
trust in the infinitely faithful One. Then shall you be glad because your heart is
quiet. (C. H. Spurgevn.) Whosoever :—-Dr. Bonar, of Scotland, tells a story
of a lady getting into conversation with a workman, and, finding he was a happy
Christian, ‘‘ How long have you been thus rejoicing?” she asked. ‘‘Six months
ago,” he said, “I heard an address from the words, ‘ Whosoever believeth in Him
should not perish, but have eternal life.” I could not take it to myself, then,” he
said, ‘but when I went home that night I dreamt that ‘ whosoever’ meant me.
I got out of bed, and got the Bible to see the word, and there it was, ‘ whosoever.’ ”
‘‘ But you knew it was in the Bible, didn’t you?” ‘Yes, but I wanted to see it
with my own eyes, and I’ve been resting on it ever since.” Whosoever :—
“Years ago @ young woman married, contrary to the advice of her friends, an
ungodly man. She was not long in finding out that she was unequally yoked,
and much misery followed. Her husband’s mother had given him a Bible,
which was put away ina napkin and never looked at. Ten years later sickness
overtook him, and the end was evidently fast approaching. One day when
his wife had gone into the harvest field, and he was sitting alone in the
house, the thought came to him, ‘What a fool I’ve been! Here my life is
nearly gone, and I’ve lived it without God and without hope.’ Shortly afterwards
his little boy came home from school, and the father sent the lad to look for the
Bible. The boy brought it down and read part of John iii. to his father, and
managed to read the little words, but when he came to the longer word ‘ whoso-
ever,’ in verse 16., he stumbled at it, and said, ‘I can’t read that; I don’t know
what it spells.’ ‘ Why, boy,’ said the father, ‘ you should know that word, because
all may turn upon its meaning.’ So the boy ran out to ask a traveller who hap-
pened to be passing what it meant, while the father sat at the open window. The
traveller answered to the boy’s inquiry, ‘The word who-so-ever means anybody and
everybody.’ The words fell on the ear of the listening father, and he said to him-
self, ‘Anybody, everybody. Why that includes me.’ It was the very message
he needed. He left his burden of sin with the great sin-bearer, and became a new
creature in Christ Jesus.” Heaven is everlasting :—‘‘ What is wanting here?”
said a courtier to his sovereign, with whom he was riding, amid the acclama-
tions and splendour of a triumphal procession. ‘ Continuance,” replied the
monarch, “So say I,” adds Mr. James. “Tell me, if you will, of your youth,
your health, the buoyancy of your spirits, your happy connections, your gay
parties, your elegant pleasures, your fair prospects, and then ask me what is
wanting. I reply, ‘Continuance.’ A single day may spoil everything ; before
to-morrow’s sun shall rise you may be attacked by disease and death.” (Biblical
Museum.) Looking and finding rest:—‘* At last one snowy day, it snowed
so much that I could not go to the place I had determined upon, and I was
obliged to stop on the road; I found rather an obscure street, and turned
down a court, and there was a little chapel. It was the Primitive Methodist
Chapel. I had heard of these people from many, and how they sang so loudly that
they made people’s heads ache; but that did not matter. I wanted to know how
I might be saved, and if they made my head ache ever so much I did not care. So
sitting down, the service went on, but no minister came (the snowstorm made him
late). At last a very thin-looking man came into the pulpit, opened his Bible, and
read these words, ‘Look unto Me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth.’
Just setting his eyes on me, as if he knew all my heart, he said, ‘ Young mag you
are in trouble.’ Well I was, sure enough. Says he, ‘ You will never get out of it
till you look to Christ.’ And then lifting up his hands he cried out, ‘Look! look !
look! It is only look,’ said he. I saw at once the way of salvation. Oh, how I did
leap for joy at that moment! I know not what else he said, I did not take much
notice of it, I was so possessed with that one thought, Like as when the brazen
serpent was lifted up, they only looked and were healed. I had been waiting to do
fifty things, but when I heard this word, ‘ Look !’ what a charming word it seemed
to me! Oh, I looked until I could almost have looked my eyes away; and in heaven


cHap. 11.) ST. JOHN. 241
gr a i AN eet eee oe Gh wren A yee wey ve
I will look on still in my joy unutterable.” (GC. H. Spurgeon.) Looking and
trusting :—I once told my little Willie to jump off a high table, and I would catch
him. But he looked down and said, “Papa, I’se afraid.” I again told him I
would catch him ; but he looked down and said, “ Papa, I’se afraid.” You smile,
but that is just the way with the unbeliever. He looks down, and dares not trust
the Lord, ‘You would say that would be blind faith, but I say it would not be. I
told Willie to look at me and then jump, and he did it, and was delighted. He
wanted to jump again, and finally his faith became so great that he would jump
when I was eight or ten feet away, and cry out, ‘ Papa, I’se a comin’,” (D. L.
Moody.) Joy comes by looking unto Jesus:— Then was Christian glad and
lightsome, and said with a merry heart, ‘He has given me rest by sorrow, and life
by His death.’ Then he stood awhile to look and wonder; for it was very sur-
prising to him that the sight of the Cross should thus ease him of his burden. He
looked, therefore, and looked again, even till the springs that were in his head sent
the water down his cheeks. Now as he stood looking and weeping, behold three
shining ones came to him, and saluted him with ‘ Peace be to thee ;’ so the first
said to him, ‘ Thy sins be forgiven thee;’ the second stripped him of his rags, and
clothed him with change of raiment; the third also set a mark on his forehead, and
gave him a roll with a seal on it, which he bid him look on as he ran, and that
he should give it in at the celestial gate; so they went their way.” (Pilgrim’s
Progress.) Looking brings life :—If we look upon Christ with the eye though of
a weak faith, we shall be saved. Dr. Cneciger when he lay a-dying cried out,
“Credo languida fide, sed tamen fide.” I believe with a weak faith, but with a
faith such as itis. (J. Trapp.)


Ver. 16. God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son.—The gospel
in brief :—Pliny declares that Cicero once saw the Iliad of Homer written in so
small a character that it could be contained ina nutshell. Peter Bales, a celebrated
caligrapher, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, wrote the whole Bible so that it was
shut up in a common walnut as its casket. In these days of advanced mechanism
even greater marvels in miniature have been achieved, but never has so much
meaning been compressed into so small a space as in that famous little word ‘ So,”
in the text. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The gospel:—The text gives a deeper insight
into the Divine character than the heavens which declare God’s glory and than
those tender mercies of His providence which are over all His works. I. Tue Divine
Love. 1, Its marvellousness, The world is (1) not the wondrously perfect material
universe; (2) not the world of unfallen angels; (3) not a world of creatures such
as Adam was when pronounced ‘very good.” Then had there been no wonder.
But (4) the world the whole of which lieth in wickedness. 2. Its universality.
(1) Salvation is as common as sunshine, yet if a man will close his eyes the sun is
of no use to him. So while salvation is for all many put it away from them. (2)
It was originally meant to be so. The Jews denied it because “ they erred, not
knowing the Scripture.” The promise to Abraham and renewed to Isaac and
repeated by Isaiah was a universal one. (3) Salvation extends to the most ignorant
and the very worst. IJ. Tue Divine eirt. Hecould give nothing dearer or greater.
Some may excel others in kindness; but God's love is such that inits manifestation
it cannot possibly be exceeded. Christ is His unspeakable gift, He gave His Son.
1. To a humbling incarnation. 2. To a laborious servitude. 3. To an ignominious
and sacrificial death. III. Tae Divinz pesien, 1. What God wants todo. (1)
To save all men from perishing—(2) To give all everlasting life. 2, The condition
upon which He will doit. Faith in His Son. (Mortlock Daniell.) A triple ray
of Gospel light :—Here are three great testimonies like the three primary colours
which make one white beam. J. LicuTt upon THE CHARACTER oF Gop. i. God
loves. The Indian or Chinese will not let you say God loves. It is an impeach-
ment of His dignity and argues need. In a profound sense, however, of yearning
for protection, of appreciating the souls of men, of finding a necessity for seeing
them blessed, in the sense of pity, mercy, self-effacement, God loves, Had wesaid
this it would have been a marvellous testimony ; much more so had Paul or John
said it. But love on the lips of Christ has a thousandfold more meaning. 2. God
loves the world, the unregenerate world, as » mother loves her wayward no less
than her worthy child, though the love be broken-hearted grief. So God loves the
rebellious. 3. God loves the world with a distributive affection reaching the ‘‘ who-
goevers.” 4. God loves it with an affection so deep, self-effacing, self-sacrificing,
az to give His only begotten Son. Love is ever giving, and the love of God says


ie


242 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHar. rf.
kris RRS Cente SSE
not of aught it possesses that itis its own. He keeps not His child. See, then,
here in the first line of the Gospel that—(1) It reveals the heart of God. (2) His
habit of sacrifice. (3) His compassion for every soul. (4) His desire to save all.
II. Licur upon Curist. What a problem has Christ been! The generations have
never been able to forget Him. Men have never given Him a small name. The
estimates of foes have betrayed their sense of His greatness, and the adoration of
friends has lost itself in the endeavour to express it. Whois He? The ages have
been a wrestling Jacob whose question has been, Whatis Thyname? Ask Himself.
1, The only begotten Son of God. The Son is of the nature of the Father—Divine
in a sense no other being is. All the Divine fulness of the Godhead is in Him.
And His life matches His name. 2. The gift of God: the property of each soul of
man. ‘There is no tie which has knit Him to our hearts that He has not knit. He
takes our nature, conditions, duties, temptations, sorrows, curse, death. Ours—(1)
By evident gift. (2) By obvious sympathies, (3) Ours so that all He has and is,
the merits of His life, the atonement of His death, is ours. 3. The Saviour. Only
Christ has borne this great name. Mohammed is prophet ; Buddha is teacher only ;
Jesus is Saviour. A name (1) written on the consciousness of every redeemed
soul, and (2) writ large in history. III. Licut on man. Low views of God go
together with low views of man. You cannot lose your faith in God without losing
your faith in man. Here we see—1l. God loves each man, therefore each man is
lovable; no heart without a beauty in it that charms the eye of God; no life with-
out some possibility of glory in it which attracts His love. 2. We are capable of
faith. There is a Divine dignity in man which lets him lift himself up to God and
entrust himself into His arms, and put himself wholly under His guidance and in
His power. 3. We are capable of everlasting life. Philosophy as we know it to-
day is a theory of the graveyard only. If we cast away the Lord of life we have to
believe in a destiny that is only atomb. Christ has come that we might have ever-
lasting life. (R. Glover.) The love of God :—I. THE FOUNTAIN OF GRACE IN Gop’s
UNSPEAKABLE LOVE. 1. The object. The world: man in his corrupt and miserable
state (John v.19). 2. The act. . The love of God is—(1) The love of benevolence
(Titus iii. 4), (2) Of complacency (Psa. xi. 7; John xvi. 27). 3. The degree—* So.”
We are not told how much. It is to be conceived rather than spoken of; admired
rather than conceived. Observe from all this—1. That love is at the bottom of all,
We may give a reason for other things, but not for this love (Deut. vii. 7, 8; Matt.
xi. 26). 2%. Love is visible in the progress and perfection of our salvation in Christ
(Rom. v. 8). Lightis not more conspicuous in the sun. 3, If there were any other
cause it must be either (1) in the merit of Christ; but this was the manifestation
not the cause of God’s love (1 John iii. 16), or (2) in our worthiness; byt this can-
not be (1 John iv. 10; Col. i. 24). The uses of all this, 1. To confute all misap-
prebensions of God. Satan tempts us to view God as unlovely or to entertain un-
worthy thoughts of His mercy. . But this shows us that He is fuller of love than the
sea is of water. 2. To quicken our admiration of the love of God in Christ. Three
things commend any favour done us. (1) The good will of the giver. (2) The
greatness of the gift. (3) The unworthiness of the recipient. All concurhere. 3.
To exhort us—(1) To improve thislove. Itis an invitation to seek after God. (2)
To answer it with a corresponding love. (3) As love was at the bottom of all grace,
60 let it be of all duty. II. THz way Gop roox To ExPREss His nove. There is a
twofold giving of Christ. 1, For us (Rom. viii. 32). This mightily bespeaks God’s
love and care for our salvation. In creation God made us after His own image; in
redemption Christ was made after ours. This was the most convenient way to
bring about His purposes of grace—(1) That our faith might be more certain. (a) By
His humanity He taught men by doctrine and example. (b) By His dying He
satisfied the justice of God, and so made a way for the course of His mercy to us
(Rom. iii. 25, 26). (c) By His resurrection, which was a visible satisfaction to the
world that His sacrifice was accepted (Rom. iv. 25). (d) By His ascension the
truth of eternal life was more confirmed. (2) That our hope might be confirmed

being built upon Christ’s example and promises (1 Pet. i. 3; 1 John ii. 25, xii. 26).
(3) That our love to God may be more fervent. (4) That our obedience may be
more ready (Heb. v. 8,9). 2. Tous, (1) Without Christ there is no recovery of
what we lost, viz., (a) The image of God. This is restored by Christ, who is the
pattern (2 Cor. iii. 18) and author (Titus iii. 5, 6). Till we are in Him we have not
this great benefit (2 Cor. v.17). (b) The favour of God which Christ died to
recover (2 Cor. v. 17). (c) Fellowship with God (Gen. iii. 24; ¢f. Eph. iii, 12; Heb.
iv. 16). (2) Without Christ there is no removal of our misery—the death and curse


oe |


OMAP, rt.) ST. JOHN. 243


involved in sin. Christ finds us where Adam left us (John iii. 18). (3) Without
Christ there is no obtaining our proper happiness. Man was made for God, and
cannot be happy without Him (John xiv. 6; 1 John v.11). The use of all this is—
1. To confute the world’s opinion who measure God’s love by outward things. 2.
To excite us to bless God for Jesus Christ (Rom. vii. 25; 1 Cor. xv. 57). Ill. Tus
END OF THIS LovE. Notice—1. The connection of our duty and privilege. We
believe: God gives. 2. The universality of the proposal. 3. The condition. 4.
The benefits negatively and positively considered. (Z'. Manton, D.D.) The love
of God :—What subject can be so interesting as this? The gospel in general is a
record of the love of God, buthere the only begotten Son from the bosom of the Father
gives us an epitome of the whole. I. Irs onyecr. If God so loved the world, then—
1. He loved those who deserved no such love. 2. He loved those who could do
nothing to purchase or to procure it. 3, He loved those by whom it was unsolicited
and undesired. 4. He must manifest it in a way worthy of Himself. (1) Was
such a loveverbal? There is a great deal of such which says, ‘‘ Be ye warmed,” &c.
Was it sentimental? There are a good many so exquisite in their sensibilities as
not to be able to endure a case of woe. Had God’s love been such we had never
been redeemed. (2) God’s love was practical, bountiful, efficient. Il. Is MANNER.
He loved in a way worthy of Himself, and bestowed a gift which proved its great-
ness. 1. The supreme dignity and worth of the gift—‘ His Son” ina sense in
which no other being is. Angels are sons because God has created them; Chris-
tians because God has adopted them. But Christis God’s Son by eternal generation ;
Son in such a sense that He can say of the Father, “I and My Father are one,”
and that the Father can say of Him, “ Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever.”
2. The relation in which the gift stood to the Giver. He was one in whom the
Father delighted, not as in a creature with a limited affection, but with a boundless
complacency. 3. Does not this teach us that a less valuable gift could not expiate
human crime, and that no other price could have been accepted. Had Christ’s teach-
ing, example, é&c., been sufficient His blood would not have been shed. But ‘‘ without
shedding of blood is no remission.” 4. The only begotten Son so loved the world
that He gave Himself. The allegation that if Christ suffered under compulsion it
were unjust is true. But Christ was Divine, and therefore independent, and con-
sequently cannot be compelled to suffer. Hence He says, ‘I delight to do Thy
will.’ ‘*No man taketh My life from Me.” III. Irs env. It was glorious and
justified the means—the salvation of the world. But this great benefit is not dis-
pensed indiscriminately. There must be a cordial acceptance of God’s plan. Two
ideas: 1. That of credence. Jesus must be believed to be what the record declares
Him to be. 2 But such credence of this testimony that it is accepted
by us, and that there is a personal reliance on Christ for salvation. It
is with the heart man believeth unto righteousness. 3. Nor is this one act merely ;
it is an act repeated till a habit is formed, a habit which gives a distinctive
denomination to the person—‘“ believer.” 4. This salvation through faith is
negative and positive. In conclusion: 1. “ God so loved the world.” Then (1) He
has so loved mankind as He has not loved other orders of creatures. (2) He has
carried this attribute in this manifestation to its utmost intensity. This cannot
be said of His wisdom or His power. (3) It was so vast, amazing, rich as to pay
down a price that defies all the powers of human or angelic calculation. 2. Has
God so loved the world as to give, &c.? Then—(1) Let us cherish views of the
Divine character worthy of Him whose we are and whom we serve. (2) How vital
to salvation is faith! (3) Have we the love of God? (4) We ought to love one
another. (R. Newton, D.D.) God’s love and its gift:—I, THz LovzE or Gop.
1. If God go loved this guilty world, then what an unplumbed depth of grace
must have been in His heart! For the object of His love is not the world
in its first condition when He pronounced it “‘ very good,” but the world ruined
by sin and condemned for apostasy. There would have been no wonder had
the world: been drowned. Yet without any change in our claims or character
He loved us. And this love is not a mere relenting which might lead to a
respite, or simple regret which might end in a sigh. There is no merit in
loving what is lovely. There is nothing about man but his misery to attract
the Divine attachment. Man’s sin is not his misfortune, but his fault. And
the marvel is there is nothing God hates so much as sin, and yet no one He
loved so much as the sinner. 2. If God so loved this little world, then surely His
love is disinterested. This orb is truly a “‘ little one,” yet it has called out emotions
which mightier spheres had failed to elicit. 2. If God loved this fallen world and


‘ = ag oe


244 "THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. —  fodar


— Uhm. eee


not the world of fallen angels His love must be sovereign. ‘Be not high minded,
put fear.’ God spared not the angels that sinned, and if thou art spared thou
hast no reason to boast. 4. The fervour and mightiness of this love arrest our
attention—“ so.” II. [uz cirr or Gov’s ove. We estimate the value of a gift
by various criteria. 1. The resources of the giver. Our Lord declared that the
poor widow gave truly more than the wealthy worshippers. 2. The motives of the
giver. One may heap favours on a fallen foe to wound his pride. 3. The manner.
If it be withheld until wrung out, or if it be offered in a surly spirit, it sinks at once
in importance below the lesser boon offered in frank and spontaneous sympathy.
4. The condition of the recipient—whether rich or needy, and in what degree of need,
and the extent to which the gift is adapted to him. Now let the love of God
be tested by these criteria. 1. The resources of the Giver are infinite; but in the
donation of Christ you see the limits of possibility. If Christ be God what gift
superior can be presented ? or if He be the Son of God what richer love could be
exhibited? 2. God’s motives were perfectly unselfish. 3. His gift is the only one
that could have profited us. 4. What adaptation there isin it to man’s dire need!
III. Tue pesian or Gon’s nove. 1. To rescue man from perishing. 2. To confer
upon man the boon of everlasting life. 3. To do this for all who believe: (1) of
every character; (2) country; (3) rank; (4) age. (J. Eadie, D.D.) The love
of God:—I. Tue opsuct or THIS LovE. The world—not a part of it. The same
reasons upon which His love of individuals is justified will justify His love to all.
II. Irs nature. 1. Negatively. (1) Not a delight in the character of men. Foran
infinite being to sympathize with wicked natures He must be infinitely wicked.
(2) Not a mere emotion, for emotions do not influence the life without the will.
(3) Not fondness for particular persons. There was nothing in any man to warrant
this fondness. (4) Not an involuntary love as is manifest in what it did. (5) Not
an unreasonable state of mind which so often gives rise to a false affection.
2. Positively. (1) It was the only kind of love that could have been important to
man. (2) It was a reasonable affection. (3) It was good-will or benevolence.
(4) It was an unselfish kind of love. (5) God did the good for the sake of the
intrinsic and infinite value of the soul. Men had no claim upon Him, but there
were infinite reasons why He should not destroy them. (6) It was disinterested.
(7) It was a love of amazing strength. Here was a world of enemies at war with
Him, yet He spared not Hisown Son. (8) It was not for a single Christian as such,
but for a world of sinners, (9) It was forbearing. (10) It was universal. (11) Ii
was holy. III. Tue REasoN roR THIS WONDERFUL MEASURE OF THE DIVINE GOVERN-
ment. Mankind had resisted this government. If God had seemed to connive at
this, all other beings might have denied the justice of the law and disobeyed it also.
What must be done? God’s relation to the universe demanded of Him either to
execute the law or to make demonstration of His estimation of the law. It is easy
to see that ‘the honour of the law might be fully sustained by God Himself if He
should show before the whole universe His approbation of the law. If God would
take upon Himself human nature, and in this nature would stand right out before
the universe, and obey the law and suffer its penalty, the law would be perfectly
honoured. This was what was done in Christ. (Prof. Finney.) The love of
God :—I. How was Jusus Given By THE Farner? 1. By His designation and
appointment unto death (Acts ii. 23; Isa. xlii.1). 2. In parting with Him and
setting Him at some distance from Himself for a time (John xvi. 28; Psa. xxii.
1,2). 3. In delivering Him into the hands of justice to be punished (Rom, viii. 32).
4. In the application of Him with all the purchases of His blood, and settling all
this upon us as an inheritance (John vi. 32, 33; Johniv. 10). Il. How rus airr
WAS THE HIGHEST, FULLEST MANIFESTATION OF THE LOVE OF GOD THAT EVER THE WORLD
saw. ‘This will be evidenced if you consider—1. How near and dear Christ was to
the Father (Col. i. 13), 2. To what He gave Him (Luke xxii. 22). 3. That in giving
Christ He gave the richest jewel in His cabinet. 4. On whom the gift was
bestowed. (1) Not on angels; not on human friends, but (3) upon enemies (Rom.
v. 8-10). 5. The freeness of the gift (1 John iv. 19). Corollaries. 1. The exceed-
ing preciousness of souls (1 Pet. i. 18; Matt. xvi. 26). 2. Those for whom God gave
His own Son may warrantably expect any other mercy from Him (Rom. viii. 32;
1 Cor, iii. 20, 21). (1) No other mercy can be so dear to God as Jesus is. (2) As
Jesus was nearer the heart of God than all, so Jesus is in Himself much more
excellent than all of them (Rom. ix. 5). (3) There is no other mercy you want but
you are entitled to it by the gift of Christ (2 Cor. i. 20; 1 Tim. vi. 17). (4) li God
has given you Christ when enemies it is not imaginable He should deny you an


3
E
,
a
:
7
a
F
;
:
a


THAP, I1t.] ST. JOHN. 245


inferior mercy now you are reconciled (Rom. v. 8-10). 3. If the greatest love hath
been manifested in the gift of Christ, then the greatest evil and wickedness is mani-
fested in rejecting Him (Heb. ii. 2-4). (J. Flavel.) The love of God :—I. Gop 18
nove. 1. Itis singular. Hefirstloved. 2. Itis personal. 3. It is compassionate.
He pities the souls that sin has ruined. 4. It is comprehensive. It extends to all
mankind. II. Irs expression. 1. In the gift. This includes (1) the birth of
Christ; (2) His matchless life and example; and (3) His sacrifice. III. Irs
RESuLTS. It is implied—1. That allare lost. 2. That none need perish; and 3. That
whosoever believeth in Him hath everlasting life. IV. Wx Live IN THE GLORIOUS
DAY OF SALVATION! This should be the tidings of great joy to all people. The
return of Christmas should revive our hope and rekindle our zeal to spend and be
spent in the Master’s service. (L. O. Thompson.) The love of God :—I. Love
IN ITS GRANDEST souRCcE. 1, God can love and does love. We must beware of
making God only an infinite man; yet love in Him must be the same in kind as
love in us. 2. Love is more than a Divine attribute. It is as light of which all the
attributes are colours. 3. How near this brings Him to our hearts. We admire other
qualities; we only love the loving. 4. The Scripture represents everywhere this
love as the fountain of redemption. II. Lovr 1n 17Ts purEst form. It had
nothing to attract it and everything to repelit. 1. The world was perishing ; it was
therefore not complacent, but compassionating love. It is one thing to help the
happy and prosperous and another to succour the needy and miserable. 2. The
world was guilty. It is harder to love those who add unworthiness to distress.
Moral excellence may attract compassion to the wretched, but moral vileness disgusts.
But “God commendeth His love,” &c. 3. The world was at enmity with God.
That love is purest which withstands provocations and does good to the injurious.
‘© When we were enemies we were reconciled,” &c, 4. The world’s misery and
peril were caused by itself. It is always a sore strain on mercy when solicited for
the wilful. How natural the reply : ‘It serves you right’?! God says, ‘* Thou hast
destroyed thyself, but in Me is thy help.” III. Love In ITs GREATEST STRENGTH.
That is a poor philanthropy which can pity without helpiag: but ‘‘ the philanthropy
of God appeared” in action. Love is as deeds, not words, desires, or feelings.
1. The love of God was practical in the most costly way. The test of love is
sacrifice ; the criterion of its strength is the measure of the sacrifice. The Cross
was the self-denial of God. 2. Of all sacrifices the chief are those of persons. The
highest sphere of value is in persons, not things, although the latter may be very
precious. 3, God sacrificed the highest of all persons. IV. Love 1n 178 LOFTIEST
purposE. No purpose could be greater. We know the worth of life. ‘All that
a man hath will he give for his life.” It is the condition of all else that is prized.
Salvation is life, not in figure, but in fact. There is a life of the flesh, of the soul,
and of the spirit. This life in all its perfection is the end of God. Beginning in the
finest portion of our nature it will spread and strengthen until it possesses the whole
of it. Man redeemed and renewed is to live to the utmost of his capacity of life.
This life is “everlasting.” Sin brought death and separated from the tree of
life: Christ restored access toit. V. Love 1n 17s wipest sPHERE. The ‘‘ world”? is
not here used in a restrictive sense. It would be difficult to believe, did not facts
prove it, that any could be so blinded as to make “the world” signify the
Church. For the fact is, whenever the “world” is applied to a portion of man-
kind it always means the wicked. Wherever there is a man in the way to perish,
there is the world God loved. There is nothing in the love or sacrifice of the Father
and the Son to prevent the whole world being saved. God loved without limit of
nation or condition. Conclusion: 1. You have here a pattern and spring of love.
“Be imitators of God as dear children.” ‘If God loved us,” &. 2. What a
gospel—good news—is here! God loves you now in spite of all your sins and follies.
The only title to love is to be ‘“ perishing”; the only condition of its blessings is
to “believe.” 3. The subject casts a shadow by its very brightness on your
unbelief, state, prospects. (A. J. Morris.) The love of God:—This affec-
tionate compassion is set forth—I. By comPaRIsON OF THE PARTIES LOVING AND
Lovep. God most high and holy loved the base and wicked world. II. By
THE MEASURE or IT. He so loved, that is, so infinitely, so transcendently, so
incomprehensibly (Heb. xii. 3). Such as cannot be sufficiently expressed or con-
ceived (1 John iii. 1), III. By rae rrurr or His wove. It was no lip love, but a
giving love. Yea, but some things are not worth the giving, therefore—
IV. By THE woRTHINEss oF THE Girt—His only begotten Son. And that to
atand in our stead, and to die on the cross for us (ver. 14). Yea, but though never


246 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [owar. rr.
so excellent a gift be given, yet if it be not of use and profit to whom it is given,
it doth not so testify love. Therefore—V. It is set forth by THE BENEFIT THAT
coMEs To vs BY IT. 1. Not perishing. 2. Having eternal life. But perhaps
though this gift brings so great profit, yet they to whom it is given must take
some great and extraordinary pains to get it, and then God’s loveis not so
great. Therefore—VI. It is set forth BY THE EASINESS OF THE MEANS whereby we
are possessed of the profit of this gift, “That whosoever believeth.” Yet if this so
worthy a gift, of such invaluable worth to the enjoyer, had been restrained to
some few sorts of men, the matter had not been somuch. Therefore—VII. It is
set forth By THE UNIVERSALITY, that whosoever, be he what he will, so he will but
reach forth his hand to take this gift, he shall have it, and all the comfort of it.
(J. Dyke.) The Divine love :—I. In 1rs source. God loved the world. 1. Inits
guilt, therefore His love was a love of benevolence. He could not take delight in it,
but He did wish it well. 2. In its depravity. Therefore His love is self-moved—
the world not as made by God, but as ruined by the devil; consequently there was
nothing in it to attract the Divine love. 3. The world, not hell, consequently His
love was sovereign-free as opposed to necessary. He could have loved fallen angels
bad such been His pleasure. But “‘He took not hold on angels, but the seed of
Abrabam.” Why? “Even so, Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight.” II.
IN ITs MANIFESTATION, in—1. The birth or incarnation of Jesus Christ (1 Johniv. 9).
This did not engender or excite His love, it only manifested it. 2. In His death or
atonement (1 John iv. 10). The Divine love is not the effect, but the cause. The
gods of heathenism received but never gave sacrifices. 3. In the Person of the only
begotten Son of God. III. In rts pssien. 1. It has in view the salvation of every
individual. 2. It offers to every individual the supremest, most precious blessing
God Himself can bestow. (1) Endless life. (2) The very life of God Himself. 3.
It offers the supremest blessings on the easiest, cheapest terms. God the Father
had a great deal to do, and God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; but man has
nothing to do but to believe. (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) |Immeasurable love :—
I. In tHe otrr. Men who love much will give much. Little love forgets to bring
water for the feet, but great love breaks its box of alabaster. Consider—1l. What
this gift was. The Father’s other self. What more could He give? Could you
fathers give your sons to die for yourenemy? 2. How God gave it: not as you,
to some honourable pursuit in whieh you would not be deprived altogether of your
son’s company, but as an exile to be born in a manger, to toil as a carpenter, and
to dieasafelon, 38, When He gave: for there is love in the time. (1) Jesus was
always the gift of God. The promise was made as soon as Adam fell. Throughout
the ages the Father stood to His gift. very sacrifice was a renewal of the gift of
grace. The whole system of types betokened that in the fulness of time God would
give HisSon. Admire the pertinacily of this love. Many aman in a moment of
generous excitement can perform a supreme act of benevolence and yet could not
bear to look at it calmly from year to year. (2) It includes all the ages afterwards.
God still gives. II. In rum pran or satvation. What is it to believe in Jesus? 1.
To give your firm and cordial assent to the truth of the substitutionary sacrifice of
Christ. 2. To accept this for yourself. In Adam’s sin you did not sin personally

but by committing personal transgression you laid your hand upon it and made it
your own. In like manner you must accept and appropriate the atonement of Jesus

3. Personal trust. III. In THE PERSONS FOR WHOM THIS PLAN IS AVAILABLE, God
did not so love the world that any man that does not believe in Jesus shall be saved

“Whosoever believeth.” 1, From the moralist to the utterly vile; from the grey-
headed sinner to the boy or maiden. 2. It encircles all degrees of faith. IV. IN THE
DELIVERANCE, Whosoever believes shall not perish, though he is ready to perish. To
perish is to lose all hope in Christ, all trust in God, all light in life, all peace in
death, all joy. V. In rue possmssion. God gives to every man that believes in
Christ everlasting life. (C. H. Spurgeon.) God’s love for the world :—I. Tu
DivINE Love—wnat iris. 1, The essence of His nature. 2. All His attributes are
modifications and manifestations of His love. 3. His law, the order of creation, the
arrangement of His providence are expressions of His love. 4. Love is the ground
of His perfect happiness. II, Tue spxcran Fruit or THE Divine LOVE IN THE GIFT
or Cunist. 1, The origin of Christ’s mission was the love of God. 2. God gave
His Son, (1) In the councils of eternity. (2) In His birth in time, (3) In His
death, 3, The relationship between the Father and the Son is the measure of the
Divine love. (1) Not an exalted creature. (2) Not merely a Son. (3) Not His Son
only by incarnation. (4) But His only begotten, well beloved, and everlasting Son,


EE


sa


ee


Tt. oe


OHAP. m1.) ST. JOHN. 247


I. Tue rEcrrrents or ris Girt. 1, Not the “elect” world, which God loves
with the love of complacency. 2. But the sinful world, which He loves with the
love of compassion. IV. THe oBJECT CONTEMPLATED IN THE BESTOWAL OF THIS GIFT.
1. To prevent dreadful evil. 2. To bestow unspeakable good. (A. Beith, D.D.)
God’s love to the world :—This verse is one of the gems of the Bible, a star of the
first magnitude. Observe three things. I. How Gop Is aFFEOTED TowaRDS THE
cosmos: He loved it. 1. Whois God? The God of the Bible. 2. What is the
cosmos? The world of human life. 3, How they stood affected. (1) Originally,
in harmony. (2) Latterly, in enmity. (3) Now, through Christ, in harmony once
more: without Christ, stillat enmity. 3. Newand Divine revelation : God is love.
II. How Gop ManirestED THIS aFFrEoTION. 1. What He gave—His Son. (1) Only
begotten. (2) Well beloved. 2. How He gave. (1) Lovingly. (2) Freely. (3)
Wholly. Ill. For waar PurRPOSE WAS THIS AFFECTION MANIFESTED. 1. Negatively:
that man might not loose himself utterly from God, duty, happiness. Thus was
the pity of God manifested. 2. Positively: that man may have life, age during
life. (Bible Notes and Queries.) The love of God in the gift of a Saviour :—
These words express the substance of the gospel. No speaker ever had the power of
condensing great principles into so narrow a compass as the Lord Jesus. I. Tur
PLAN OF SALVATION ORIGINATED IN THE LOVE OF Gop, 1. The idea that God is loving
has been doubted or denied. (1) By those who contend that the world ought to have
been made happy and pure. To them the fact that He provides remedies is no
proof of His goodness. (2) By those who suppose that the Bible represents God as
originally a stern and inexorable Being placated by Christ, and that now He is only
mild and benignant toa few. 2. The text teaches that God was originally disposed
to show mercy. (1) No change has been wrought in His character by the plan of
salvation. He was just as worthy of love and confidence before as after the atonement.
(2) God was originally so full of mercy that He was willing to stoop to any sacrifice
except that of truth and justice in order tosave man, (3) The plan of salvation
was not merely to save man, but to save the name, character, and government of
God. This could only be done by allowing His Son to be treated as if He was a
sinner, in order to treat the really guilty as if they were righteous,-and so to identify
the one with the other. IJ. Tut nxpression or His LovE waS THE HIGHEST THAT
IT COULD PossIBLy BE. 1, Such a gift as that of His only begotten Son is the
highest conceivable gift, and this Christ intends to convey. The Bible represents
God as having the attributes of a kind and tender Father. He loves when Hesays
He loves, and is no cold creation of the imagination. When a man bids his son go
into the tented field with every prospect of his dying for the welfare of his country,
it is the highest expression of his attachment for that country. 2. But no man
has ever manifested such a love as God’s. In a few instances a man has sacrificed
his life for his friend, and not a few fathers and mothers endangered their lives for
their children. But who has ever given the life of his child foran enemy? But
“God commendeth,” &c. (A. Barnes, D.D.) Christ's mission a revelation of
God’s love:—I. Love InN irs HIGHEST FoRM. Love is a generic term and includes
a large number of specific affections. There is a love of friendship, brotherly
love, parental love, conjugal love, a love of country or patriotism, and a love
of God, or religion. Love is a redeeming quality among the many miseries of
our fallen state. It is like the silver ray of sun-light which gleams through
the dark cloud when the storm is brewing in the sky. It is like an oasis in
the desert, which is a scene of beauty and a home of life amid arid plains
doomed to perpetual barrenness. It is like the wood which Moses took and placed in
the bitter waters of Mara. It sweetens the cup of human experience. It is the only
lasting bond of human society—the only guarantee of the perpetual bliss of heaven,
and the only attribute in fallen man which is made an emblem of God, “ God is
love.” Iflove in human form and in a fallen world be so Divine, what must it be
in God Himself? Love in man is but a ray from the sun; a drop from the ocean.
II. Love IN rvs sUBLIMEST MANIFESTATION. The object of my text is not general,
but special. It is to assure us that while the love of God may be traced in every
object in nature, and read on every page of Providence, as the colours of the rain-
bow may be found in every ray of silvery sun-light, yet the brightest and the fullest
manifestation of itis in the mission of Jesus into the world to save sinners, In
considering this subject, we must carefully bear in mind that Jesus Christ was not
a mere man, but God who assumed a human form and nature. Few men in the
time of the Saviour’s advent had any idea of the love of God. Man’s true happi-
ness must ever be found in God, and in other beings only as they are Godlike. But


ye ~ Te


: ay, ¢- ae
218 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHar. rz.


de ee ls


to find happiness in such a god as that of which the highest conception is realized -

in the mythology of Greece, the idolatry of Moab, or the dogmas of the Pharisees
is out of the question. Jesus, however, came to overturn these errors and fearful
misrepresentations of the Deity, and save the world by proving that God was kind
and loving, just and faithful, and therefore deserving of men’s love and trust. It
is most interesting to study the character of God according to the teaching of Jesus.


He represented the Divine Being as a Father who yearned for the return of his i
prodigal child, welcomed him home, receiving him with open arms and open heart, ‘
bidding all his household help him to tell the world his joy, “ Rejoice with me, for ;


this my son was dead and is alive again, was lost and is found.” He represented ‘
God as the Good Shepherd, who goes after the lost one until it is found, and bears F
it to His home upon His shoulders with rejoicing. He represented God as the Good
Samaritan who saw men lying in their wounds, robbed by sin of hope and heaven,
upon the poirt of death, and came to save them at his own expense. III. Love in
ITS WIDEST FIELD OF OPERATION. This widest field is the world, for ‘‘God so loved
the world.” It is evident that the text cannot mean merely to assert that God
loved and admired the material world or the things of the world, as these need no
salvation, and are not capable of being saved, and the love of God to the world,
in the text, is said to have special reference to its salvation. As the pious Jew of
old rambled among the ruins of his glorious temple, turning over with affection its
broken columns, cherishing the very dust and stone thereof; so God in Christ,
with His loving heart overflowing with sympathy and affection, seeks to gather the
broken fragments of humanity together, and rebuild upon a surer basis the temple
of man. As mother, sister, or wife walks in the field of blood after the day of
dreadful slaughter, with tears of affection flowing from her eyes, the sigh of sorrow
rising from her wounded heart and floating upwards to tell its grief to God, and
with tenderness of touch turns over the forms of the dead, that she may press once
more to her heart, now broken, the object of her warm affection ; so God is repre-
sented as amid the carnage which sin has made of us, inspired by the love of which
ray text is speaking, toiling and labouring and suffering, having come to seek and
to save those who were lost. ‘‘God so loved the world!” This is the source from
which all our blessings flow. IV. Love 1n 17s NoBLEST INTENTION. 1. The sad
condition of those whom it proposes to affect—‘ should not perish.’? The objects
of His love are perishing—perishing, not in body but in soul. 2. The glorious
state to which the love of God proposes to raise all He found in this sad condition,
‘“but have everlasting life.” Life, even of a temporal character, is of 50 much
value that men toil and labour and manifest the deepest concern, in order, not to
perpetuate it, but merely to prolong it for a few years. 38. The simple way in
which we may become eternally benefited by this saving work of God, ‘‘ whosoever
believeth in Him,” What an awful curse is unbelief! 4, The impartial manner
in which these blessings are offered, ‘‘ whosoever.’? Were man to make a feast, his
invitations would not be to every one, for his ability to provide would have a limit.
The richest man could not make a feast for all. But God is not man that He
should be deficient. (EH. Lewis, B.A.) God’s love for a sinning world :—
I, SIN IS THE MOST EXPENSIVE THING IN THE UNIVERSE. 1, It is the violation of an
infinitely important law—a law designed and adapted to secure the highest good of
the universe. 2. As sin is this it cannot be treated lightly. The entire welfare of
a government and its subjects turns upon obedience. 3. The law of God must not
be dishonoured by anything He shall do. He must stand by it to retrieve its
honour, 4. Hence the expense. Hither the law must be executed at the expense of
the race, or God must suffer the worse results of disrespect to His law, or a substi-
tute be provided who shall both save the sinner and honour the law. II. How sHAtn
THE EXPENSE BE MET? Who shall head the subscription? The Father made the
first donation. 1. He gave His Son to make the atonement due to law. 2. Hegave
His Spirit to take charge of this work. III. For wHom was THE GREAT DONATION
MADE? By the ‘‘ world”’ cannot be meant any particular part. The Bible and the
nature of the case shows that the atonement must have been made for the whole.
Otherwise no man could be sure that it was made for himself. IV. WHat PRomPTED
Gop to maxEit? Love. This love is—1. Not complacency, or it would have been
infinitely disgraceful to Himself. 2. Not mere feeling, as in those who are carried
away by strong emotion. But—3. Disinterested: for He had nothing to hope or
fear; no profit to make out of the saved. 4, Zealous. 5. Most self-denying. 6.
Universal because particular. God loved each, therefore all. 7%. Most patient. V.
Tue aivt or Gop MUST BE RECEIVED By FaiTH. This is the only possible way.


i a i a
= “ve
{ ™


CHP ur.) ST. JOHN. 249


God’s government is moral because the Saviour is a moral agent, Therefore God
cannot influence us unless we give Him our confidence. Lessons: 1. Sinners may
place themselves beyond the reach of mercy. 2. This involves them in thegreatest
responsibility. 3, This responsibility can only be discharged and the sinner saved
by accepting the donation of Christ. 4. Accepting that donation let us give it to
others. (C. G. Finney, D.D.) God’s wonderful love :—I. Irs CHARACTERISTICS,
1. Eternal: ‘‘loved.” Who can tell when it began? 2. Compassionate: ‘‘ the
world.” 38. Unspeakable: ‘‘so.” II. Ivs manirusration. 1. Condescending. 2.
Sacrificial. 3. Exhaustive. III. Irs purposz. 1. Broad: “whosoever.” 2.
Limited: ‘ believeth.” 3, Blessed. (1) Negative: ‘‘should not perish.” (2)
Positive : ‘‘ have everlasting life.’ (R.S. MacArthur, D.D.) The love of God
self-originated :—The ocean is always moving, but it is not self-moving. The cause
of its movements is outside itself, in the moon, and in the wind, Did the wind and
the moon let it alone, the Atlantic would for ever be a pacific ocean, quiet, restful,
pellucid as an inland lake ; it has no power to heave itself. But as for the shore-
less sea of the Divine Love, it has the power to move itself; and it did move itself.
It rolled in a grand irresistible current towards the shores of our world. Like the
Divine Essence, the Divine Love possesses the power of self-determination. (J. C.
Jones, D.D.) _God’s love for sinners :—I remember the case of a young man who
was afflicted with a frightfully loathsome disease. He had to be kept out of sight.
But was he neglected? No. Ineed not tell you who looked after him. There was
not ® morning but his loving mother bathed his wounds and swathed his
limbs, and not an evening that she wearied in her toil. Do you think she
had not natural sensitiveness? I knew her to be as sensitive as any lady;
but by so much more as she felt the loathsomeness of her work do you
see the love that constantly upheld her in doing it. But oh! what is the
loathsomeness of cankered wounds compared with the loathsomeness of sin
to God? There is but one thing that God hates, and that is sin, Yet with
all His hatred of sin how He hangs over the sinner! (S. Coley.) The
power of God’s love:—We often hear of counter currents, but was there ever
such a counter current as is implied here! One of the most important and wonder-
ful ocean currents is the Gulf Stream. It takes its rise in the Gulf of Mexico and
sweeps across through the heart of the mighty Atlantic to the Arctic Seas; and by
its strong currents, more rapid than that of the Mississippi, it engulfs every other
ocean stream that comes athwart its course, making it tributary to its own grand
mission of washing the shores and ameliorating the climate of the sea-bound
countries of Europe. ‘So God loved the world.” His love is a mighty stream of
warm, generous commiseration sweeping with mighty force towards that moral
Arctic Sea sin has made of our world. And such was the strength of the current
that it swept into its own bosom the mighty stream of God’s love of complacency
towards His only begotten Son, so that He was borne on its bosom into this world,
where, by suffering and death, He became “ the author of eternal salvation to all
them that obey Him.” (A. J. Parry.) The love of God :—In human govern-
ments, justice is central, and love incidental. In the Divine government, love is
the central element, and jnstice only incidental. God wishes to exhaust all means
of kindness before His hand takes hold on justice. When the waves of penalty
begin to come in in fearful tides, then He banks up against them. His goodness is
the levee between justice and the sinful soul. (H. W. Beecher.) God is love :—
(God is love, and there is a something about love which always winslove. When love
puts on her own golden armour, and bears her sword bright with her own unselfish-
ness, she goeth on conquering and to conquer. Let a man once apprehend that
God is love, that this is God’s very essence, and he must at once love God.
(C. H. Spurgeon.) A royal gift :—Plutarch, the Greek historian, tells a story
to this effect: ‘An ancient king once gave a present of a large sum of money
to a personal friend, and was gently taken to task for his generosity. ‘What!’
was his astonished exclamation, ‘would you not have me be liberal? Let the
world know that when the king gives he gives generously, like a king.’”” Upon
this, he made a second present of equal value, Faith in Christ ts certain salva-
tion:—We lately read in the papers an illustration of the way of salvation.
A man had been condemned in a Spanish court to be shot, but being an American
citizen and also of English birth, the consuls of the two countries interposed,
and declared that the Spanish authorities had no power to put him to death.
What did they do to secure his life when their protest was not. sufficient ? They
wrapped him up in their flags, they covered him with the Stars and Stripes and the


ee,


Th


250 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (CHAP. I1t.
VT ee
Union Jack, and defied the executioners. ‘‘ Now fire a shot if you dare, for if you
do so, you defy the nations represented by those flags, and you will bring the powers
of those two great empires upon you.”” There stood the man, and before him the


soldiery, and though a single shot might have ended his life, yet he was as invul- —


nerable as though encased in triple steel. Even so Jesus Christ has taken my poor
guilty soul ever since I believed in Him, and has wrapped around me the blood-red
flag of His atoning sacrifice, and before God can destroy me or any other soul that
is wrapped in the atonement, He must insult His Son and dishonour His sacrifice,
and that He will never do, blessed be Hisname. (C.H.Spurgeon.) Believe only :-—
It is said that some years ago a vessel sailing on the northern coast of the South
American continent, was observed to make signals of distress. When hailed by
another vessel, they reported themselves as ‘‘ Dying for water!” “ Dipitup then,”
was the response, “you are in the mouth of the Amazon river.” There was fresh
water all around them, they had nothing to do but to dip it up, and yet they were
dying of thirst, because they thought themselves to be surrounded by the salt sea.
How often are men ignorant of their mercies? How sad that they should perish
for lack of knowledge! Jesus is near the seeker even when he is tossed upon
oceans of doubt. The sinner has but to stoop down and drink and live.
(Ibvid.) We must believe or perish :—When a shipwrecked sailor, left to the
mercy of the waves, has no help within reach or view but a spar or mast, how
will he cling to it, how firmly he will clasp it—he will hold it as life itself. Ifa
passing billow sweep him from it, with all his might he will make for it again, and
grasp it faster than ever. To part is to perish; and so he clings—and how
anxiously! So the awakened sinner feels. The ocean of wrath surrounds him ;
its billows and its waves go over him. Hell yawns beneath to engulf him. The
vessel is an utter wreck. All its floating timbers are very rottenness. Oh, how he
strains his eye searching for a mast, a plank, a spar! His eye rests on the only
hope, the only rock in the wide ocean of wrath, the Rock of Ages, the Lord Jesus.
He makes for the Saviour—he clasps Him—he cleaves to Him. Every terror of
sin and of unworthiness that strives to loosen his hold only makes him grasp with
more terrible and death-like tenacity, for he knows that to part company is to perish.
(R. B. Nichol.) The love of God is a necessity of His own nature :-—‘‘God so
loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son,” &c. The life and death of
Christ was but the working out of the love of God. The affection and the yearn-
ing of heart towards His erring creatures was just the same in God before Christ
came, that Christ showed it to be while He was on earth. It is just the same still.
There is no change in God, orin His love. Man nor woman need fear disappoint-
ment there. It has been the custom of some, a custom too much prevailing, to
represent God as being under no manner of obligation to do anything for His crea-
tures after they had broken His law. The trouble with this statement is that there
is a great deal of truth in it; and yet it has been made in such a manner as to give
a very wrong impression. In God’s own nature there is a necessity for His efforts
for man’s redemption. (H.W. Beecher.) The word ‘“ so’? :—Come, ye surveyors,
bring your chains, and try to make a survey of this word “so.” Nay, that is not
enough. Come hither, ye that make our national surveys, and lay down charts for
all nations. Come ye, who map the sea and land, and make a chart of this word
“so.” Nay, I must go further. Come hither, ye astronomers, that with your optic
glasses spy out spaces before which imagination staggers, come hither and encounter
calculations worthy of all your powers! When you have measured between the
horns of space, here is a task that will defy you—‘‘ God so loved the world.” If
you enter into that, you will know that all this love is to you—that while Jehovah
loves the world, yet He loves you as much as if there were nobody else in all the
world to love. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The glory of the Gospel:—It is not like a
banquet, accommodated to the tastes and wants of so many and no more. Like a
masterpiece of music, its virtues are independent of numbers. (D. Thomas, D.D.)
God’s mercy is free :—Let me tell thee that the mercy of God flows freely. It
wants no money and no price from thee, no fitness of frames and feelings, no pre-
paration of good works or penitence. Free as the brook which leaps from the
mountain side, at which every weary traveller may drink, so free is the mercy of
God. Free as the sun that shineth, and gilds the mountain’s brow, and makes
glad the valleys without fee or reward, so free is the mercy of God to every needy
sinner. Free as the air which belts the earth and penetrates the peasant’s cottage
as well as the royal palace without purchase or premium, so free is the mercy of
God in Christ. It tarrieth not for thee: it cometh to thee as thou art. It way


=~. = oe


CHAP. ITZ. ] ST. JOHN. 251


layeth thee in love; it meeteth thee in tenderness. Ask not how thou shalt get it.
Thou needst not climb to heaven, nor descend to hell for it; the word is nigh
thee; on thy lip, and in thy heart if thou believest on the Lord Jesus with thy
heart, and with thy mouth makest confession of Him, thou shalt be saved.
What is tt to perish :—What is it to perish? It is to die in our sins, without bright
angels to smile upon us as they wait to carry us away from earth; to die without
the Saviour’s glorious presence to cheer us in the valley of the shadow of death.
It is to be turned away from the shut door of our Father’s mercy, because, like the
foolish virgins, we are not ready when the bridegroom comes. To perish is to lose
the smile of God, the company of the redeemed, the society of angels, the glories
of the heavenly world, and, with no ray of comfort or gleam of hope, to be driven
away into outer darkness, into misery and woe, without deliverance and without
end. The thought of this awful perdition made Jesus weep over Jerusalem and say,
* © Jerusalem, Jerusalem: thou that killest the prophets and stonest them that are
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen
doth gather her brood under her wings, and ye would not.” (Rev. R. Brewin.)
Whosoever :—‘* Whosoever’? has a finger for babes, and an arm for old men;
it has an eye for the quick, and a smile for the dull. Young men and maidens,
whosoever offers its embrace to you! Good and bad, honourable or disreputable,
this ‘‘ whosoever” speaks to you all with equal truth! Kings and queens may
find room in it; and so may thieves and beggars. Peers and paupers sit on one
seat in this word. ‘ Whosoever’ has a special voice for you, my hearer! Do you
answer, “ ButIam an oddity”? ‘ Whosoever” includes all the oddities. I always
have a warm side towards odd, eccentric, out-of-the-way people, because I am one
myself, at least so I am often said to be. I am deeply thankful for this blessed
text; forif I am a lot unmentioned in any other catalogue, I know that this
includes me: I am beyond all question under the shade of “whosoever.” No end
of odd people come to the Tabernacle, or read my sermons; but they are all
within the range of “whosoever.” (C. H. Spurgeon.) Whosoever :—When
the great mutiny in India had been brought to a close, and peace was being
made between the government and the rebels, the Queen caused a proclamation
to be made throughout the rebel provinces that all who should lay down their
arms, and come to certain appointed places by a fixed day, should receive for-
giveness, with some exceptions. Ah! these exceptions. The poor fellows who
knew they could not be forgiven, but must be put to death, never came. The love
of God knows no exceptions ; whosoever will may come. (Ibid.) Whosoever :—
Somebody said he would rather read ‘‘ Whosoever ” than see his own name, because
he should be afraid it might refer to some other man who might have the same
name. This was well brought out in a prison the other day, when the chaplain
said to me, ‘‘I want to describe a scene that occurred here some time ago. Our
Commissioners went to the Governor of the State and got him to give his consent to
grant pardons to five men on account of their good behaviour, The Governor said
the record was to be kept secret ; the men were to know nothing about it; and at
the end of six months the criminals were brought out, the roll was called, and the
President of the Commission came up and spoke to them ; then putting his hand
in his pocket he drew out the papers and said to those 1,100 convicts, ‘I hold in my
hand pardons for five men.’ I never witnessed anything like it, Every man held
his breath, and wasas silent as death, Then the Commissioner went on to tell how
they obtained these pardons; that it was the Governor who granted them, ? and the
chaplain said the suspense was so great that he spoke to the Commissioner and
asked him to first read out the names of those-who were pardoned before he spoke
further, and the first name was given out thus, ‘‘ Reuben Johnson will come out and
get his pardon.” He held out the papers but no one came. He looked all around,
expecting to see a man spring forward at once ; still no one arose, and he turned to
the officer of the prison and said, ‘ Are all the convicts here? . ‘ Yes,” was the
reply. ‘Then, Reuben Johnson will come and get his pardon.” The real Reuben
Johnson was all this time looking around to see where Keuben was ; and the chap-
Jain beckoned to him, and he turned and looked around and behind him, thinking
some other man must be meant. A second time he beckoned to Reuben, and ealled
to him, and the second time the man lookéd around to see where | Reuben was,
until at last the chaplain said to him, es You are the man, Reuben;” and he rose
up out of his seat and sank back again, thinking it could not be true. He had been
there for nineteen years, having been placed there for life; and when he came up
and took his pardon he could hardly believe his eyes, and he went back to his seat


259 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR.

and wept likea child: and then, when the convicts were marched back to their cells,
Reuben had been so long in the habit of falling into line and taking the lock step
with the rest that he fell into his place, and the chaplain had to say, ‘‘ Reuben, come
out; you are a free man.” (D. L. Moody.) The naturalness of God’s love :—
When William Knibb had been preaching from this text in Jamaica, returning home
he came up with an old black woman, and he said to her, ‘‘ What do you think ot
the great love of God?” Simplicity is often allied to sublimity. ‘* Think, massa!”
she replied ; ‘‘Me think it be just like Him.” Soitis. St. Peter says, ‘* According
to His abundant mercy He hath begotten us again.” It is just like Him. Itis as
a father pitieth his children. (S. Coley.) Christ not the cause but the manifesta-
tion of God’s love:—The law of gravitation existed from the foundation of the
world, it daily exerted its influence, keeping the stars in their orbits, and’ swinging
them around their respective centres. The mysterious force, however, was unknown
until discovered by Sir Isgac Newton, and published in his writings. It existed
from the first; only a century or two ago was it made manifest. In like manner
the love of God existed from eternity, from days of old. It burnt as hot in the
days of Nosh and of Abraham, as on the Incarnation morn or the Atonement eve.
All through the ages it governed the world with a view toits finalredemption. But
in the Incarnation and Propitiation was it revealed, only then did it force itself upon
the obtuse vision of the world. ‘‘ Ye have believed that I came out from God. I came
forth from—out of—the Father, and am come into the world.” Not only He came from
God, but He came out of God, John the Baptist camefrom God. (J. C. Jones, D.D.)
The love of God as seen in the giftof Christ :—A story has been often told of the
fondness of parents for their children ; how in a famine in the East a father and
mother were reduced to absolute starvation, and the only possibility of preserving
the life of the family was to sell’ one of the children into slavery. So they con-
sidered it. The pinch of hunger became unbearable, and their children pleading
for bread tugged so painfully at their heart-strings, that they must entertain the
idea of selling one to save the lives of the rest. They had four sons. Who of
these should be sold? It must not be the first: how could they spare their first-
born? ‘The second was so strangely like his father that he seemed a reproduction
of him, and the mother said that she would never part with him. The third was
so singularly like the mother that the father said he would sooner die than that
this dear boy should go into bondage; and as for the fourth, he was their Benjamin,
their last, their darling, and they could not part with him. Thsy concluded that
it were better for them all to die together than willingly to part with any one of their
children. Do you not sympathize with them? Isee youdo. Yet God so loved us
that, to put it very strongly, He seemed to love us better than His only Son, and
did not spare Him that He might spare us. He permitted His Son to perish from
among men ‘that whosoever believeth in Him might not perish, but have ever-
lasting life.” (C. H. Spurgeon.) The love of God in the gift of Christ :—When
Jesus looked at the poor widow He found a new rule of arithmetic. When she
dropped in her two mites He said that she had given more than they all. What
new rule was this? Many had given much, but the Lord looked at what they had
left. This woman had given all. Try God by His own rule. He had but one Son
—His only begotten. If He had taken every star from the sky, and manipulated
those stars, and moulded them all into a gigantic body of which every star was an
atom ; and then if He had taken every seraph from His throne and made a mighty
amalgam of all souls into one, and had put that giant mind into that gigantic body,
and given that body and soul for man, it would have been as nothing to this. A
word of His could have restored the dismantled heavens ; but God Himself cannot
make an only-begotten Son. (S. Coley.) God’s provision of the sacrifice :—
Transport yourselves in imagination to Athens or Rome; observe closely the images
of the gods, in motley crowds on either hand of you; see the rivers of red blood
flowing towards them. No marvel that “ Paul’s spirit was stirred within him as he
saw the city wholly given to idolatry.” Come with me again to Jerusalem. Behold
the image of the invisible God lifted up on Calvary. Does blood flow towards it ?
No: blood flows from it. Here, then, we have hit upon the radical difference
between paganism and Christianity. Blood to the image: that is the essence of
paganism. Blood from the image: that is the essence of Christianity. The
heathen gods demand a sacrifice, but never provide it ; the gospel God both demands
it and provides it, ‘He gave His only-begotten Son.” (J. CG. Jones, D.D )
God’s love and justice im sacrifice :—King Zeleucus decreed that whosoever committed
a particular offence should lose his eyes; and the first person found guilty was his


[cmar. mm


lle ciaak Heder.


OwAP. 17.1 8T. JOHN. 253


own son. What a company would be gathered, and what an anxious inquiry there
would be! What will the king do? Will he set aside the law because the offender
is royal? Amid the hush of that gathered company the officer sternly commanded
to do his duty dashed out one of the prince’s eyes. ‘‘Stop,” said the king, “take
the other from me.” This was done. This will show that the love of the king was
seen all the more from the justice of his administration. (S. Coley.) Salvation:
—I. Irs onteIn IN THE LOVE or Gop, which will appear after we consider that—1.
Man by nature is in a state of degradation and spiritual death by reason of sin. 2.
The essential means of salvation is the free gift of God, Il. Tum MANnrIFEsTATION
OF THIS LOVE. Observe—l. The gift. 2. The faithfulness of the Father in this
transaction. 38. The part which the Son took in this stupendous work. 4. The
necessity of this gift. III. Tum mzans BY WHICH WE BECOME PERSONALLY INTERESTED
IN THIS Girt. 1. There must be repentance. 2. There must be faith. (J. Gaskin,
M.A.) The cost and cheapness of salvation :—A preacher had gone down into a
coal mine during the noon-hour to tell the miners of the glad tidings of salvation.
Meeting the foreman on his way back to the shaft he asked him what he thought of
God’s manner of saving men. ‘‘Oh, it is too cheap, I cannot believe in such a
religion as that.’? Without an immediate reply to his remark the preacher asked,
‘“‘ How do you get out of this place?” ‘‘ Simply by getting into the cage,” was the
reply. ‘And does it take long to get to the top?” ‘*Oh, no; only afew seconds.”
‘Well, that certainly is very easy and simple. But do you not need help to raise
yourself?” said the preacher. ‘‘Of course not,” replied the miner, ‘As I have
said, you have nothing to do but to get into the cage.” ‘‘ But what about the
people who sunk the shaft, and perfected allthis arrangement? Was there much
labour or expense about it?” ‘Yes, indeed; that was a laborious and expensive
work. The shaft is a thousand feet deep, and it was sunk at great cost to the
proprietors ; but it is our way out, and without it we should never be able to get to
the surface.” ‘Just so,” and when God’s Word tells you that whosoever believeth
on the Son of God hath everlasting life, you say, “‘ Too cheap,” forgetting that
God’s work to bring you and others out of the pit of destruction was accomplished
at a vast cost, the price being the death of His only-begotten Son. (W. Baxendale.)
Redemption through Christ:—I. MEN NEED DELIVERANCE FROM DEATH. II. Gov’s
LOVE IS 80 GREAT AS TO PROMPT TO DELIVERANCE. III. TuHIs DELIVERANCE HAS BEEN
WROUGHT OUT BY SELF-SACRIFICE ON THE PARTOFGop. IV. Tuts DELIVERANCE IS MADE
OURS EY A PERSONAL FAITH IN THE Lorp Jesus Cunist. (C.D. Barrows.) Redemp-
tion:—I. Tue pocrrinz. ‘God so loved,” &. 1. The first cause of redemption
—the love of God to man. Christ died not that God might, but because He did
love us. (1) This is a doctrine distinctive of the Bible. You find it nowhere else.
Men talk about the mercy of God, but if we give up the ideas of God obtained from
the Scriptures how do we know that He is a God of love? What is there in nature
to suggest it? There we see the reign of law: sin and suffer. (2) The presence of
such a truth in the Bible forms one of the most powerful vindications of its
authority. If it contained nothing different from other books we might reasonably
question its Divine origin. (3) But familiarity has deadened the force and beauty
of this great Bible truth in those who have heard it so often. (4) Here, however,
is the marvel of marvels—standing alone in the universe—that God loves a race
that has defied and insulted Him. 2. The mode of human redemption. God's
love could not be a powerless thing dealing in fine sentiment and words of pity. It
had a great end in view which could only be secured by an unparalleled sacrifice.
“He gave His only begotten Son.” (1) The designation of the Redeemer is
peculiar and significant. Unlike other sons, He has a position of His own, and
His name is an incidental but most powerful proof of His Divinity. (2) The
Redeemer was “‘given,” not to be a mere teacher or example, but to be the propitia-
tion for sin. 3. The extent of human redemption. It would not be easy to find
language more free and comprehensive than “ the world, . . . whosoever.” All are
not saved, but none need be unpardoned. An universal need is here universally
provided for, II. Taz pury. God has lavished the love of His heart on us and
requires the trust and love of ours. Nothing can be simpler or more common than
trust, the child’s first lesson and act. This is illustrated in the miracles of Christ.
Only believe that Jesus has the will and the power to save and your confidence will
not be disappointed. 1. Faith is different from knowledge. Yet there must be
some knowledge. But there may be little knowledge and strong faith, and much
knowledge and no faith. There are many well-instructed people who shrink from
the thought of infidelity. Yet infidelity is the want of trust in God and Christ.


~


254 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. tI.
veh we i eee
Faith is the soul’s own rest in Jesus as its own Redeemer. 2. The text makes no
distinction in the kind or degree of faith. It is doubtless better to have a firm than
a weak faith. Still, if a man have faith at all he will be saved. II. Tue Promise.
‘“Eternal life.” 1. A present realization. 2. ‘‘ More abundantly” hereafter. Of
this the unbeliever is deprived in time and eternity. He that believeth not is dead
already. (J. Guiness Rogers, B.A.) The Christian’s creed :—I. Its first article is
—Gop LOVES THE WORLD. Easy to say, impossible to realize in all its augustness.
The great question is, What does God feel? Agnostics do not know whether He is
force or Father. But when they cannot tell what you yearn to know Jesus comes,
and there is light over all the darkness and despair of life. On any lips this would
be a wonderful word, but in the lips of Christ ‘‘love’’ meant all that was in His
own heart. Himself the embodiment of love, He lifts our eyes to heaven and
says, God loves, not made, rules, judges, but loves; and not the Church, but the
world, and every individua} in it. Mankind is not a larger family for God to love
than is yours for you. II. Its second article is—Gop Has civen us His Son. Love
is ever giving. It gives its best. Our best earthly gifts are our friends, and God
gives us the best friend. And He is ours absolutely, individually, and for ever—all
He is andall He has, Value the gift which cost God so much. III. The third
article is—WHOSOEVER BELIEVETH IN Curist, &c. The condition upon which we
are to receive salvation is universally practicable. If there were any other it would
shut some one out, All our training in this world is a training for faith. All the
joys of life are joys of trust. It is nqt a question whether faith shall be the con-
dition of salvation. It is a necessity in the nature of things. If you suspect any
you shrink from them. Doubt is the great gulf fixed between you and God, but
faith is the link which binds us to Him. All that is needed, therefore, is the
entrustment of the heart to God. Conclusion: That is our creed. 1. Repent of
treating it sonegligently. 2. Benotashamedofit. 3. Fear notits future. Man will
want no new one until all that wakes up our need of Christis destroyed. (R. Glover.)
The everlastings :—I. The everlasting Farner. II. The everlasting Son. III.
The everlasting nove. IV. The everlasting uirz. (J. C. Jones.) The morality
of the Evangelical faith :—I. In these words I find my religion, theology, ethics,
and politics, politics being one of the chief branches of ethics. 1. The Divine love
for mankind. 2. The mission of the love of God for salvation. 38. Faith in the
Son of God the condition of salvation. 4. Eternal life the gift of Divine love to all
who believe in Christ. II. Evangelical Christians have claimed one of these truths
as pre-eminently their own. Faith in Christ as the condition of salvation is the
very heart of the Gospel, Whitefield the Calvinist and Wesley the Arminian
differed on many points, but when a man asked, ‘* What must I do to be saved?”
each gave the same answer. III, Luther maintained that justification by faith was
the test of a standing or a falling Church. We go further. It is as necessary
to preach that men are sanctified by faith. Faith is the root of morality as well as
the condition of pardon. Heb. xi., which illustrates the triumphs of faith, is an un-
finished fragment. You must add to it the story of the saintliness, heroism,
righteousness, and charity of sixty generations; even then it remains a fragment
still. IV. To believe in Christ—what is it? Not the mere acceptance, however cor-
dial, of the Christian creed. It is to have confidence in Christ, unreserved, unquali-
fied, unmeasured, Whatever dignity Christ claims, faith reverently acknowledges.
Whatever relations He assumes to God and to man, it concedes. Whatever autho-
rity He asserts, it submits to. When He teaches, faith admits His teaching as
absolute truth. When He commands, faith accepts His precepts as the perfect law
of life. When He promises, faith relies on Him to fulfil, To admit some of
Christ’s claims and to reject the rest; to listen to His declarations that His blood is
shed for the remission of sins; to refuse to listen, or to listen incredulously, when
He speaks as the moral ruler of the race, this is inconsistent with faith in Him.
(R. W. Dale, D.D.) The power of this gospel of love on its first proclamation: It
we could but hear the words for the first time, and without prepossessions either of
Pharisaic error or logical orthodoxy, hear them with nothing but consciousness of
sin and thirst for life, before the love of God had been hardened into doctrine, and
the only begotten Son has become a quarrel for the schools, ‘Do your gods love
you?” asked a missionary of some Indians. ‘The gods never think of loving,”’
was the cheerless answer. The text before us was read. ‘Read it again,’’ asked
the arrested pagan. ‘“ That is large light, read it again.” A third time the blessed
words were repeated ; and with this emphatic response, “ That is true, I feel it,”
On one occasion a missionary was dictating to a native amanuensis the transla.


ss *


CHAP. 111] ST. JOHN. 255


—


tion of the First Epistle, and when he reached the passage, ‘* Now are we the sons of
God,” the poor child of heathenism burst into tears, and exclaimed, ‘It is too
much, it is too much ; let me put it, Now are we permitted to kiss His feet.” (A.
J. Morris.) God’s love for man:—The missionary Nott was once reading and
explaining this passage to some awakened Tahitians, One of his auditors asked:
‘Ts it then really true that God has so loved you and us that He gave His only
begotten Son for us?” Nott stedfastly affirmed that the gospel which he was
preaching was really true; upon which the Tahitian cried out: ‘Oh, and thou
canst speak of such love without tears! ’’—himself weeping from shame and joy.
(R. Besser, D.D.) The love of God :—When Bonplau the botanist climbed one
of the loftiest peaks of the Andes, he found it a volcano. The rim of the erater
was covered with scoriz, and everything that looked like blasting and desolation,
but just in one little crevice there was a tiny bright flower. Thereit grewin beauty.
Like enough the seed had dropped from a bird. The shower had fallen, the sun
had shone, and the flower had grown there waving in the wind amidst surrounding
desolation. The flower growing there on the rim of that fire funnel is something
like the grand and beautiful love of God. He has planted flowers on the rim of
perdition, on the very edge of that rim. (S. Coley.) Whosoever :—When John
Williams sailed in his missionary ship, he said as he touched a shore where he
had never been before, where no foot of white man had ever trod, wherever he
preached for the first time he had this for his text. No text could bear him
beyond this. He could stand anywhere, on any shore, and cry, ‘‘ God so loved the
world.” (Ibid.) Whosoever :—‘*I thank God for this word ‘ whosoever,’” re-
marked Richard Baxter, ‘ did it read, there is mercy for Richard Baxter, I am so
vile, so sinful, that I would have thought it must have meant some other Richard
Baxter; but this word ‘ whosoever’ includes the worst of all the Baxters that ever
lived.” The universality of the atonement :—Suppose a will is made by a rich
man bequeathing certain property to certain unknown persons, described only by
the name of “ the elect.””. They are not described otherwise than by this term, and
all agree that although the maker of the will had the individuals definitely in his
mind, yet that he left no description of them, which either the persons them-
selves, the courts, nor any living mortal can understand. Now such a will is of
necessity altogether null and void. No living man can claim under such a will,
and none the better though these elect were described as residents of Oberlin.
Since it does not embrace all the residents of Oberlin, and does not define which of
them, all is lost. All having an equal claim and none any definite claim, noné can
inherit. If the atonement were made in this way, no living man would have
any valid reason for believing himself one of the elect, prior to his reception of the
Gospel. Hence he would have no authority to believe and receive its blessings by
faith. In fact, the atonement must be wholly void—on this supposition—unless a
special revelation is made to the persons for whom it is intended. (C. G. Finney,
D.D.) The personal appropriation of the atonement :—During a revival season,
a young man came to me in the inquiry room, and showed me a card like the


following :


GOD SO LOVED THE WORLD, THAT HE

GAVE HIS ONLY BEGOTIEN ‘SON, THAT

BELIEVING ON HIM SHOULD NOT PERISH,
BUT HAVE EVERLASTING LIFE.


In the blank space, the young man had written his own name in full. Said he:
“ My superintendent gave me this card on condition that I would write my namein
the blank space. If I had known what it was, I never would have promised ; for I
have had no peace since that day.” That night, on his knees, he found peace.
Let the teacher prepare such cards, and try the plan. I have tried it with powerful
effect, It makes this seem personal, and puts “ me” in the place of ‘ whosoever,”
(A. F. Schauffler.) A mother’s lesson ;—A young soldier was shot on the battle-
field, and dragged by a comrade aside to die. He shut his eyes, and all his past
life flashed before him. It seemed but an instant of time. He looked forward and
saw eternity, like a great gulf, ready to swallow him up, with his sins as so many
weights sinking him deeper and deeper. Suddenly a lesson, which his pious


ra Se


256 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHap. 11.
ea a a a
mother taught him when a little boy at her knee, stood before him in shining
letters. It was a lesson he heard repeated again and again and again; she was
never tired of imprinting it on his memory before she died ; it was her only legacy.
In the gaiety of life he had forgotten it. He had lost his hold on it, but it had
never quite lost its hold on him; and now, in the hour of peril, it threw out to him
a rope of mercy. What was it? ‘God so loved the world,” &. He caught the
rope; it seemed let down from heaven. ‘Lord, I believe,” he cried; “ save me,
orl perish!” Till he died, a few hours after, he said little but this one prayer:
“‘Lord, I believe; save me, orI perish!” a prayer never uttered by the penitent
soulin vain, (Clerical Anecdotes.)


Vers. 17-19. For God sent not His Son into the world to condemn the world.
—Salvation :—I. WHat IT 1s THAT GOD HAS ACTUALLY DONE FOR US AS FALLEN SINNERS,
1. What is done? He hgth redeemed us, Fallen by sin we are all by nature
children of wrath, and according to the rules of justice under condemnation, In-
stead of allowing righteous wrath to take its course, God has interposed in arrest
of judgment; not to do an unrighteous thing, not to exercise His mercy at the
expense of His justice, but to open a door for lovingkindness. The everlasting
Son took into union with Himself the nature that deserved the wrath and placed
Himself beneath the falling thunderbolt which would have crushed the world.
This was done 1800 years ago, and nothing can be added to it or diminished from
it. 2. For whom is this work done? (1) For God, in order that His love might
flow out in acts of beneficence while at the same time His justice and purity might
remain untainted. (2) For the world. Every sinner therefore may put in his
claim. 3. Has God actually saved any one? Is redemption the same as salvation?
What is salvation? (1) To have all my sins pardoned. (2) To have my soul re-
newed unto holiness. (3) To have my body transformed into the likeness of
Christ’s glorious body. (4) To reign with Christ. In this full sense none are
saved, God has made provision and is acting on it, and men are being saved, but
are not fully saved this side of heaven. II. Wuar 1s 1t rHat Gop Is NOW DOING
FOR US AS FALLEN SINNERS? 1. He is giving to one sinner after another repentance
and forgiveness of sins and a character unto holiness commenced and progressive.
During the whole of the dispensation this is the revealed work of the Holy Spirit. -
2. To separate the elect from the mass ot mankind as His purchased and sanctified
ones. 3. He is giving the faith which secures all this, even freedom from condem-
nation and acceptance in the beloved. 4. Without this faith the old condemnation
remains, and a fresh condemnation is added, that following on the rejection of sal-
vation by the only begotten Son of God. (H. MeNeile, D.D.) No condemnation
to the believer :—I. THE PURPOSE or Gop in sending His Son into the world. Con-
sider—l. What that purpose was not. To condemn the world. He might have
done so.’ The world’s iniquities had grown to a fearful height, and though for
1800 years the world has continued in rebellion, we dare not say that God sent His
Son to condemn the world. 2. What that purpose was: that there should be
wrought out in, and tendered to the world in, through, and by Christ, a salvation
equal to the wretchedness and peril to which the whole race was exposed. Hence
then, it follows that no sinner need perish for want of a provision of God’s merey
and love. II. How Is THAT INTENTION To BE FULFILLED? By an act of faith. 1.
What are we to believe? (1) The lost and ruined state which we are in by nature.
So long as we deceive ourselves on that point, or excuse it, we hold back from the
remedy, (2) Our own utter helplessness and destitution. (3) The reality of the pro-
vision of God’s mercy in Christ. (4) That the provision of the Gospel is actually
tendered to every one. 2. How are we to believe? (1) Not in that speculative way
which regards the truth of God as an abstract matter. (2) But in that practical
and personal way which accepts this salvation for one’s self. (3) It is to lay our
hand an the head of the Great Sacrifice which bears away the sin of the
world. Conclusion: 1. It was through believing a lie that man fell; it is by
believing the truth that he is saved. 2. Deem not sin a light matter
3. Accept God’s provision of grace—(1) thankfully; (2) now. (G. Fisk LL.B.)
Salvation and condemnation :—I, SanvaTIon 18 BY THE GIFT oF CuRistT, 1. Christ
came not to condemn the world. (1) Condemnation might have been expected—
(2) From the condition of the world, without desire or effort for deliverance and
rebellious against God. (b) From the errands of other messengers sent in ven.
geance, (c) From God’s foreknowledge of the way in which Christ would be re-
ceived. (2) But God’s ways are not ours. Had God’s design been no more than


ae


_ OHAP, 111.] ST, JOHN. 257
cee aa PS i a ee Se a
not to condemn, but merely to neutralize or stay approaching ruin, Christ’s missi
would have been unspeakably precious. (3) There are hides who limit the effect
of Christ’s mission to a period of undeserved forbearance, and are blindly satisfied
with a temporary, unenduring good. 2. Christ came that the world through Him
might be saved. The nature of this salvation is—(1) Atonement for sin. (2) The
bringing in of an everlasting righteousness. (3) Exaltation to glory. II. Taz way
IN WHICH MEN BECOME PARTAKERS OF THIS SALVATION. 1. Some men regard the
world as saved, contrary to Scripture and universal experience. 2. Others regard
God as disappoint+d in His great design. Not so. God has provided the salvation ;
man must voluntarily partake of it. How? 1. The glory must be given to God
because—(1) The remote and originating cause is the Father’s love. (2) The
meritorious cause, Christ’s redeeming work. (3) The energetic agency, the Holy
Spirit. Thus salvation is through the concurrence and co-operation of the Trinity.
2. But what is the instrumental cause? Faith. (1) Had God proposed that for
righteous deeds He would save us, our case had been hopeless. (2) So it would
had He arranged to place us again under the covenant of works, promising that by
the deeds of the law performed in our own strength we should inherit heaven. (3)
Equally so had our salvation been conditioned by a combination of Christ’s
righteousness and our own. (4) Or by our originating holy emotions of repentance
and love. (5) Knowing all this, God requires only that we should believe on His
Son. This faith is His gift, the medium of Divine life and its active principle
when communicated, involving self-renunciation, rational dependence on God, and
trust in His grace in Christ. III. THz rEasoN WHY MEN PERISH THOUGH SALVA-
TION HAS BEEN PROVIDED. 1. Not because God passes them by or excludes them
from life. 2. Not because there is no merit for them in Christ’s mediation. 3. Not
because the Holy Spirit might have breathed upon them, but has not. But—4.
Because the sinner will not believe. In this duty he fails. (1) Under the
sound of the gospel; (2) Under the strivings of the Spirit; (8) And though Christ
stretches forth His hand all the day long. 5. Consequently he is condemned
already by a double condemnation—(1) Through his relations and adherence to the
first man. (2) Because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son
of God. (A. Beith, D.D.) The fundamental facts of Evangelism :—Christianity is
built on facts; those facts are connected with the history of a Person; that Person
is the Son of God. Three such facts are here. I. Gop sent His Son into THE
worL~p, 1. This fact implies—(1) Separateness of existence. (2) Subordination of
existence. These no philosophy bas yet reconciled to the doctrine of Divine Unity.
2. This is the greatest fact in the history of the world, perhaps of the universe. It
constitutes the great epoch in the annals of the race. JI. God sent His Son into
the world Not To conDEMN IT. This is not what might have been expected. 1.
Because of the wickedness of the world: full of ingratitude, idolatry, corruption,
and rebellion. 2. Because of all the treatment His other messengers had received.
The world had rejected, persecuted, murdered His prophets. Might it not then be
expected that God’s Son would come on a mission of judgment, III. God sent His
Son into the world To save 1r. What is salvation? Not physical, intellectual, or
local change, but a restoration in the soul of what has been lost through sin. 1,
Supreme love to God—the life of the soul. 2. Constant fellowship with the great
Father—the happiness of the soul. 3. Useful service in the universe—the mission of
the soul. (D. Thomas, D.D.) Christ the Saviour of even the worst of sinners :—He
does not exclude the greatest sinners when they come to Him, but on the contrary
He gives them His first attention, as a surgeon who has been called to a field of
battle to dress the wounded always first goes to the most desperate cases. (Nauden.)
Christ the Saviour of the world :—In September, 1878, a dreadful accident happened
onthe Thames, when an excursion steamer, named the Princess Alice was cut down
by the Bywell Castle, an outward bound merchant steamship, More than seven
hundred persons that day found a watery grave. Among the brave efforts that were
made on that occasion to save the drowning people, one of the noblest was made by
a man who was in charge of a small boat at some distance from the scene of the
collision. Rowing with all his might into the midst of the struggling passengers,
he pulled several of them one after another into his little boat, which was now full
and in danger of sinking, and prepared to row away. But when he saw the white,
upturned faces of many others, and heard their piteous cries, ‘‘ Oh, save me, sir! uw
“Don’t leave me, sir!” it ig said that in agony he threw up his arms and cried,
“O God, that I had a bigger boat! O God, that I had a bigger boat!” His heart
was large enough to save all who were perishing, but his boat was too small ; his


258 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. 1h
ee ret a
power was limited. It is not so with Christ. He is the Life-boat of perishing
humanity, and in Him there is room for the whole race, for “ He is the propitiation
for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.” (RB.
Brewin.) The mission of Christ is plain :—You can understand when the Prince
of Wales went to America, all the country was excited, and it was said he had come
for this purpose and that purpose. But when Christ comes He can tell us what
He comes for. When the Prince of Heaven comes into this world He can tell us the
nature of His mission. For “ the Son of Man comes to seek and to save that which
was lost.” (D. L. Moody.) Salvation is for all who need it :—I remember when
Master Street Hospital, in Philadelphia, was opened during the war, a telegram
came, saying, ‘There will be three hundred wounded men to-night; be ready to
take care of them”; and from my church there went in some tzenty or thirty men
and women to look after these poor wounded fellows. As they came, some from one
part of the land, some frgm another, no one asked whether this man was from
Oregon, or from Massachusetts, or from Minnesota, or from New York. There
was a wounded soldier, and the only question was how to take off the rags the most
gently, and put on the bandage, and administer the cordial, And when a soul
comes to God, He does not ask where you came from, or what your ancestry was.
Healing for all your wounds. Pardon for all your guilt. Comfort for all your
troubles, (Z'.DeW. Talmage, D.D.) The gospel the most glorious tidings :—When
the Romans, by conquest, might have given law to the Grecians at Corinth, in the
solemn time of the Isthmian games, their general, by a herald, unexpectedly pro-
claimed freedom to all the cities of Greece; the proclamation at first did so amaze
the Grecians, that they did not believe it to be true. But when it was proclaimed
the second time, they gave such a shout that the very birds flying in the air were
astonished therewith, and fell dead to the ground. Butif you will have a better
story, take that of the Jews, who, when at first they heard of Cyrus’ proclamation,
and that the Lord thereby had turned the captivity of Sion, they confess that, at the
first hearing of it, they were like men that dreamed; but afterwards their mouths
were filled with laughter and their tongues with singing. Now, the peace that the
Grecians and the Jews had was but the peace of a people or a nation, and a great
blessing of God, too. But how much more reason is there that our affections should
be strained to the highest pitch of joy and thanks, when we hear of the proclama-
tion of the peace of conscience? that peace which is not of our bodies but of our
souls—not of our earthly but of our heavenly estate? a peace that shall be begun
here—that shall endure for ever hereafter; such a peace as will make God at peace
with us, reconcile us to ourselves, and make us at concord with all the world. (J.
Spencer.) He that believeth on Him is not condemned.—Preliminary judgments :
-—I, THE STARTLING PHENOMENON. The judicial separation of mankind into two
classes, the believing and the unbelieving, the workers of evil and doers of good
(vers. 20-21), 1. Whenit occurred, At the appearing of Christ (ver. 19). 2. How
it was effected. By the appearing of Christ, the light, the effects of which were—
(1) INumination, setting in bold relief what was previously obscure, viz., that there
are only two varieties of character, the good and the bad (Matt. iv. 1, 2). (2)
Separation. Not by the direct action of Christ, but through the indirect action of
the truth (Job xxiv. 13), (3) Arbitration. The man who comes to the light judges
himself and separates himself from the darkness, declaring himself to be antago-
nistic to it. So with the man who turns from the light (Acts xiii. 46). Thus by
coming into the world Christ initiates a judicial process which will culminate in
the great day (Mal. iii. 18; Matt. xxv. 26). II. Tum sonemn Expnanation. 1. Of
the behaviour of those who come not to the light. (1) They love darkness not
more than light, as though there lingered some appreciation, but rather than the
light which they do not love at all (ver, 20), because it is congenial to the works in
which they delight (Eph. v. 11; Prov. ii. 13; Psa. lxxxii. 5); to themselves as
children of darkness, (2) They hate the light as well as love the darkness; for
prophesying evil (2 Chron, xviii. 7); for suggesting good (chap. xiii. 26, 27). Hence
they shun the light (Job xxiv. 14-16) like Lady Macbeth (act. 1. scene 5). 2. Of the
conduct of those who came to the light. (1) They have a natural affinity for it
(chap. xviii. 37). (2) They are not afraid of the light (Eph. v. 8-13). Lessons—
1. If a sinner is condemned, himself only, and neither God nor Christ, is to blame.
ete. z sinner refuses to believe the gospel, he must share in the judgment which
will ultimately fall upon the world, (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) The essence of the
gospel: —When our Lord shall come a second time, before Him shall be gathered
all nations, and He shall separate them as the shepherd divideth the sheep from the


=).


CHAP. 11.) ST. JOHN. 259


goats. That will not be the first time that He has acted as a separator. It is
always so whenever He comes. Now He finds out His chosen and calls them
apart, and on the other hand unbelievers are discovered. Between the two is a
deep gulf. Other distinctions, riches and poverty, c., sink into insignificance. I.
CoNSIDER TO WHICH OF THE CLASSES WE BELONG. 1. What is meant by believing .
in Christ, for such is the preposition here. (1) Some believe concerning Him that
He is the Mexsiah, the Saviour of men. But orthodoxy is not synonymous with
justification. (2) It isa step further when we believe Him. Believing Him to be
God’s Christ, it follows as a matter of course that we accept His word as true;
but this is not a state of salvation. (3) Another form of faith is believing on Him,
to lean upon Him, and take Him as the foundation of our hope, A form of saving
faith. (4) But believing in is something more. If I thoroughly believe in an advo-
cate, I trust my case to him, and thus believe on him; but I also follow his rules
to the letter, being fully convinced that they will lead to a right issue, 2. The
connection of the text will help us to form a judgment as to whether we are believers
in Jesus. (1) Have you realized by a true exercise of faith verses 13 and 15? (2)
Do you, as having trusted in Jesus, come to the light (ver 21)? Is it your desire
to know God’s truth, God’s will, God’s law? 38. Are we unbelievers? (1) Instead
of looking to the brazen serpent, are you seeking another remedy? (2) Do you
shut your eyes to the one only light? IL, Consipnr THE CONDITION OF THE BELIEVER.
He is not condemned, because he does not offer himself for judgment. He says,
“J plead guilty.” Having done this, the believer sees the sentence laid upon the
surety in whom he believes. This brings him peace. Then no more condemned,
he seeks the light, and desives more and more to work in it. III. Constper THE
CONDITION OF THE UNBELIEVER. 1. He offers himself for judgment. He has not
believed in the Saviour, and confesses, ‘I do not require Him. I am willing to
stand my trial.” If you ask for judgment you shall have it. God declares you to
be condemned already. 2. He gives personal evidence to his own condemnation.
He rejects the testimony of God concerning Christ. Is not that enough to con-
demn him? 3. He rejects a most exalted person, When men rejected Moses they
perished without mercy; but when a man despises the Only begotten, we need call
no witnesses against him. 4. He gives evidence against himself, for every man
who rejects the true light always gocs on to reject other forms of light, God’s Word
and Spirit and his own conscience, 5. Consider the condemnation already pro-
nounced. (1) It is no matter of form. (2) God has power at any moment to carry
it into effect. (3) There is no promise that He will not execute it this very day.
6. Consider the only way of escape—immediate faith. (C. II. Spurgeon.) Faith:
I. Tue opsect or FAITH. To what faith looks. 1. How many make a mistake
about this and think they are to believe in God the Pather! But we come to this
as a result of believing in God the Son. 2. Others look to the work of the Holy
Ghost; but this is the effect of faith in Christ. 3. Christ is the sole object of the
sinner’s faith. (1) As God. (2) In His perfect righteousness. (3) As dying and
dead. (4) As risen. (5) As your substitute. Il. Tue REASON oF Falta. Why
and whence. 1. To his own experience faith comes as a sense of the need of a
Saviour. 2. Really and originally it is the gfft of God, The Spirit comes and
shuts men up under the law to a conviction that unless they come to Christ they
must perish. III. Tue crounp oF FAITH. What it means when it comes. Not
that a man is a sensible sinner, or an awakened sinner, or a penitent sinner, but
simply because he is a sinner. IV. ‘Tue Warrant OF FAITH. Why a man dares to
trust in Christ. Just because Christ has bidden him. Faith is a duty as well as a
privilege. IV. THe RESULT OF FAITH. How it speeds when it comes to Christ.
“He that believeth is not condemned.” (Ibid.) No condemnation:—I. THE
SATISFACTORY DECLARATION. A verdict of ‘‘not. guilty” amounts to an ac-
quittal, so the sentence of ‘‘not condemned” implies the justification of the
sinner. This is—l. A. present justification, Faith does not produce this fruit
by and by, but now. 2. A continual justification. 3. A complete justifi-
cation, not half condemned and half accepted. 4. An effectual justification.
II, ConrEcT SOME MISAPPREHENSIONS BY WHICH CHRISTIANS ARE CAST DOWN. 1,
Some think they shall never sin again. 2. Others that they will have no more
conflicts, 3. Others that they will be free from trials. 4. Others that the Futher’s
countenance will always be clear. None of these are guaranteed, III. WHat THE
rEXT IncLUDES—the believer. IV. WHaT THE TEXT ExcLUDES—the unbeliever.
(Ibid.) Regeneration—faith the instrumental cause :—I. THE ESSENTIALNESS OF
rartn. 1. Affirmatively. Our Lord mentions only the relation of feith to the


260 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omar. m.


“ a


legal aspect of salvation. This was enough, for he who apprehends believingly the


work of Christ as the ground of his justification will not fail to experience it as a
regenerative power. Many stumble through the simplicity of faith. They sup-
pose that something difficult is required. But faith is identical with that implicit
unquestioning confidence a person ordinarily exercises almost unconsciously in
relation to almost everything he appropriates to his use: the food he eats, the
garment he wears, the medicine he takes, the bridge he crosses, the train by which
he travels. 2. Negatively. Without faith salvation is impossible. It is not that
the unbeliever shall be condemned, he is actually so. It is a solemn truth that,
notwithstanding all that Christ has done for us, it will avail us nothing without
personal faith, for God cannot save men without their will. Il. Irs neeuEcT By
some. The light here referred to is Christ (chap. i. 9, viii. 12), 1. Men are volun-
tarily in the state indicated by darkness. Men are not unbelievers by compulsion.
They love darkness. What a perversion of natural taste and judgment would such
a physical predilection imply! ‘Truly the light is sweet,” &. Yet a course of
conduct that would be deemed the grossest folly physically is followed by thousands
spiritually. 2. This is not an absolute preference. A degree of love for the light
is implied. Many who remain in darkness cannot help feeling a measure of
admiration for the light in which they refuse to walk: they attend the ministry of
it, grant their passive assent to it, and yet remain in the darkness of unbelief. III.
THE CAUSE OF THE NEGLECT: Love of sin. 1. How explicitly our Lord brings the
responsibility of men’s perdition home to themselves. 2. How sad that condem-
nation should be the portion of those who occupy a position so near salvation.
Bunyan says there is a way to hell from the very gate of heaven, (4. J. Parry.)


Ver. 18. He that believeth on Him is not condemned.—A real acquittal :—
In the reign of George III. the son of a member of this Church lay under
sentence of death for forgery. Dr. Rippon, after incredible exertions, obtained
a promise that this sentence should be remitted. By a singular occurrence the
present senior deacon learned that the reprieve had not been received, and
the unhappy prisoner would have been executed had not Dr. Rippon gone post-
haste to Windsor, obtained an interview with the king in his bed-chamber, and
received from that monarch’s own hand a copy of that reprieve, which had been
negligently put aside by a thoughtless officer. ‘I charge you, doctor,” said His
Highness, ‘‘to make good speed.” “ Trust me, sire, for that,” said he; and he
returned to London only just in time, for the prisoner was being marched, with
many gthers, to the scaffold. That pardon might have been given, and yet the
man might have been executed, But, blessed be God, our non-condemnation is an
effectual thing. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Faith must rest on Christ :—Not long ago a
man said to me, “I cannot believe.” ‘*Whom?’’I asked. He stammered, and
again said, “I cannot believe.” I said, “‘Whom?” ‘ Well,” he said, “I can’t
believe.” ‘‘Whom?” I asked again, At last he said, ‘‘I cannot believe myself.”
‘Well, you don’t need to. You do not need to put any confidence in yourself. The
less you believe in yourself the better.” (D. L. Moody.) Believing the one step
into the kingdom of God :—I am told that at Rome, if you go up a few steps on your
hands and knees, that is nine years out of purgatory. If you take one step now
you are out of purgatory for time and eternity. You used to have two steps into
glory—out of self into Christ, out of Christ into glory. But there is a shorter way
now with only one step—out of self into glory, and you are saved. May God help
you to take the step now! Flee, my friends, to-night to Calvary, and get under
the shadow of the cross! (Ibid.) The doom of unbelievers :—I recollect how those
words ‘“‘condemned already ” rang in my ears, as I should think the bells of St
Sepulchre’s used to sound in the ears of the condemned in Newgate, warning them
that the time was come to go out upon the seaffold, When the shadow of eternal
wrath falls upon the heart, nothing worse can be imagined; for the conscience
bears sure witness that God is just when He judges, condemns, and punishes
When a man feels the shadow of death upon him, infidel arguments are silenced,
self-conceited defences are banished, and the heart consents to the justice of the
law which declares, “The soul that sinneth, it shall die.” (C. H. Spurgeon.)
Neglect is ruinous :—Neglect is enough to ruin a man, A man who is ‘in basinese
need not commit forgery or robbery to ruin himself; he has only to neglect his
business, and his ruin is certain, A man who is lying on a bed of sickness need
not cut his throat to destroy himself; he has only to neglect the means of restora
tion, and he will be ruined. A man floating in a skiff above Niagara need not move


i it ate ie a)


HAP, 11.) ST. JOHN. 261


an oar, or make an effort to destroy himself; he has only to neglect using the oar
at the proper time, and he will certainly be carried over the cataract. Most of the
calamities of life are caused by simple neglect. Let no one infer, therefore, that
because he is not a drunkard, or an adulterer, or a murderer, that therefore he will
be saved, Such an inference would be as irrational as it would be for a man to
infer that, because he is not a murderer, his farm will produce a harvest; or that,
because he is not an adulterer, therefore his merchandise will take care of itself.
(A. Barnes.) Believing is laying hold on Christ :—‘‘ Mark you,” said a pious
sailor, when explaining to a shipmate at the wheel, ‘‘ mark you, it isn’t breaking off
swearing and the like; it isn’t reading the Bible, nor praying, nor being good; it is
none of these ; for even if they would answer for the time to come, there’s still the
old score; and how are you to get over that? It isn’t anything that you have done
or can do; its taking hold of what Jesus did for you; its forsaking your sins, and
expecting the pardon and salvation of your soul, because Christ let the waves and
billows go over Him on Calvary. This is believing, and believing is nothing else.”
(New Cyclopedia of Anecdote.) Not condemned, and condenvned already :—I.
THE BELIEVER NOT CONDEMNED. 1. Christ has appeared to put away sin by the
sacrifice of Himself. 2. Faith in Christ identifies us with His sacrifice. 3, Identi-
fication with the sacrifice of Christ removes all personal guilt. 4. So the believer
is not regarded or dealt with by God asa sinner. He is not condemned—(1) by
God; (2) by the law; (3) by Himself: remorse subsides, fear vanishes, II. Tux
UNBELIEVERS ALREADY CONDEMNED. 1, What does unbelief seem to do? (1) It
despises God’s unspeakable gift as superfluous, or insufficient, or comparatively un-
important. (2) It dishonours the Son of God Himself. (3) It refuses to listen
even to God’s testimony concerning His Son. 2. The cause of unbelief must be
evil, and what is evil is foolish. 3. The nature of unbelief. (1) It is sin both in
the spirit and in the letter (1 John iii. 23). (2) It is the greatest folly (Acts iv. 12).
4, The doom of unbelief (Mark xvi. 16; Prov. i. 34-36; Matt. xi. 23; Luke xii.
47; Hebrew x. 29). This doom is confirmed by the conscience of the unbeliever.
(S. Martin.) Condemned already :—The condemnation here spoken of is not of
the judge but of the architect. Itis a customary thing to appoint a committee to
examine a bridge or a building, but if either is condemned as unfit for use, the
architect merely proclaims that repair is needed: he refers to the past, not to the
future. He says, not that they are to be destroyed, but that he will not guarantee
them for a single moment, that the hall or building is not safe for a meeting-piace,
and that the bridge is not fit to be a vehicle of commerce between man and man.
The whole word lies in the word already. Some here may have read that wonderful
story of George Eliot’s, ‘‘ Daniel Deronda,” and remember the marvellous character
in it, Mordecai, who, by the mysticism of his mind, is represented as having gone
back. He became possessed with the idea that he was a bridge over which the
whole world was passing ; he felt the feet trampling over his life, and they weighed
him down with agony. Never was Mordecai so little of the madman as when he
possessed that thought. Whether we realize it or not, the idea istrue. Hvery one
is a bridge for the wholé world. The world would not have been the same if you
had not lived, and what is that but saying you are a means of transport for the
generations? Therefore it is of the more value that some are labelled, ‘* Condemned
already” ; to hear a voice warning us back from the gilded parapet, from the painted
structure, from the gaudy edifice; for the frail planks are ready to fall into the
mighty cauldron, seething below. Stand back till the rotten materials are renewed
and welded together. (G. Matheson, D.D.) Faith :—A person who had noticed
a flower of a very rare kind growing on a narrow ledge on the face of a precipitous
rock, was very desirous to gain possession of it. There was no possibility of reaching
it except by a person being let down from the top suspended byarope. The person
interested engaged a boy of the neighbourhood, and brought him to the spot for
this purpose. But the boy, when he saw the situation of the flower, hesitated. His
employer tried to tempt him by the offer of. a larger reward, but still he hesitated.
At last, when a very considerable sum was named, he turned to the gentleman, and
said, ‘* Yes, I will get it, if I may fetch my brother to hold the rope.” Here is an
example of implicit trust consciously exercised under extraordinary circumstances.
(A. J. Parry.) Salvation through union with Christ :—In primitive times there
was a law or custom that if a man or woman would consent to marry, under the
gallows, a person condemned to death, the criminal would thereby be saved from
execution. There are instances on record of this custom having been carried out.
We have here a faint picture of the grand truths of the text, The sinner “is con-


.


262 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaAP. If,
jiig AREER DENSE Se OE a
demned already,” is under sentence of death, but Christ consents to take him into
union with Himself, and so thereby deliver him from his terrible doom, but faith
working through love must be the bond of this mystical union. And this faith
regenerates the man, By it the greatest sinner is transformed into a saint. (Ibid.)
The great alternative :—Let us consider, then, this sin of unbelief, and the two
reasons, furnished by my text, for its being made the ground of condemnation. I.
First of all, in regard to the sin itself, you will notice how entirely everything is made
to hinge on the fact of a man’s believing or his not believing. The difference
between these two is all the difference between condemnation and acquittal. Doubt-
less it was well for Nicodemus, during whose interview with our Lord the statement
of my text was uttered, that the issue should be narrowed to so definite a point. It
was well he should know that however far he might be inclined to go in his acknow-
ledgment of Jesus, nothing short of personal trust in Him as his Messias would sufiice.
Nor is it enough, to make a man a Christian, that he accepts, in a general way, the
teaching of Scripture, and seeks to bring his life into accord with the Divine com-
mands. There must be something much more precise and radical than this. There
needs an uprooting of the life out of its old soil, a transplanting of it into new con-
ditions, the committal of your whole nature into the hands of a Divine Person, out
of whose deep inexhaustible being it shall henceforward draw its succour and sup-
port. And if this be wanting, then all is wanting. Whatever your connection with
Christianity may have done for you, if it has failed to connect you with Him it has
failed of the one thing it seeks tc accomplish. It may have begotten within you
anxious thoughts and surmises about its mysteries. If your convictions of guilt
have not persuaded you to have recourse to the great Pardoner and Purifier of sin-
ners, then they have failed of their mark. He that believeth not, whether he be
serious or careless, whether he be the profane scoffer or the regular church-goer, is
condemned already. Notice particularly, I pray you, the force of that word already.
Sentence is not suspended till it be seen whether you succeed in attaining a certain
pitch of moral excellence or fall below it. It is not unfixed and unsettled till the
end of your life, and then for the first time shaped into a verdict. Then it will
only be revealed and made manifest. Then it will only be pronounced and read
aloud from the page of that book on which it now stands recorded. Already you
are condemned if you do not believe in the only-begotten Son. II. I pass on now
to consider WHY UNBELIEF SHOULD BE MADE THE GROUND OF CONDEMNATION. ‘Two
reasons are given. 1. The first is, because it involves rejection of the only-begotten
Son of God. He came, as we have seen, not to condemn men, but to save men who
were condemned already. And His coming was not one of a number of similar
expedients, that had been tried before. To reject Him, then, is to reject the only
possible means of escape from a doomed state. It is to remain separate and apart
from God, that is, in a condition of death and condemnation. If you can find any
sin, or ingrained force of habit, which He cannot conquer and break, then you may
hesitate to appeal to Him for help. But the fact of His Divine Sonship precludes
all this. It is important to notice here the turn that takes place at this point in
our Lord’s reasoning. He wishes to bring out the persdénal responsibility of each
individual, The unbeliever is condemned, not because he is involved in the sinful-
ness that is common to humanity, but because of his unbelief; that is to say, not
because of his sharing a guilt which was brought upon him by the offence of
another, but in virtue of his own deliberate deed—because he hath not believed.
It has been a matter of conscious choice with him. He has had the alternative
placed before him, and he has preferred to be without Christ and perish, rather
than take refuge in His grace. Now, this is true of every unbeliever. And if you
are not receiving and trusting Him you are choosing to reject Him, 2. The second
reason specified for the condemnation attached to unbelief is, that it involves the
greatest immorality. It is a very common impression that unbelief leaves a man
no worse than it found him, Other sins may render him an object of suspicion.
Untruthfulness may strip his statements of credibility. Fraud may exclude him
from the dealings of honourable men. Excess in eating or drinking may brutalize
him, and make him an unsteady customer in business. But he may be as good for
all practical purposes whether he believes or not. That is a matter confined to the
sphere of opinion, and need not affect his actions, to any appreciable extent. A
creed does not make a Christian, unless it be wedded to a life. And a true believer
in Christ is different from other men by a vast difference, a difference that works
through his whole nature, turning it in a new direction, and shaping it to a new
snd. Do not suppose that to believe in Him is a mere act of the intellect, and


omar. m1] ST. JOHN. 263


nothing more. If that were all you might do so or not do so, and the effects would
never extend beyond your intellect, just as one may not bea whit the worse because
he rejects some purely scientific or formal truth. Faith is not a mere assent to
certain propositions. It is an act of the whole moral nature, closing with Christ
for moral and spiritual ends. In coming to Him, then, you come that He may
achieve within you that for which He came to you. You come that you may be
pardoned and purified, that He may impart peace to your conscience, and touch
you with the living power of His quickening Spirit. And when you refuse to come
it is because you object to this process of renewal. And in refusing to be like Him
you refuse to be like God, you show your deliberate preference for the evil which
He hates. So that unbelief is the most terrible of all sins, the sin in which the
innermost, deepest aversion of the heart to God comes to a head and acts. Having
looked upon the light, and having looked also upon the darkness, and having
wished that you might live in the sunshine, but wished also still more that you
might abide in the shadow of some pet sin, or of some habit of self-righteousness,
have you turned away, away from Christ, away from God, away from hope? Then
do not disguise the reason from your eyes. Do not set it down to a mere exercise
of intellect. ‘This is the condemnation, that light’ is come into the world, and
men have loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.” (C.
Mornet, M.A.) Unbelief arraigned and condemned :—I, THE NATURE OF UNBELIEF.
1, A denying of the truth of the gospel. 2. A doubting or wavering uncertainty of
mind about the truths of the gospel. 3. When, though a person may be convinced
in his mind, by rational arguments, that the Bible is the Word of God, he does not
fall in with the great design of the Scriptures by receiving Christ, and resting upon
Him alone for salvation as He is there presented and discovered. II, THE causes
OF UNBELIEF. 1. The devil has a great hand in it. 2. Ignorance. 3. Pride. 4.
A pretended humility and self-denial is another gréat bar in the way of believing,
to many; they thrust away Christ and the mercy of God from them, under a pre-
tence that they are not fit for it. 5. A secret jealousy, as if God were not in good
earnest with us, when He offers Christ and His salvation to us in the gospel. III.
Tue sENTENcE. 1. Prove that the sentence is passed against the unbeliever. ‘“ He
that believes not in the Son shall not see life” (John iii. 36). 2. The unbeliever is
condemned already. (1) In the court of the law, as a covenant by which he is
seeking to be justified and saved: ‘‘ There is one that accuseth you, even Moses”
(Rom, iii. 19). (2) The unbeliever is already condemned in the gospel court, The
sentence passed against him in the court of the law is aggravated and heightened
by his contempt of gospel grace (Heb. ii. 3; x. 28, 29). (3) The unbeliever is con-
demned already in the court of his own conscience. (4) The unbeliever is already
condemned in the court of the Church; or, may I call it, in the ministerial court.
(5) The unbeliever is condemned in the court of the great God, ‘Consider this,
ye that forget God” (Psa. i, 22). 3. A few qualities of this sentence of condemna-
tion passed against the unbelieving sinner. (1) A most mature and deliberate
sentence. (2) A most righteous sentence. (3) A most awful and terrible sentence,
(4) An irrevocable sentence. Application: 1. See hence a very sufficient reason
why ministers of the gospel do so much urge the necessity of faith. 2. See hence
the miserable and mournful condition of the generality of gospel hearers; they are
a company of condemned men, under sentence of death, 38. How ill-grounded the
joy and triumph of a Christless, unbelieving sinner! 4, See hence how fitly the
gospel is called a joyful sound (Psa. lxxxix. 15). 5. It is every man’s duty and
interest to examine and try whether he be under this heavy sentence or not. (Pulpit
Assistant.) This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world.—God’s
condemnation of men:—The first entrance of light produces two effects—it makes
manifest and it separates. By this well-known result of the dawn we understand that
when the Light that saves ertered the world His appearance at the same time became
the complete condemnation of men. But these words do not refer simply to the im-
mediate effects of Christ’s advent. They contain a truth for all time. I. Tur
PRINCIPLE OF DIVINE CONDEMNATION. On what ground does.God condemn humanity ?
It has been said that God docms men for evils which it was beyond their power to
avoid; as saving some few, and sending the rest to perdition because he chooses to
do so. Christ here affirms that God finally condemns men, not for being sinful,
bat for content to be sinful. 1. Cont: mplate sin as a power slumbering in hnman
nature. It is there, even in the child. The most virtuously educated, when thrown
suddenly into some unusvel conipanionship, will show it. God cannot doom a man
for sinful impulses which any temptation may draw forth. 2. Pass on to the rise


~ he, oe
“s é


¥ 7 t&
264 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. Ri (omar. mit,


a


of sin into conscious deeds, Has man power in himself to free himself from its
slavery? (1) Every act of sin darkens the light of conscience. God has given
man @ conscience whose eye is quick to detect evil; but the misery of sin is
that the very first action begins to darken the light which was given to guard
against sin’s blinding power. (2) Every step decreases the power of resistance ;
for the longer a man lives in sin, the more deeply he becomes conscious of
self-degradation. Destroy a man’s self-respect, make him feel that his character
is gone, and see how carelessly and recklessly he will act. lf, then, sin has such
a power, do you think that God finally condemns a man for being sinful? Is it
not rather for being content to remain in sin, for loving darkness rather than light?
II. THE MANIFESTATION OF THIS PRINCIPLE IN THE CoMING oF Curist. When the
light came, every man who rejected Him proved his contentment in sin. Two
things are requisite to prove this, 1. Man must be brought into a state in which
he shall be able to choose deliberately between God and sin: and into this state :
the coming of Christ brings him. Through Christ the strongest and holiest powers
—love, pity, sorrow act in man’s nature and appeal to him to enter the light and
liberty of the sons of God. 2. Man must show his contentment in sin, and thus
doom himself. The rejection of Christ is utter self-condemnation, (1) Within
man is an evil power, and from that power Christ comes to deliver, but man chooses
subjection to that power rather than deliverance. (2) Behind man is a blackened
past—man says I accept it; before man is an awful future springing out of his evil
—man says I dare its doom: although Christ came to forgive the one and avert
the other. (EZ. L. Hull.) The cause of present and future condemnation :—I. A
FACT sTaTED. ‘“ Light is come in the world.” 1. The light of conscience which—
(1) Condemns or approves now. (2) Is prophetic of future acceptance or condem-
nation, 2. The light of nature. (1) Astronomy teaches us the existence of an
Almighty Creator. (2) Microscopy reveals one infinite in resources. (3) The won-
derful order of nature shows one manifold in wisdom, (4) The beneficence of
providential arrangements exhibits one conspicuously good. 3. The light of Divine
revelation, (1) Confirming the lessons of natural theology. (2) Making known to
us the provisions of redemption. 4. The light of the Holy Spirit. (1) Enlighten-
ing the mind, (2) Teaching the way of salvation. (3) Guiding into all truth. (4)
Witnessing to our adoption. 5. The light of reason. (1) To this faculty God
directs His revelation, (2) This faculty vindicates the claims of Christianity as
consistent with the principles of human nature and the attributes of God. II.
MAN’S PERVERSENESS ILLUSTRATED. ‘‘ Men loved darkness rather than light.”
Darkness signifies ignorance and sin; light, knowledge, and purity. How strange
the sinners infatuation, 1. Instead of paying attention to the inward monitor, he
seeks its destruction, 2. Men walk about the temple of nature and admire its
workmanship, but see no Supreme Being. 3. Men have the Word of God and treat
itasafable: 4, They resist to grieve the Holy Spirit. 5. They reject the great
salvation. III. THe REASON ASSIGNED FOR THIS MORAL OBLIQUITY. ‘* Because their
deeds were evil,” 1. Sin is not an accident of our lives. 2. Sin is the choice and
love of our hearts. IV. Man’s consEQUENT CONDEMNATION. 1. Sinners are con-
demned in this life. 2. Sinners will be condemned in the life to come. (R. Ser-
geant. ) Love of darkness rather than light :—When the Bastille was about to be
destroyed a prisoner was brought out, who had long been lying in one of its gloomy
cells. Instead of joyfully welcoming his liberty, he entreated that he might be
taken back to his dungeon. It was so long since he had seen the light that his eye
could not endure the light of the sun. Besides this, his friends were all dead, he
had no home, and his limbs refused to move. His chief desire now was that he
might die in the dark prison where so long he had been a captive. (W. Denton.)
Light come into the world :—This is one of the most important announcements
ever made in a sinful world, and to lost mankind. I. Ler vs BxaMINE THE
ASSERTION, that—‘‘ Light is come into the world.” It is a strong and beautiful
metaphor, signifying knowledge—salvation—happiness. 1. It is revelation. It
dawned on Adam, rose upon the patriarchs and prophets—but has arrived at a
noonday by Christ and His apostles. 2. What it reveals. II, Tue worwp 18
REPRESENTED AS IN A STATE OF DARKNESS. It may have natural light and intel-
lectual light—but it isin moral darkness. 1. What this darkness is. Ignorance
of God as the true God—ignorance of sin and guilt of sin. 2, This darkness is
preferred. Sinners avoid the means of conviction—are afraid of the light—
neglect the word, the house, and the service of God. III. Taz REASON WHY
DARKNESS IS PREFERRED, 1. The innate love of sin. It is their element—their


i


‘OMAP. mt.) ST. JOHN. 265


delight, 2. They find ease in sin. No alarms—conscience lulled. 3. The few
rays of light that do occasionally break in are unwelcome and. painful. They
excite suspicion and fear. 4. If the light were admitted it would require an
abandonment of evil practices which are pleasant; hence darkness is preferred
because it is more congenial with sin. IV. THis PREFERENCE OF DARKNESS IS THE
OCCASION OF AN AWFUL CONDEMNATION. 1. God condemns all that refuse the light
He has condescended to impart. He will send on such strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie. 2. Christ condemns all that refuse His light, 3. Unbelievers
will condemn themselves in retirement, on a sick bed, and in a dying hour. 4. Alt
will condemn them at the judgment because they loved darkness, not for want of
light, but because they hated it: preferred sin and darkness, not from force or
necessity, but from the love of it, Application: 1. Consider the awful state of
sinners under the light of the gospel. Their greater light exposes to a greater
condemnation. Not like heathens. 2. Their condemnation will be final—eternal.
3. The condemnation is now come, but not the execution of the sentence, therefore
there is yet time for repentance. 4. The Redeemer waits to translate us out of
darkness into His marvellous light (Heb. x. 29). (The Evangelist.) The test of
condemnation—loving darkness rather than light :—What is a test of this condem-
nation? Our Lord’s words are so very liberal that I would not have used them if
He had not; I would have been afraid of the presbyteries. He does not place the
test upon inadequate belief or doctrine, or even on deficient morality, but on dead-
ness of aspiration. This is the condemnation, that men have loved darkness
rather than the light. But that alone does not prove unfitness; our Lord’s
liberality is not yet exhausted. There is another condition—the light must have
come into the world. If you get up at midnight and enter your dark sitting-room
the mirror that was wont to flash in the daytime will show no light. Why don’t
you smash the mirror? It seems to love the darkness, and why? Because its
light had not yet come. And there are hundreds in this city in precisely the
game position. They are dark because no light has come to them. Suppose I ask
you if you have the spirit of a poet, and you say, ‘Oh no, I haven’t; I never wrote
a line of poetry in my life. I once tried and failed miserably. I have no idea of
metre or scansion.” But I take you to the top of a mountain when the light is
coming, when the morning is dawning and nature is about to drench the dark world
in a liquid bath of gold; and I watch the gleam of enthusiasm brighten over your
countenance as from your heart rise the words, “‘ Oh, it is beautiful!” Then, my
brother, I know you are a poet, though Tennyson be ignorant of you and Words-
worth acknowledge you not. So if you want to know if you are within the pale of
Christianity stand on the mountain when Jesus passes by, and should you feel one
fond desire, one panting aspiration which makes you cry, O to be like Thee, to be
near Thee! then, though your Thirty-Nine Articles be reduced to ten, though your
morality lags faintly behind, by that thrill of aspiration in your heart you will
know you have seen the Bright and Morning Star and that your light has come.
How could it be possible for any man or woman to love darkness rather than light ?
The answer to that, too, is here, ‘‘ Because their deeds are evil;” and this condi-
tion comes at the end of a long process. No man ever stretched his hands to
Satan and prayed, “O Prince of the Power of the Air, I want to be bad, to break
hearts, to bring tears to loving eyes, to cultivate malice and envy and all uncharit-
ableness.” No, he began by evil deeds, and his beautiful aspirations continued to
survive long after. I have heard the birds singing in October, and they seemed to
say, It was once summer, it is summer no longer. It is a survival of old culture
and the golden summer-time. Young man, listen to them, and go back. I knew a
youth, brimming over with music, poetry, and esthetic culture, but he returned,
all his high aspirations gone through a life of intemperance and debauchery. Sin
had taken away the esthetic glow and his power of admiration. Is there any hope,
then, for those who have got to this stage, who have put out their eyes? Yes, by
retracing their steps over past deeds, never seeking to go into the past but keeping
their hands from past sins in the future; and the beauty will come back in the way
by which it went. In the words of the Israelitish Psalmist, the first Joy comes
back after a lifs of abstinence. The beauty of old days returns when in God’s
law “he doth meditate day and night.” ‘The 33rd of Isaiah is grander still, telling
us we must begin by the life of self-denial if we would see the glory of the Lord.
By traversing the narrow defiles of duty, the morning at last shines. A few more
strokes of the oar, alittle more straining of the muscles, a few more struggles against
the angry foe, and, courage! you will see the land at last. (G. Matheson, D.D.)


266 {HH BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaP. 11%.
ee
Ignorance may be wilful :—There is a sort of ignorance, which is not an ignorance
of an empty understanding, but of a depraved heart; such an ignorance as does
not only consist in a bare privation, but in a corrupt disposition ; where the under-
standing is like that sort of blind serpents, whose blindness is attended with
much venom and malignity, This was such a blindness as struck the Sodomites:
there was darkness in their eyes, and withal villany in their hearts. (Dr. South.)
Refusing the physician :—Two gentlemen were fellow-passengers in a vessel bound
for a distant port. One was in vigorous health, and the other emaciated with
disease, and manifesting premonitory symptoms of a speedy dissolution. He was
young and intelligent, but had not made what he knew to be the necessary prepara-
tion for the event which was rapidly approaching. His fellow-passenger, as they
were drawing near the port whither they were bound, advised him to consult an
eminent physician who resided there. ‘No,’ he replied, “I shall not consult him.”
He was asked, “Why?” To which he answered, ‘It is not because I do not enter-
tain the highest opinion of his skill, but he will honestly tell me that my disease is
incurable, that I must die; and I do not wish to receive the announcement from


such a source.” It is just so with the multitudes who know that they must die, _


and that they are totally unprepared for the event. They are afraid to consult
the great Physician, lest they should be told the worst of their own case. In oppo-
sition to their better judgment, they endeavour to hide from their eyes the doom
which awaits them. Their deception is voluntary; it is of their own choosing.
They wish it to be so, and therefore do they avoid the means of detecting and
exposing it. Itis madness to refuse Christ:—Suppose I was going over London
Bridge, and saw a poor miserable beggar, bare-footed, coatless, hatless, with no
rags hardly to cover his nakedness, and right behind him, only a few yards, there
was the Prince of Wales with a bag of gold, and the poor beggar was running away
from him as if he was running away from a demon, and the Prince of Wales was
hallooing after him, ‘‘ Oh, beggar, here is a bag of gold!”” Why, we should say the
beggar had gone mad, to be running away from the Prince of Wales with the bag of
gold. Sinner, that is your condition. The Prince of Heaven wants to give you
eternal life, and you are running away from Him. ‘The wages of sin is death, but
the gift of God is eternal life.” (D. L. Moody.) Light and liberty :—Going to
Helena I saw piles of boxes and goods and all manner of things on the landing,
and I said to the superintendent, ‘Do the slaves buy as much as used to be bought
for them by their masters?” ‘A great deal more.” ‘* Well, what things do they
buy?” ‘Buy? lLooking-glasses and candles.” ‘ Looking-glasses, of course:
candles, however?’’ said I. ‘‘ What do they want with candles?” In the old
slave-times a slave was never allowed to have a lighted candle in his cabin after it
was dark; nothing, unless it was a fire, was allowed, and the candles became in
their eyes the signal of liberty; and the moment that they were free they said,
‘* Give us light.” (H. W. Beecher.) Two great wonders :—There are two wonders,
one from above, the other from the depths of Satan: “God so loved the world,
that He gave His only-begotten Son’’—and the world so loved darkness that it
rejected the only-begotten Son of God who was given for it. (R. Besser, D.D.)
The action of light :—The world of darkness is a world of false terrors and confused
appearances. In the night, old and familiar objects take new forms; common
things seem to stand out like strange dangers in our way; well-known things are
changed ; and we cannot distinguish shadows from realities, or the dangerous from
the secure, But the first morning beam that pierces the dark world restores the
confusion to order; the shadowy perils fly, and the strange night-world disappears.
That first beam manifests things in their reality, and by making manifest it
separates the false from the true. (EK. L. Hull, B.A.) The blessedness of light :—
Imagine a traveller passing through a wild and unfrequented country. He misses
his road. Night overtakes him. The storm rages; winds howl around him; the
rain descends in torrents; thunders break in loud and terrific peals; whilst light-
ning fires occasionally discover dangerous precipices, rendering his condition im-
minently perilous, At length a faint but steady light comes gleaming from a
distance ; he follows the light, he treads the bright pathway, it leads to a human
habitation—to shelter, warmth, and security. Sinner, you are that traveller,
Human life is a wilderness. You are in the night of sin; wandering on the dark
mountains of transgression; in immivent danger. The next step you may be
irrevocably lost. But light has come into the world. Oh follow it! It will lead you
to peace, security, and heaven. (R. Sergeant.) The wilful folly of rejecting the
light :—None of us can prevent the sun from shining, but all of us can prevent the


RY NS Ct ee ae


cos 111.] ST. JOHN. 267


sun from shining on us, The great orb of day still floods the earth with undimmed
lustre; but we can shut ourselves away from his beams, in caves and holes of the
earth. So we may shut ourselves away from that Sun of the soul who lighteth
every man that cometh into the world. We cannot make God less loving, less
merciful, less gracious than He is; but we can stand apart from that love, that
mercy, that grace. ‘‘ Behold the Lord’s hand isnot shortened, that it cannot save;
neither His ear heavy, that it cannot hear: but your iniquities have separated —are
separating—between you and your God, and your sins have hid His face from you,
that he will not hear.” Would you have the Sun shine on you? Tear down the
wall and roof of separation which you have built between youand him. (H.C.
Trumbull, D.D.)


Vers. 20, 21. For every one that doeth evil hateth the light ... but he that
doeth truth cometh to the light.— The repelling and attractive influence of light :—
These words may have taken their form from the fact that Nicodemus came by
night, and may have been a gentle rebuke, and a test for self examination. One
of the saddest things in a spiritual senseis that man shrinks from the light. With
a nature and position before God such as his this ought not to be. One of the most
blessed things is when men welcome the light, and have nothing about them that
they wish to hide (Psa. cxxxix. 23). I. DoINe EVIL AND THE HATRED OF LIGHT
consrquent, 1, The word doeth, in relation to evil, rpacow, indicates—(1) The
easy and natural way in which a thing is done. So we need no self-constraint or
unusual exertion to do evil. We are too readily inclined to it. It required not
much temptation to lead our first parents astray; and their children have followed
them with easy steps. (2) Habit. There is a tendency in what is easy and natural
to become habitual. A thing once done is not difficult to repeat, and each repeated
action makes us more accustomed to it. From the little men go on to the great,
and so silence the inward monitor. Evil is fine as a gossamer web at first, but at
last a man is ‘“‘ bound with the cords of bis sin.” (3) The transient and worthless
result is in the word. So sin’s gratifications leave a sting behind, and are only
‘‘for a season.” How little satisfaction had Samson or Achanin theirsin, 2.
The evildoer hates the light. And no wonder if that which reveals his guilt and
folly humiliates and disgraces him, and threatens punishment, is feared and hated.
No wonder that Ahab hated Elijah and Michaiah, that Jehoiachin destroyed the
prophets’ roll, that Herodias hated John, and the Pharisees Christ. Here is the
explanation of every unhumbled man’s distaste for the truth. ‘“ The carnal mind
is enmity against God.” This shows the need and blessedness of the Gospel, II.
DoINnG THE TRUTH AND THE BLESSED RESULT. 1. The word doeth, here, zorew
suggests—(1) The exercise of resistance. The man who will do truth opposes the
evil impulses of his nature. He will fight against wrong feelings. With noble
superiority he contends against subtlety and deceit. See instances in Joseph,
Daniel, the Three Children, and Cornelius. (2) Decision of character. The man
who does the truth has no vacillation or hesitation. He is steady, unmoved by
caprice. He applies himself steadily to the course he adopts, like Moses, Samuel,
Nehemiah, Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea. (3) The permanent and satisfactory
result. Good is not temporary or unstable in its results. What peace and joy it
imparts! 2. Doers of truth love the light. They are neither ashamed nor fearful.
Let the light shine, and it will justify them, and reveal the glory of God in their
truth doing. Conclusion: 1. The sentiment of a man towards the truth is an index
to his cliaracter. 2. The doing of truth in every man is of God. (G. McMichael,
B.A.) The ground of infidelity :—Many men seem to proceed on the supposition
that, though placed under the Gospel, they may accept or reject it, just as their incli-
nations dictate. But it is not left to every man’s choice in a Christian land whether
or not he will be subject to the Gospel. It is not a matter of option with a man
who resides in a kingdom, whether he will be governed by the laws of the land. If
he violate them it will avail him nothing to plead that he never intended to take
them as his guide. No doubt a man may make something else than the Gospel the
rule of his life: but the solemn fact remains that the Gospel, after all, continues to
be the rule by which he will be tried. When he appears before the Judgment Seat
the processes will have reference to the dispensation beneath which it pleased God
to place him, and not that under which he has chosen to place himself. It will
avail him as little to say, “I acted up to the light of nature; I never professed to be
led by any other light,” as it would for an Englishman to plead in the courts, “ I
acted up to the laws of Japan, which I professed to follow.” The Gospel, then,


268 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaP. 1.
|
will be the system by which we shall be judged, though it may not have been that
under which we have lived. Here comes the question, Why is the Gospel rejected ?
If men are to be condemned for its rejection, it must follow that the rejection
cannot be pleaded as unavoidable. Is there a man necessarily blameworthy for
being an infidel? May he not have sat down with a calm and decided wish to in-
vestigate truth and to believe Christianity, and yet arise confirmed in his scepticism ?
The answer is this: that we dare not take the blame off men and throw it upon God.
This may sound illiberal and uncharitable, but we cannot admit that God is the
author of sin through placing any of His creatures under the invincible necessity of
continuing in sin. In the text Christ charges men’s unbelief in their immorality.
The Scriptures conclude that where actions are evil faith cannot be genuine. The
text states the converse of this, that practice influences faith. Men prefer darkness ;
therefore they hate light. I, Turis was so wiTH THE Jews. When Christ came,
Judea was over-run with profligacy. Christ rebuked it, and was consequently hated
and crucified. Wherever the religion of our Lord is promulgated, it allows no truce
to sin, but Christ came to save men from sin. Had He come to condemn men His
contemporaries would have shrunk from Him equally. Their sensuality and pride
had led them to expect a triumphing Messiah, who would give full scope for their
licentiousness and arrogance; and when He preached His pure and spiritual king-
dom, their habits of evil rose up in protest against Him and it. It was not that He
was not armed with credentials; the exhibition of His greatest credential, the resur-
rection of Lazarus, sealed His doom. II. It 1s tHe same Now. What produces
infidelity is not weakness of evidence; it is the wish to prove the Bible a fable, and
this goes more than half-way towards the result. If the Bible be true, evil deeds
must be reproved, and hence some men have an interest in disproving its preten-
tions. In this desire lies the secret of open, also of practical infidelity. Selfish,
lustful men would view conversion as a positive calamity. They know that they
cannot have religion without renouncing much that they loved, and doing what they
dislike. In conclusion—1. God has erected no barrier against the salvation of a
single soul. 2. If any man is finally condemned, it will be by his own choice.
(H. Melvell, B.D.) The truth:—I. God is to be honoured by the truth. II.
Men are to be benifited by the truth. III. Opposition must be expected on account
of the truth. IV. For the truth we should wish to live. V. For the truth we
should be willing to die. (Prof. J..H. Godwin.) The hatred of the wicked to the
light of the Gospel:—I, Iv 18 AN ACTUAL HATRED (Prov. i. 22). II. Ir 1s a
PASSION OF THE HEART. III. It Is A PASSION WHEREBY THE HEART RISETH UP
AGAINST A UNION WITH THE WorD. A wicked man hates not the Word so
long as it keeps within itself; but if it begin to pluck sin from him and
his pleasures from him, then he hates it. I put this union of the Word in
opposition to four things. 1. Against general preaching. A wicked man may hear
a thousand sermons and like them all, but let one of them come in particular to
him and tell him this is thy sin, and thou must go to hell for it if thou repentest
not, then he hates it. John the Baptist was heard by Herod gladly so long as he
kept off his personal sin. 2. Against merciful preaching, which can never stick a
sermon on to a profane heart. Ahab loved his 400 prophets well enough, but when
Micaiah came, ‘‘Oh, I hate him, for he never prophesieth good unto me!” 8.
Against preaching when the minister is dead. A wicked man can endure that,
because there is none to urge a union of the Word with his conscience. He can
read St. Paul, St. Peter, St. John, &c., and the books of dead ministers, but if they
were alive to tell him if this be the Word of God then thou art a damned man,
they would not be loved. 4. Against now and then preaching. The wicked can
endure the word so long as it doth not stand digging in their conscience and galling
their hearts day by day. Occasional rebukes they can stand, but to be convicted
every Sunday for condemned men, this they hate. IV. As itis an actual affection
whereby the heart riseth up against a union, s0 IT IS AGAINST THAT WHICH IS
DISSONANT AND REPUGNANT TO HIS LUST, Therefore wicked men may love three
kinds of preaching. 1. Quaint preaching that savours more of humanity than of
divinity. Dainty phrases, acute stories, eloquent allusions are heard well enough.
2. Impertinent preaching, when, though it be never so pertinent to some in the
church, yet if it be not pertinent to him, he loves it. The drunkard does not cavil
at a sermon against hypocrisy, nor the profligate at one against covetousness; but
if the Word strikes his own particular corruption, he hates it. 8. So much preach-
ing. A wicked man’s conscience tells him that he must have some religion, and
therefore so long as the minister calls only for some hearing, he responds. The


CHAP. III.] ST. JOHN. 269
ee eee ee eee eee hee eg ee ee ee
vilest drunkard will be content to hear of calling on the Lord Jesus at his death ;
otherwise their consciences would not be quiet. V. THus you sEE THAT WICKED
MEN HATE THE Worp oF Gop. They hate it because—1. They hate the truth, and
being of the Word, a man hates the being of that which he hates, and he would
destroy it. Now, though a wicked man cannot destroy the Bible from being in
itself, yet he would destroy the Bible from being in his life, 2. They hate the
nature of the Word (Rom, viii. 7). 3. This being the case, he hates the being of
the Word in his understanding (Job xxi. 14). VI. Usz 13 10 REPROVE THE WICKED
AND INVITE THEM TO REPENTANCE. (W. Fenner.) The ground of bad men’s enmuty
to the truth :—J. THe ENMITY OF THE WICKED TO THE TRUTH. This enmity appears
—1, In their opposition and resistance to it. 2. Their persecution of it (chap. viii.
40). II. Tue causes AND RLASONS OF THIS ENMITY. 1, They are afraid the evil
of their actions should be discovered to themselves, because that creates guilt and
trouble. (1) It robs them of that good opinion which they had of themselves before.
Truth flatters no man; no wonder, therefore, that so many are offended atit. (2)
Truth carries great evidence along with it, and is very convincing, and gives a good
deal of disturbance. 2. Bad men are enemies to the truth because it discovers the
evil of their actions to others, which causeth shame. III. Inrerznczs. 1. We
learn the true reason why men are so apt to reject the principles of natural and
revealed religion ; they are loath to be under the restraint of them. 2. This is a
great vindication of our religion that it can bear the light, and is ready to submit to
any impartial examination. 3. This is the reason why some are so careful to sup-
press the truth and to lock it up from the people in an unknown tongue, because
their doctrines, dogmas, and deeds are evil. (Abp. Tillotson.) Sinners hate the
light :—J. TH TRUTHS oF GOD WHICH RESPECT THE SINNER ARE, AS FAR AS THE
NATURE AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF THEM ARE CONCERNED, AS EASILY FELT AND SEEN AS
any oTtHER. IJ. THE MIND CANNOT TURN FROM DIVINE TRUTH WITHOUT CHOOSING
to po 1T. III. MEN RESORT TO ARTIFICES TO HIDE THE TRUTH, TO TURN ITS FORCE
AND RESIST ITS PRESSURE. 1. One is infidelity. 2. Another is found in the excuses
offered for disobedience. 38. The indulgence of false hopes. 4. Reproaching
religion and ministers. IV. Remarxs: 1. The common complaint that sinners
must wait for the Spirit of God before they can feel the importance of religion is
unfounded and impious. 2. Ministers must not be afraid of alarming and dis-
tressing sinners. (N. W. Taylor, D.D.) Light welcomed :—At the first Methodist
Conference it was asked, Should they be afraid of thoroughly debating every ques-
tion that might arise? What are we afraid of ? Of overturning our first principles ?
If they are false, the sooner they are overturned the better. If they are true, they
will bear the strictest examination. Let us pray for a willingness to receive light,
to know every doctrine whether it be of God. (R. Stevens.) Light detested :—A
sluttish housemaid, when scolded for the untidiness of the chambers, exclaimed,
“‘T’m sure the rooms would be clean enough if it were not for the nasty sun, which
is always showing the dirty corners.” Thus do men revile the gospel because it
reveals their own sin. Thus all agitations for reforms in Church and State are
opposed, and all manner of mischief attributed to them as if they created the evils
which they bring to light. The lover of the right courts anything which may
manifest the wrong, but those who love evil have never a good word for those dis-
turbing beams of truth which show up the filthy corners of their hearts and lives.
(C. H. Spurgeon.) Revelations of the light :—What a difference it makes fo have
a street well lighted at night! The cheery beams of the street lamp and the
dazzling brilliancy of the electric light are more of a protection to the traveller at
night through city streets than the weapon of the policeman. The evil beings who
haunt our streets at night shun the well-lighted fhoroughfares, and skulk off into
dark alleys and unlighted lanes, where their evil deeds are not likely to be dis-
covered. And yet it is not the light alone that makes the difference. There are
palaces of sin where riot and revelry go on unabashed beneath the glare of gilded
lamps and crystal chandeliers; for the light of the physical lamp is of little moral
avail unless it is made effective by that other light of which Christ spoke when he
said, ‘ Ye are the light of the world.” The powers of darkness fear the natural
light only when it is accompanied by that better light; and the guilty creatures who
showed their guilt, unashamed, in the brilliantly-lighted palaces of sin, would cower
and shrink beneath the Christ-lighted eyes of true and pure men, if suddenly ex-
posed to their searching gaze. There are anxious souls who seem to themselves
never to have done anything for the Master, who might be comforted a little if they
could only realize how important is this work of mere light-bearing. Many a


=


270 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. 1
ne ee
neighbourhood, now forced to be outwardly respectable by the presence of a few
God-fearing men and women in its midst, would break out into open and flagrant
wickedness if that restraining and enlightening presence were to cease. But
wherever God’s children are, the light shines, and the workers of iniquity are
forced to hide their evil deeds. Itis a deed worth doing to flood the streets at night
with the electric light ; but it is a deed far better worth doing to let one’s Christian
light so shine that evil men will fear to bring their evil deeds to the brightness of
its shining ; for the light of a little band of Christian men and women is worth
more, to keep a community pure, than all the light of all the lamps ever invented
(H. C. Trumbull.) What the light reveals :—Some time ago the use of the
electric light in those theatres where it had been introduced was discontinued
because its great brilliancy revealed the sham character of the furniture of
the stage; it showed the paint on the faces of the actors, and the gewgaw
and tinsel nature of their dresses and ornaments; so the dimmer light of the
gas was substituted. Thus itis morally with men; they refuse to come into
the bright light of the gospel lest it make manifest the shams of their lives.
We have instances of this in those persons who frankly tell us that they cannot
become religious because of the dishonest ways and methods of business to
which, they plead, they are compelled to conform. (A. J. Parry.) The different
effect of the light on the good and the bad :—That which scares the wicked from,
draws the godly unto the Word. The owl flies from the morning light, which
other birds welcome. (J. Dyke.) Blindness :—I. There is the blindness which
is the result of passion, covering us, whilst we are under the dominion of passion,
with the darkness of sin, and hiding from us the light of truth. IL. There is the
deeper blindness which is caused by sinful habits, and by indulgence in continuous
sin, until truth becomes odious tous. III. There is the still blacker form of sin,
which not only drives us away from the light, but which hurries us on until we
trample upon and persecute the doers of righteousness. (Quesnel.) Man’s proper
attitude towards the truth:—There is all the difference in the world between battling
for the truth because of one’s love for the truth, and battling on the side of truth
because of hostility to the opponents of truth. A man may be as intense and as
violent in the one case as in the other; but if a man lacks a profound conviction of
truth, and a devoted love for truth, he can never be inspired to a high courage, and
held to an unwavering endurance, by any hatred of those who are over against him
in his struggles. All real progress in any line of reform is made through the dead
earnestness of men who love the right ; not through the impulsive violence of men
who are aroused, for a time, against the upholders of evil. He who loves his
fellow-man, and therefore strives for his disenthralling, is worth more as a friend
of liberty than he who hates oppressors, and therefore seeks their overthrow. So it
is in every sphere of well-doing; love for the good is a more potent factor than
hatred of evil—more potent even in the battle with evil. (H.C. Trumbull.) Why
men hate the truth :—A gentleman once visiting an acquaintance of his, whose con-
duct was as irregular as his principles were erroneous, was astonished to see a large
Bible in the hall chained fast to the floor. He ventured to inquire the reason.
‘‘Sir,” replied his infidel friend, “I am obliged to chain down that book to prevent
its flying in my face.” Such persons hate the Bible, as Ahab did Micaiah, because
it never speaks good concerning them, but evil. (Biblical Museum.) Light re-
proves sin:—The margin will show that our translators felt a difficulty about this
word “‘reproved.” See Matt. xviii. 15, where it is rendered “ tell him his fault,”
and compare the other instances in this Gospel, chap. viii. 9, 45 (‘ convince ” in
both), and especially chap. xvi. 8 (‘‘reprove,” and margin ‘‘ convince”). The moral
idea is exactly illustrated by the action of light, which makes manifest the wrong
and leads the conscience to see it and repent of it. It is through this chastening
that the man passes from darkness to light. It is because men shrink from this
chastening that they hate the light (comp. the remarkable parallel in Eph. v. 11
et seq.). (H. W. Watkins, D.D.) Light reveals sin and alarms sinners :—Some
persons accuse us poor preachers of disturbing the minds of our hearers, when
persons are alarmed under the ministry of the gospel. The very purpose for which
it was sent was to alarm men’s minds; and it fails altogether when it does not
alarm. When the ministry of the gospel alarms the sinner, he sees its workings
going on in his bosom ; it comes out before his friends and companions; they ask
him why he should sacrifice himself to that sort of teaching which disturbs and
agitates him 2? Why,my friends, we do not bring the things there that are discovered
—it is the light that reveals them ; they were all there before—it is the light that


———————


a


ear. 111.] ST. JOHN. 271


falls upon things—and then they appear in a very different manner; and the
ministry of the gospel is designed and constituted to make the darkness light, to
convince the sinner and to awaken the impenitent. Light and crime :—In 1807
Pall Mall was lighted with gas. The original Gas Company was first derided and
then treated in Parliament as rapacious monopolists, intent upon the ruin of
established industry. The adventurers in gaslight did more for the prevention of
crime than the government had done since the days of Alfred. (Knight's ‘* England.”

Christians love light :—‘‘ Light breaksin! light breaksin! Hallelujah!” exclaime

one when dying. Sargeant, the biographer of Martyn, spoke of “ glory, glory,’’ and
of that ‘bright light”; and when asked, ‘‘ What light?” answered, Itis face
kindling into a holy fervour, ‘“‘ The light of the Sun of Righteousness.” A blind
Hindoo boy, when dying, said joyfully, ‘I see! now I have light. I see Him in
His beauty. Tell the missionary that the blind see. I glory in Christ.” Thomas
Jewett, referring to the dying expression of the English infidel, ‘‘I am going to take
a leap in the dark,” said to those at his bedside, ‘‘Iam going to take a leap in the
light.” While still another dying saint said, “I am not afraid to plunge into
eternity.” A wounded soldier, when asked if he were prepared to depart, said,
‘‘Oh yes; my Saviour, in whom I have long trusted, is with me now, and His
smile lights up the dark valley forme.” <A dying minister said, ‘‘ It is just as I said
it would be, ‘ There is no valley,’ ”’ emphatically repeating, ‘Oh, no valley. It is
allclear and bright—a king’s highway.” The light of an everlasting life seemed to
dawn upon his heart; and touched with its glory, he went, already crowned, into
the New Jerusalem. A Christian woman lay dying. Visions of heaven came to
her. She was askedif she really saw heaven. Her answer was, ‘‘I know I saw
heaven; but one thing I did not see, the valley of the shadow of death. I saw the
suburbs.’ A young man who had but lately found Jesus was laid upon his dying
bed. A friend who stood over him asked, “Is it dark?” ‘I shall never,”
said he, “forget his reply. ‘No, no,’ he exclaimed, ‘it is all light! light!
light!’ and thus triumphantly passed away.” (American Messenger.) But he
that doeth truth.—He that doeth truth cometh to the light :—What is it, then,
to do the truth? For that would seem to be the condition which brings us
within the rays of the light of Him Who is the Spirit of Truth, the right dis-
position in which to keep Whitsuntide. I. “He that doeth truth.” This would
seem to mean, first of all, HH THAT BELIEVETH THE TRUTH. We can no more shut
up the Book of Revelation than we can shut up the book of experience, and say it
does not matter. Can we say, for instance, to any young man entering on the
study of medicine, “It does not matter the least what system you follow—homeo-
pathy, allopathy, or even herbalism; all are equally true or equally false, as long
as you mean well.” Or shall we tell him, if he wishes to become a soldier, that
drill and tactics and the modern science of warfare may be taken up or let alone,
provided that he is brave? or that engineering depends on mechanical skill, or
botany on his love for flowers, or chemistry on a taste for analysis, or mathematics
on skill in computation? No; we know that all these things have their Bibles,
compendiums of exact truth ; so that he who enters on the study of them, enters
on it enriched with a heritage of precise fact wrested by the patient interrogation
of phenomena. And so it is with religion. The truth as set forth in the Creed is
that which is exactly adapted to the needs of mankind. What we should do if we
were constructing a new religion is one thing, and what we ought to do when God
has told us what will make us truly religious is another. And to do the truth, is
faithfully to believe what God has spoken, as a duty which we owe to Him and to
our fellow-men also. II. “‘ He that doeth truth.” This, perhaps, means, secondly,
HE THAT Lives THE TRUTH. A true life is no butterfly existence wasted in So-called
pleasure and idleness, never serious, never earnest; where all experience is but as
pictures on the wall, all talents merely ornamental for self-display ; where grace is
received in vain, as the water in the fabled penance of the Danaides, which flows
away as fast as it enters in; where sin and want of seriousness have riven the soul
so that it cannot contain grace. But the true life will be one which is faithful to
all God’s influences and modes of approach, which says in its joy, ‘‘ My soul truly
waiteth still upon God; ” towards Whom there is the aspiration of prayer ; from
Whom comes the message to the soul; at Whose coming the door is opened in
Holy Communion, and all the approaches cleared by which God may enter into the
soul. To live the truth is to trust more to prayer and sacraments and holy things
than to mere human culture, self-reliance, strength, or cleverness. Think of that
description in the Book of Revelation (x. 1) of the servant of God. And as the


272 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. m1
angel is mighty, so the servant of God will be strong in firmness and fidelity, and
in the knowledge of the truth. He is “clothed with a cloud;” there will be a
seriousness about him, as of one who is still under the influence of the luminous
cloud of Sinai, where he has been communing with God, or the half-sadness of one
who is compassed about with the earth-drawn sorrow with which sympathy has
enveloped him. ‘A rainbow is upon his head;” he has a brightness within him
which lights up the rain-cloud of life, because God is shining upon it. “ His face
is as it were the sun,”’ because at each prayer-time, and frequently throughout the
day, he drinks in light from that Sun to which he turns. “ His feet are as pillars
of fire,” for he is not easily shaken in his steadfastness ; he is active, vigorous—
yes, graceful as the image of God who created him. III. And then, thirdly, ‘‘ He
that doeth truth ’ means, obviously, HE THAT SPEAKETH THE TRUTH. Is it absolutely
unknown, for instance, for people to screen themselves when they have done wrong
by the easy lie? Dishonour, ruin, disgrace, stare the man in the face. “ Say you
have not done it,” says Satan; and the evil is put off, only to return with a tenfold
aggravation of malignity as the net of deceit winds itself tighter and tighter round
its hopelessly implicated victim. The old German legend is full of instruction.
“A huntsman to forward his own purposes seeks the devil, and together they cast
seven bullets. Six of these are to strike wherever the caster wills, but the seventh
is to be the devil’s, and is to recoil and strike the caster, who is never certain which
of all of them he is putting into his rifle, and at last is struck down by his own
shot.” The fraudulent lie succeeds for a time, but at last comes the fatal one,
which recoils upon him who uses it with shame and disaster. Do we scrupulously
adbere to the disagreeable appointment, or the unpleasant duty, or the invitation
which we have pledged ourselves to accept? Or are we always careful to avoid that
exaggeration which piles up rumours and reports, which mixes truth with fiction,
which stays not to inquire whether a thing is correct or not, which aims, rather, at
‘“‘saying a new thing that is not true, rather than a true thing which is not new”?
(W. C. E. Newbolt, M.A.) He that doeth truth:—It is observable, in the first
place, that there are several places in the New Testament in which the truth is
spoken of in ways not very much unlike to this; places, that is, in which it is
spoken of, variously indeed, but in each of them as something real and solid,—not
a mere object of apprehension by the intellectual powers cf a man—not something
external, merely viewed, seen, recognized, but something internal, something to be,
and something to do—something full of blessing, a precious possession, a gift, an
inward treasure (see John viii. 31-36, xiv. 5, 6, xvii. 17, xviii. 87; 1 John iii.
19, v. 6). Now it is plain that these statements of Holy Scripture—and there are
a great many more like them, particularly in the inspired writings of St. John—
make the truth (the Divine truth) to be something very sacred and very deep.
Whatever it be in itself—and this is too hard and difficult a question for us to enter
upon—it is plain that when possessed by a man, it is full of precious blessing to
him. Possessed by a man, and possessing him, he is not what he was before.
The truth has made him free who was a slave. The truth has made him who had
no ears able to hear the words of Christ; the truth has sanctified him; the truth
has made him God’s son. What relation then (it may be asked), does doctrine
bear to the truth? for it is plain that it is not the same thing. If the truth be
thus something mysterious and real, which, coming forth of God, and being Divine,
taketh, possesseth, occupieth a man, what relation does it bear to doctrine, Divine
doctrine, the true revealed declarations of God, His nature and His will, which He
has been pleased to give us? for these are often called truths, or the truth, though
plainly not in the high and mysterious sense of the truth which we have been con-
sidering. I suppose that it is quite beyond our power to answer exactly. It is only
clear that they are very nearly and closely connected. It is certain that the truth
cannot possess a man and bless him with all the great blessings which belong to it,
unless doctrine be duly known, and received, and believed. Doctrine is, as it were,
truth projected on some medium which the mind can see; a shadow of the invisible
and blessed truth cast, as it were, upon a cloud; and this the mind must see, and
know, and own, and believe, or else, such is the order of God’s will, a man cannot
have the freedom indeed, the sonship, the sanctification, the open ears, the various
great and precious blessings of the indwelling truth. Learn then from hence the
sacred value of doctrine; its sacred, deep, unfathomable preciousness. If then we
undervalue doctrine, who shall insure us against losing the truth? If we tamper
with it, or lose our hold of it, who shall insure us of our freedom and sanctification

which we should derive from the indwelling truth? If we should allow others to


Z
a
4
4
E


a


onaP, rr.) ST, JOHN. 273


seduce us from our simple, earnest, obedient subjection to it, who shall assure us
that they have not robbed us of our precious estate of being in the truth? Thus
far then we have regarded the truth as it is a real and precious thing, possessing
which we are in an estate or condition of high blessing—the estate of being
Christians; our text rather leads us to regard it in a further view, as being some-
thing practical, something to be done. Being in the truth (that is, our estate, or
condition), we must do truth (that is, our duty). “If we keep not His command-
ments, the truth is not in us.” ‘If we say that we have no sin, the truth is not
in us.” ‘If we say that we have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness, we
do not the truth.” The truth then, in which we are, is to be done; and keeping
of the commandments of God, and walking in the light, and acknowledging our
own sins, are doing the truth. Truth, then, means holiness. Being in the truth,
we must do the truth; and we must do it, as the truth is in Jesus. And so our
law of holiness is a law of holy truth. It is a straight and direct law: ‘*O that my
ways were made so direct that I might keep Thy statutes.” It admits not of de-
flection, or voluntary imperfection. As doctrine is the intellectual phase, if I may
so speak, of essential Divine truth, so is obedience its practical one. To deviate
into heresy, or to deviate into sin, are alike to depart from the influence of that
sacred, central truth, in which we are sons, in which we are free, and in which we
are holy. It is plain (as soon as we regard the law of God in this light, in which
the Holy Scriptures so often present it to us) that the law of truth must needs be a
very holy and righteous law. It is also plain that it is far higher, and holier, and
more searching than it is often thought. How it cuts like a sword through all the
easy living, the self-indulgence, and lazy half-service which characterize these later
ages of the Church! If there be a truth of holy thoughts, surely there is much
unlicensed and random thinking—much letting loose of the imagination on things
trifling, and enervating, and unprofitable, which must partake in a great and
serious degree of the nature of falsehood. If there be a sacred truth of holy
words, there must be much idle and frivolous, and satirical, and bold talking, which
must be very far below that high standard of truth, and so be really false. Above
all, if there be a real sacred truth of duty and holy living, there must be a vast
deal of practical and dangerous falsehood, in the waste of time, the imperfectness
of service, the very easy and self-complacent way of life of very many baptized
Christians. Indeed, we may readily see, that the ordinary rule of living, as we
may judge of it from seeing how men live, is quite of another kind from the rule
of truth. As long as they refrain from clear and notorious sins, and discharge
certain clear and undoubted duties, men think themselves more or less at liberty to
live in the rest of their behaviour as they like best. There are, as it were, certain
buoys marking out particular shoals of sin, and these they must take care to steer
clear of; but meanwhile, they have a free choice of navigating in a wide and easy
channel, following their own fancy, and doing as much or as little therein as they
please. And meanwhile, while practical truth is thus widely neglected among us,
there is nothing which is more earnestly insisted upon as a virtue of the first
necessity to the existence and well-being of society than veracity, or worded truth.
Truth in words is held to be a virtue of such magnitude and necessity, that a clear
breach of it ruins the character of a man amongst men more than almost any sin,
however gross, which ordinary society knows. Worded truth, or veracity, precious
as it is, is but as the outside, as the husk, of a more precious reality inside.
Worded truth is the outside, and acted truth is the inner kernel. Oh, believe me,
the essence of falsehood is deeper, deeper far than words! Believe me, it is a
hollow philosophy which magnifies veracity, and lets the daily habits loose in
self-indulgence and neglect: a miserable worldly code which exacts truth of words
under the severest penalties, and makes it innocent and even honourable to depart,
ever so far, from truth in deeds! No; the essence of truth is in duty, in heart-
whole devotion of duty to the sacred law of God’s truth. (Bishop Moberly.)


Vers. 22-36. After these things came Jesus and His disciples unto the land of
Judea (see also on ver. 30 for the whole paragraph),—Jesus and John and their dis-
ciples :—I. A HUMBLING EXAMPLE OF THE PETTY JEALOUSIES AND PARTY SPIRIT WHICH
MAY EXIST AMONG PROFESSORS OF RELIGION (ver. 26). 1. This spirit is but too common
in the churches. Men care more for the increase of their party than for the
increase of Christianity, and cannot rejoice when it spreads outside of their own
denomination or congregation. 2. True Christians must watch and pray against
this spirit. It is contagious, injurious, and brings contempt on religion. Where-


274 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHAP. 01
ONS on ee eee
ever good is done we should acknowledge it and be thankful (Phil. i, 18). ITA
SPLENDID PATTERN OF TRUE AND GODLY HUMILITY. 1. John’s conduct is contrasted
with that of his disciples. (1) His principle is that acceptance with men is the gift
of God (ver. 27). (2) He reminds his followers of his repeated declaration (ver. 28).
(3) He informs them that his office and joy is only that of a bridegroom’s friend
(ver. 29). (4) He testifies to the coming greatness of Christ and his own eclipse.
3. This frame of mind is the highest degree of grace to which a man can attain.
(1) God declares this to be the case (Peter v. 5). (2) This is seen in the cases of
Abraham, Moses, Job, David, Daniel, Paul, and the Baptist. (3) The way to true
honour is humility. No man was ever so praised by Christ as John, III. An
INSTRUCTIVE DECLARATION OF CHRIST’S HONOUR AND DieniTy. 1. For the last time
John testifies to Christ’s dignity. Christ is—(1) The Bridegroom of the Church.
(2) ‘Him that cometh from above.” (3) One to whom the Spirit is given without
measure. (4) One whom the Father loves. (5) One into whose hands all things
are given. (6) One to believe in whom is life everlasting, and whom to reject is
eternal ruin. 2. Let us hold the same views. (1) We can never make too much
of Christ. We can easily think too much of church, sacraments, &c. (2) Christ
only is worthy of all honour, IV. A BROAD ASSERTION OF THE NEARNESS OF THE SAL-
VATION OF TRUE CuHrisTIANS. 1. Salvation is not a future and distant privilege.
The believer “hath” everlasting life. 2. Unbelief is a tremendous peril. (Bp.
Ryle.) The Masters and the disciples :—I. How mucH OF HUMAN NATURE THERE
EVER HAS BEEN AND IS EVERYWHERE AND THROUGH ALL TIME. Even with the Lord
present and overseeing jealousies arose. II. How sMALL OFTENTIMES WERE AND ARE
THE SUBJECTS OF QUESTIONING BETWEEN FOLLOWERS OF Jesus. On this occasion it
was an unknown something about purifying which neither the Baptist nor the
evangelist thought it worth while to name. Is it not humiliating that ecclesiastical
history is largely a story of strife on the merest ‘‘ mint and anise’’ as compared
with those fundamentals wherein all true disciples are practically at one. A
politician once sought to allay alarm about the invasion of India by sending a large
map showing the vast distances and obstacles that would have to be overcome. So
if men would only scan the height and depth and length and breadth of the work
given to all who love the Lord they could never wrangle over petty things. III.
How LITTLE JOHN’S DISCIPLES KNEW HIM OR HAD BEEN INFLUENCED BY HIS MINISTRY.
Had they known him could they have imagined rivalry between him and Christ ?
Had they received his testimony about Christ, they must have known that appeal
from what Christ elected to do was impossible. It must have saddened John to
have to repeat his testimony again. Let the preacher and teacher be humbly
patient in recognizing the transciency of the impression left by the most momentous
truths and the necessity of their frequent repetition, IV. TrrviaL AND UNWORTHY
AS WAS THE OCCASION OF THIS QUESTIONING WE MUST REJOICE THAT IT CAME TO PASS.
From this low level the Forerunner re-argues the whole position, and speaks out
with a new volume and momentum all that lay in his mind and heart. Trivial
circumstances may give rise to the most important disclosures, (A. B. Grosart,
D.D.) John also was baptizing.—The ministry of John was exercised—I. In the
WILDERNESS oF JuDmA, where he preached and also baptized (Matt. iii. 1; Mark i.
1-5; Luke iii, 3), IL. In Perma, east of Jordan at Buruany (chap. i. 28). III. At
‘Ginon near to Salim, In these places he proclaimed Christ. 1. In the first by pre-
announcing Him as the great Baptizer and Judge of all (Matt. iii. 11, 12). 2. In
the second, by pointing Him out as the Lamb of God (chap. i. 19-28; iii. 26). 3.
In the third by declaring Him to be the Bridegroom of the Church and by delivering
the illustrious testimony here recorded. (Bp. Wordsworth.) 4inon near to
Salim :—Three miles east of Shechem, at the head of the great Wady Farah,
which has in all ages been the highway from the Damiet ford of the Jordan to
Shechem, there are great springs marking this spot. They rise in open ground
amidst bare and unattractive hills, and flow down the slope, through a skirting of
oleanders, in a strong brook which grows deeper on its way from the addition of
numerous small streams. The village of Salim is a wretched collection of small
huts, square and flat-roofed, with a tree, large for Palestine, near them, enclosed
within a stone wall for preservation, and with a few olives dotting the bare slopes.
Looking westward, the eye crosses the great plain and travels up the valley of
Shechem, but around Salim itself there is nothing at all attractive. To make the
identification eomplete there is a village called Ainun four miles north of the prin-
cipal stream, With abundant water flowing all the year round, a central position,
free space for the crowds, and a situation on the edge of the descent to the Jordan, of


CHAP, III. ] ST. JOHN. 275
which the waters of the neighbourhood are, south of the plain of Esdrelon, the main
tributary on the west, no position more favourable in every way could have been
chosen by the Baptist for his work. That he once raised his earnest voice in regions
now so silent and forlorn casts an interest over the landscape more powerful than
it could otherwise have had, even had it possessed great natural attractions. (C.
Getkie, D.D.) Then there arose a question between some of John’s disciples
and the Jews about purifying —The controversy about purifying—I. AFFORDS AN
EXAMPLE OF THE TENDENCY TO SINFUL DISPUTES UNDER THE MOST FAVOURABLE CIRCUM-
stances. 1. The Lord and His messenger are the cause of this dispute. 2. The
minds of the disputants'were carnal. 3. Times of reformation specially breed such
disputes. The gospel is then a newtruth. Prejudices are excited and inflamed.
4, We must not be scandalized when such things occur. II. SHows THE InjuRY
WHICH ARISES FROM MISTAKEN VIEWS OF THE OBJECT INTENDED TO BE SERVED BY OUT-
WARD ORDINANCES. 1. The question seems to have been the comparative efficacy
of John’s baptism, the various Jewish washings, and probably Christ’s. 2. Eccle-
siastical rites may be substituted for Christ and His gospel. 3. Salvation may
come without ritualism of any kind. III. Teaches THe BANEFUL INFLUENCE OF THE
SPIRIT OF SELF AND PARTY, SO COMMON IN THE HISTORY OF THE CHuRcH. 1. Certain Jews,
grieved at the progress of the gospel, approach certain disciples of John and artfully
endeavour to excite their minds to jealousy against Christ. 2. These come to
John and try to inflame his envy by representing the universal popularity of Christ.
(A. Beith, D.D.) Christ attracts sinners :—Among the several wonders of the
loadstone this is not the least, that it will not draw gold or pearl, but, despising
these, it draws the iron to it, one of the most inferior metals: thus Christ leaves
the angels, those noble spirits, the gold and the pearl, and He comes to poor sinful
man, and draws him into His embraces. (T. Watson.) The attractive power of
Christ :—A Christian mother was once showing her little girl, about five years old,
@ picture representing Jesus holding an infant in His arms, while the mothers were
pushing their children towards Him. ‘ There, Carrie,” said her mother, “this is
what I would have done with you if I had been there.” ‘I wouldn’t be pushed to
Jesus,” said little Carrie, with beautiful and touching earnestness; ‘‘I’d go to Him
without pushing.” (Biblical Treasury.) Christ sufficient for all :—‘*I come very
often,” said the pitcher one day to the spring, which it again approached to be
filled with its pure water. ‘‘I hope I do not come too frequently, but I soon get
emptied, and as often need to be replenished.” ‘ You are but one of a great many
that come with the same errand,” answered the flowing spring. “It is very
generous of you to give unto all that come,” said the pitcher, “ and. that, like
myself, apply so frequently.” ‘‘I never refuse any, and send none empty away,”
replied the spring, “‘and however large the number that I take, I am not at all
impoverished. I draw in order to supply the wants of the thirsting, and whosoever
will let him come.” (Bowden.) All men may come to Christ :—There is enough
in Jesus Christ for to serve us all. If two, or six, or twenty men be athirst, and
they go to drink out of a bottle, while one is drinking the other envies, because he
thinks there will not be enough for him too; but if a hundred be athirst, and go to
the river, while one is drinking the other envies not, because there is enough for
all. (W. Bridge.) John answered and said, A man can receive nothing except
it be given him from heaven.—John’s joy fulfilled :—I. JoHN ASCRIBES HIS POSITION
AND QUALIFICATIONS TO THE DIVINE SOVEREIGNTY (ver. 27). What he says is true of
temporal things, much more of spiritual things aud the happy use of both. 1. John
wished his disciples to entertain truthful views of his position. It was of God that
he had been qualified for his work, and had been successful in it. God therefore
could only say when it was done and give him his discharge. He was content to
patiently await the issue. 2. From this it follows that envy of others reflects upon
God. Those who rate against Moses rebelled against God. Backbiting, calumny,


secret or open opposition to those whom God has made superior te us, comes under


‘s catevory (cf. the cases of Miriam and of Aaron and of Korah). 3. To be dead to
Shea cae on John’s principle, how precious! This grace distinguished
Jonathan and Paul. II. Joun’s DEGLARATION THAT HIS PAST DOCTRINE WAS CONSISTENT
WITH HIS PRESENT STATEMENT (ver. 28). 1. We may reasonably conclude that John
was disappointed in his disciples. That all his teaching had been lost upon them
was a humbling trial. If he had-ever been tempted to exult over results this must
have been a severe correction. Yet he must have felt unspeakable comfort that
he could boldly appeal to their consciences for the character of his testimony.
2. Two things were ever prominent, (1) That he was not the Christ. Good cause


276 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaP. IIT,
Sie a ee
for this in the notions and expectations of his followers. He clearly saw the rock
towards which they were drifting. (2) That he was the messenger of Christ—fore-
announcing one more glorions than himself. That done, and Christ having
arrived, his office ceased. 8. Truths so obvious must have silenced his too zealous
followers. They could not now but remember what he had said. Let us learn.
that not hearing only, but profitable hearing is our duty. III. Curist’s RELATION
T0 THE CHURCH RELATIVELY To Joun’s (ver. 29). 1. Christ’s relation to the Church
is that of bridegroom. John here alludes to a common Old Testament emblem.
The Jews understood the marriage of the first pair as typical, and so that of
Abraham with Sarah, and Isaac with Rebecca, The marriage relation was that
which God sustained to His people (Ezek. xvi.; Psa. xlv.; and Song of Solomon).
2. John ascribes to Christ the glory due to Him, and it is of vital interest that we
should receive his testimony. Christ qualified Himself for entering into this alliance
with us by sharing our nature while retaining His own. He entered upon it by
special contract with the Father. He fulfilled every legal obligation, and ‘loved
the Church, and gave Himself for it.” He participates with His people and pro-
vides for them, and whatever a faithful, tender husband might do, He has engaged to
do and actually does. 8. John’s relation was that of the Bridegroom’sfriend. The
bridegroom, on all nuptial occasions, had his ‘* friend,” whose office was to conduct
the bride to the bridegroom. Thus, Moses was God’s ‘‘ friend,” when he brought
Israel into the wilderness. Similarly John was, and all ministers are Christ’s
“friends ” to bring the Church to him, IV. THE NECESSARY ISSUE OF JOHN’S MINIS-
TRY AND Curist’s (ver 30). The course of Christ was that of the sun in the
firmament. John’s that of a lamp to shine on a dark path until the orb of day
appeared. In the consummation of this ministry John rejoiced. (Ibid.) John
and Jesus :—The points of contrast between Christ and the Baptist, as stated by
the latter in these five verses, are five-fold; thus: Heis the Christ: I am but the
forerunner. He is the Bridegroom: I am but the’ friend of the Bridegroom. He
must increase: J must decrease. Heisfrom heaven: Iamoftheearth. Hespeaks
what He has seen and heard in heaven: I speak of the earth. With the last of
these compare a somewhat similar opposition in Heb. xii. 25. (G. J. Brown, M.A.)
I am not the Christ . . . Iam sent before Him.—John first, then Jesus :—I. WHat
DID JOHN PREACH? 1. He delivered the whole law against sin ; even in the case of
Herod (Mark vi. 18-20) and of the Pharisees (Luke iii. 7). He showed how the
law extended to the words and thoughts of men (Matt. ili. 8,9). He counselled
circumspection in the walks of ordinary life, with a view to the final account.
Thus he aroused the consciences of the people. 2. He made a demand for im-
mediate repentance, and its fruits in a new life (Matt. iii. 2). 8. He heralded
Jesus as the Messiah predicted of old (Matt. iii. 3). In this way he connected
Moses with Christ. For himself he took pains to withdraw and resist every claim
(chap. i. 20). Thus he gave a forward look to all his denunciations of sin in view of
the true baptism cleansing from it. 4, He announced the special office of Jesus as
the Redeemer of men, Thus he prepared the way for a gospel which based all its
invitations of peace on the doctrine of sacrifice. II. Wat pip Jesus TEACH WHEN
Ir cAME TO His turn? 1. Christ testified to the entire accuracy of John’s doctrine,
He accepted the ministry of His forerunner without one question. 2. He proclaimed
the full necessity of an atonement. Not even John exceeded Christ in denouncing
sin and requiring renewal of heart. 3. He declared that the necessary sacrifice was
now to be accomplished by Himself (ver. 16). 4. He thus raised no new issues be-
tween man and God; but rather narrowed all the old into one: He made it clear
that faith was the instrument of salvation (Chron. vi. 28,29), He offered the freest
gospel, but He left no chance of mistake to those who might suppose a simple issue
was a weak one (ver. 18; Mark xvi. 16). III. Tue orpER BETWEEN THE TEACHING
oF JOHN AND JEsus. John’s came earliest in fact and logical necessity, 1. The
historic position of the two men is enough to show all that is here claimed. Our
Lord’s life was part of His teachings, and each step depended on whatever steps
went before. John’s work was a necessary and solemn prerequisite to the work of
Jesus. 2. Their methods of procedure were similar, John presented the law first
then the gospel; but his office was plainly to press the law into prominence.
Jesus presented the law first, then the gospel: but His office was to bring the gos-
pel into prominence. In both cases the law came earliest. 3. The conclusion
therefore, is inevitable. I:aw work precedes gospel work in all God’s dealing with
souls. IV. PRACTICAL INFERENCES. 1. We see why religious instruction some-
times proves inefficacious; Jesus is preached without John. The Lord does not


3
~


aay Y > intel


oar. m1.] ST. JOHN. 277


seem in the still, small voice, because men miss the preparation of wind, earthquake,
and fire, 2. Why inquirers are so slowin finding psace. There has been nothing to
awake conscience. 3. Why there is so much of unrest and misgiving among
Christ’s people. They have no intelligent sense of Christ’s loyal work in bearing
the curse of the law for them. 4. Why backsliding is so frequent as the sin of con-
verts. Somebody has been daxoing them with untempered mortar. 5. We see how
the new life begins and continues according to the revealed plan (Rom. vy. 1, 2;
viii. 1,3). (C. S. Robinson, D.D.) ;


Vers. 29, 30. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom, but the friend of the
bridegroom .. . standeth and heareth.—The Bridegroom and His friend :—I. THE
PECULIAR TOUCHES IN THE Baprist’s PORTRAIT HERE EXHIBITED. 1, Elsewhere he
appears like Elijah flashing in terrific flames of anger and rebuke in the sins of
the age; another Moses with a stern countenance bearing the table of God’s law.
Here we find him, after he had baptized the Lord, shining with reflected rays such
as streamed from the dove-like glory. It is an evangelical lustre which encircles
him now. He is more apostle than prophet. His words areinspired with Christian
faith. 2. In other passages he appears as an ascetic. He dwells in the desert.
His disciples fast. He carries the burden of the Lord. Here he rejoices greatly,
because of the Bridegroom’s voice. The Man of Sorrows rejoiced in Spirit; so also
did His forerunner here. 3. Elsewhere the Baptist is a popular preacher. People
went in crowds, not merely to listen to, but to live with the great revivalist. In all
guch excitement there is a power of reaction upon the author of it. He gathers
back in his own soul the influences which, torrent like, have been rushing out of him,
but when the ebb comes and the congregations thin; when another and greater
prophet eclipses the lesser, whose mission has been fulfilled, is not that an hour
of trial? testing the purity an disinterestedness of him whose popularity is on the
wane. John was paling before the brighter light, and some reminded him of the
change going on. How noble was his conduct! What an example for ministers
and all men! II. Tua REFERENCE OF THE TEXT TO CurIsT AND CHRISTIAN MINISTERS
IN GENERAL. 1. The relation which Christ sustains to the Church. This imagery
has been abused, but there is a precious truth in it which the evangelist loved to ex-
pound (Rev. xix. 6-9). Christ’s love to His people is pure, intense, everlasting,
expressed in a covenant inviolable as the marriage bond. He gave Himself for
them ; all He is and has is made over to them, and the due response on their part
is the consecration of their hearts and lives to Him. 2. The true minister of Christ
is the friend of the Bridegroom. Christ’s disciples are more than servants—
servants lifted up into the sphere of friendship; and never does a preacher fulfil his
office in a more beautiful way than when he feels that he is not only in service, but
in fellowship—not only that he has an obligation but a privilege, ‘‘ He standeth
and heareth.” ‘The minister of the gospel is a listener and an echo. He catches
voices from the other world, and repeats them—like Samuel ‘* Speak Lord!” &e.,
like David, ‘Come all ye that fear God’’; like the Cherubim bending over the ark
to learn “ things which the angels desire to look into” ; like the angel flying in the
midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach. 3. In reference to the
Divine Bridegroom, the minister’s motto should ever be, ‘ He must increase, and I
must decrease,” words which testify to the growing glory of Christ and the disposition
of faithful friends to lose themselves in Him. (1) Ministers must not preach
themselves or seek to display their own powers and attainments. Self must be re-
duced to ® minimum that He may be all in all. (2) They should seek to be
forgotten, absorbed in Him, getting behind Him, “nor showing even the tip of
one’s little finger ;” (3) and not only by speaking, but by living. (J. Stoughton,
D.D.) The Bridegroom and Bride with their retinwe :—I. Henn 1s AN INTERESTING
PORTRAITURE OF CuristT AND His CuuRcH AS THE GLORIOUS BripEGROOM AND His
tiustrious Bripr. 1. Christ is the Bridegroom (Psa. xlv.). 2. The Church the
Bride (ibid), 3. The union of the Bridegroom and the Bride. “ He that hast.’
Which has reference to the fact that she is Christ’s (1) in the purpose of His good
pleasure ; (2) By the price paid for her redemption; (3) By the voluntary surrender
of herself tu Him forever. 4. The entireness of the union, II, A STRIKING REPRE-
SENTATION OF A PART OF THE DBRIDEGROOM’S RUTINUE. J ohn well deserved to be called
the friend of Christ, in that he was wholly devoted to the interests of his Master. He
represents the Christian ministry. 1, In its character, A minister should be the
friend of Christ, Can those be such who deny His Divinity and outrage His laws ?
2. Inits duties. To “hear the Bridegrooim’s voice,” receive His instructions, and


278 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. mL
Be ee eee

them into execution. 3. Its pleasures. ‘‘He rejoiceth greatly.” These pleasures
peek’ Fir those of literature, science, art, &c. but, (1) in communion with Christ.
(2) Working for Christ. (3) Reward by Christ. (J. Clayton, jun.) Christ the
Bridegroom of the Church :—As such He is represented throughout the Scripture
(Matt. xxv.; Eph. v.; Song of Solomon, and Revelation in particular). I. A
BRIDEGROOM IS NOT SATISFIED WITH THE STATE IN WHICH HE IS, BUT DESIRES TO
EXCHANGE IT AND BE MARRIED To ANOTHER. So the Lord of Glory was not satisfied
to be alone. He was not complete until “ the fulness of His body” was united to
Him in everlasting and wedded love. Il. A BRIDEGROOM, IF A DUTIFUL AND
AFFECTIONATE SON, CONSULTS CONFIDENTIALLY WITH HIS PARENTS. So the Son of God
“game forth from the Father,” “ not to do His own will, but the will of Him that
sent Him.” III, AN oBJECT OF AFFECTION IS NECESSARILY AND NATURALLY FIXED
UPON, BY THE BRIDEGROOM, WHOSE AFFECTIONS HE DESIRES TO WED TO HIMSELF. Christ
fastened His love not on angels but on sinners (Deut. vii.). The earthly bride-
groom, however, fastens his affection on something that is attractive, and loves
because there is something worthy of his love. IV. WHEN THE BRIDEGROOM HAS
FOUND THE OBJECT OF HIS AFFECTIONS HE NATURALLY VISITS HER, ARRAYS HIMSELF IN
SUITABLE APPAREL, AND COURTS HER FELLOWSHIP AND society. Christ came from the
height of glory to woo His Bride. V. WHEN A BRIDEGROOM GOES TO COURT HIS
BRIDE, HE NATURALLY ASKS HER IF HER AFFECTIONS ARE DISENGAGED ; and if they are
engaged to one unworthy of her, warns her of the consequences. So Christ
implores His Church to disengage herself from the world. VI. THE BRIDEGROOM
USES ARGUMENTS TO INDUCE THE BRIDE TO ACCEPT HIS OFFERS. So our Lord tells His
bride of the dowry wherewith He will enrich her, and the heaven He will make her
home, VII. THE BRIDEGROOM WILL WAIT LONG BEFORE HE GIVES OVER. Christ stands
at the door and knocks. VIII. THE TRUE BRIDEGROOM SEEKS THE BRIDE NOT FOR HER
PORTION, BUT HERSELF. This must be the case with Christ; for our very righteous-
ness is but as filthy rags. IX. Ir REPULSED, THE BRIDEGROOM WILL USE VARIOUS
PLANS AND MEANS TO INDUCE HIS DESIRED BRIDE TO COMPLY WITH HIS REQUEST. 1.He
will employ friends, as Christ does His ministers. 2. He will send letters full of
persuasive reasoning. Christ sends His gospels. 3. He will send love tokens.
Christ has given us Baptism and the Lord’s Supper. In conclusion : notice some
points of difference between an earthly and the heavenly bridegroom. 1. In this
world there is much of self to determine the choice of a man—to render life more
happy, &c. But Christ was wholly disinterested. 2. In this world, when a bride-
groom has found his bride, he cannot add one feature to her beauty or accomplish-
ments; but Christ, when He takes His bride, adds to her all the glories of heaven,
while He removes from her all traces of earth. 3. In this world the love of the
bridegroom, who is most affectionate at first, may cool by years. Christ ‘ having
loved His own, loves them unto the end.” Mark, then (1) The debt of gratitude
we owe to Christ. (2) The great guilt and ingratitude of rejecting the offers of the
heavenly bridegroom. (J. Cumming, D.D.) The Bridegroom and the Bride:—
I. THe privitecE or Curist. Christ,as is proper to Him, is the Head and Husband
of the Church. A bride hath but one bridegroom ; a wife but one husband (Eph.
v. 23; Col. i, 18; Hoseai. 11). Christ has this right by virtue of redemption. As
the Israelites had a right to marry their redeemed captives (Deut. xxi.), so Christ,
having redeemed us from the law (Rom. vii.), hath thereby a right to espouse us
to Himself. II, Tue paivizece oF tur Cuurcu. The union between Christ and
the Church is not imaginary, but real (Gen. ii, 23, 24, cf. Eph. v. 30-32). And,
therefore, as in marriage, to show the nearness of it, the name of the husband
is given to the wife (Isa. iv. 1), so the name of Christ is given to the Church
(1 Cor. xii. 12), III. Tam rurraer oprnine or THIs pocrring. 1, How this contract
and marriage is made up, By the mutual consent of both parties (1) Christ gives
His consent, (a) By so securing our nature that there might be congruity and
correspondence (Heb. ii. 11). (2) By giving us His Spirit, which is His love token
(Eph. i. 14; 1 John iii, 24), (3) The Church gives her assent by faith; the hand
whereby we wed and handfast ourselves to Him. 2. The dowry and jointure—* All
things” (1 Cor. iii. 21-23 ; Eph. v. 30; Rom. viii. 32). Whatsoever the husband
hath the wife hath. (1) His own righteousness. We, who have no righteousness
of our own, being married to Christ, shine with His beams (1 Cor. i. 30; Ezek,
xvi. 8, 9: Rev. xix. 7, 8). (2) The graces of sanctification (1 Cor. i. 30; John i. 16;
Ezek. xvi. 9-13). Herein Christ goes beyond earthly bridegrooms, who cannot im.
part their beauty to their brides (Ezek. xvi. 14). (3) Acceptance of our services
(Isa. Ixii. 5). (4) Comfort in our infirmities. (5) Access to Christ. (6) Heaven


a, edhe» Fh


i oo 54,


a a i iN i a


onap, 111, ] ST. JOHN. 279
itself (Psa. xlv. 15; Rev. xxi. 9-11 ; Hosea ii. 19). 3. The duties of the bride. (1)
Thankfulness to Christ for so great honour and love(1 Sam. xviii. 18: Psa. xlv. 10;
Ezek. xvi. 3). (2) Constant and faithful love to cleave to Him with all our hearts.
(a) Forsaking Him not in any afflictions. (b) Admitting no strange love. (3)
Answerable carriage (1 Pet. iii. 3, 4). (4) Longing for the marriage day (Rev.
xxii. 17). (5) Always preparing for the marriage. IV. THe MINISTERS PRIVILEGE
AND Dury. 1. To offer and persuade the marriage to the Church. 2. To
fit and prepare the Church for Christ (2 Cor. xi. 2). 3. To hold fast the Church
to Christ, being jealous over her for Christ’s sake (2 Cor. xi. 2, 3). 4. If the
Church break her marriage covenant, to labour to reduce her affections again to
Christ (Jer. iii. 1). 5. To rejoice to hear the bridegroom’s voice, and to make
way for Him. (J. Dyke.) The royal espousals:—I. THE sPoUSE IS CHRIST.
Il. Tue weptocx is faith. III. Tae pvace oF THe weptock is the Church. IV. Tue
PLEDGE of it remission of sins, and the fellowship of the Spirit. V. THe con-
summation—eternal life. The joy of the bride :—I. THE panties sPoKEN oF. 1. The
bride—the Church (Rev. xxi. 2; Hosea ii. 19; Song of Solomon iv. 9). (1) She is
not well born, but of the fallen and guilty family ofAdam, (2) Notrich. No tempting
dowry does she bring. She owes ten thousand talents, and he who takes her must
answer for all she owes. 2. The Bridegroom—Christ Jesus (2 Cor. xi. 2; Matt.
xxv. 1; Song of Solomon passim). (1) He is of exalted rank. A king’s son: Prince
of the kings of the earth: “Thy Maker is thy husband (Isa. Ixii.5). (2) He is rich.
“Tt hath pleased the Father that in Him should all fulness dwell.” II. Tus
DOCTRINE concerning the parties spoken of—the bridegroom hath the bride. 1. By
destination. In some countries brides are betrothed as children: in this case the
bride was betrothed before she was born. Hence, the Son of God was glad when
the earth was made. He rejoiced over the spot which was to be the birthplace of
His spouse, to which He was to come in due time to seek her, and whisper the
astonishing avowal, “I have loved thee with an everlasting love.”’ This marriage,
at any rate, was “ made in heaven.” 2. By His own choice. A bride by destination is
not always the bridegroom’s choice. King’s sons are often obliged to marry against
their choice. A bride by destination merely may, therefore, well have misgivings.
But here is no constraint on the bridegroom, ‘‘ The Lord hath chosen Zion.” 3. By
purchase. An eastern usage is for a bridegroom to pay a price for a bride, e.g.,
Jacob. So Christ purchased the Church. Dike Jacob, He became a willing servant.
The years of service for Rachel seemed unto Jacob but a few days for the love he
had to her. So Christ, for the joy that was set before Him, endured the Cross. By
the service of pain and death He bought His Church “‘with a price.” 4. By
preparation. Esther’s preparation lasted a year. So with the Daughter of Zion.
The grace of the Holy Spirit is the oil of myrrh, &c., by which she is purified, and
becomes beautiful. This preparation is by the bridegroom as well asfor Him. His
the fountain that washes every stain, and the clothing of wrought gold. By Him
she is sanctified that He may present her unto Himself a glorious Church. 5. By


mutual contract. When the day of espousals, the day of conversion comes, it is a


day of secret interchanges of love never to be forgotten. What are the stipu-
lations? (1) On the bride’s part: To renounce and reject all Christ’s rivals, sin,
the world, and the flesh, and to love Him with her undivided heart. (2) On the
Bridegroom’s part. (a) He endows her with all He is and has, (0) He engages to
visit her, and it is no fault of His if He is not at her side at all times. (c) He en-
gages to provide for all her wants. (a) He engages to defend her. (e) He engages
to take her home with Him for ever in the many mansions of His Father’s house.
(Andrew Grey.) The friend of the bridegroom :—No simile could have been more
beautiful and true. In the drama of Syrian love and marriage, the friend of the
bridegroom plays a conspicuous part, doing kindly, unselfish service ; yet earning
no other reward than that of feeling how much he has added to the happiness of a
men whom he loves. Sometimes this friend of the bridegroom has to select the
bride. At all times he has had to take the oaths of espousal, and to present the
mchar, the bridal gift. For the virgin’s year, separating the act of betrothal from
that of the bringing home, he is the only messenger between youth and maid.
With many a laugh and jest, with many a sign and token, he had to pass from the
unknown husband to the unknown wife; watching over their common rights, and
feeding with his praises their mutual love; for during that virgin’s year, the
husband, though he may possess much of a husband’s power, and may even put
his wife to death for wrongs against his bed, is never allowed to see her face. His
married joy and sorrow come to him only through his chosen friend. Until the day


ei
aA 4


280 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cuaP. m1


of bringing home, when the veil of the bride is to be lifted up, and with a ery of
rapture the husband is allowed to gaze into her eyes and kiss her on the mouth,
the function of the bridegroom’s friend knows no pause. Then the bridegroom’s
heart is glad, and the friend rejoices when he hears the bridegroom’s voice.
(Dizon's “* Holy Land,’’) The friend of the bridegroom :—John was fitly called a
friend to this Kingly Bridegroom for four reasons. First, ex castitate, for his
chastity (See Prov. xxii. 11). John was so ‘pure in heart,” and “gracious in
speech,” that he had the love of the Bridegroom Christ, though, for the same cause,
he felt the wrath of the adulterer Herod. Secondly, ex militudine morum. Likeness
of manners makes friendship. They were £0 like, that they were often taken for
one the other. They were both valde humiles, very humble (comp. Psa. xxii. 7,
with St. John i, 23), yet a “worm” hath some substance; ‘a voice” is in a
manner nothing. ‘Thirdly, they were friends ex similitudine voluntatis ; they both
willed the same thing (comp. S. Mark i. 15, with St. Matt. iii, 2, and St. Mark
x. 19, with St. Luke iii, 13, 14). Their faces looked one towards another
(Exod. xxv. 20), and they embraced each other with their wings; and John
ears ante faciem) looked with joy on the face of the great Angel, embracing His

octrine, and agreeing with Him inall things. Fourthly, He was the Bridegroom’s
friend ex-officio, by his place: for as the Paranymphus (so the fathers call John)
prepares the bride, with all fitting instruction and ornament, against her spouse
come to marry her, so John came to instruct, adorn, and fit the Church for the
receiving of her Living Spouse, Christ Jesus. (W. Austin.) Christ the bride-
groom announced by prophecy :—Such a Bridegroom all the prophets had, in one
form of speech or another, been discoursing of. They had proved that they were
dealing in no metaphors—pouring out no Oriental rhapsodies ; for their revelation
of Him had been connected with the homeliest exhortations to domestic union and
purity ; they had affirmed the relation of the particular husband and wife to have
its foundation in this higher relation; they had treated all branches of the marriage
vow as indications and results of the adultery of the race to its unseen husband.
And though the race meant in their minds Israel, the people whom God had
chosen, and with whom He had made a covenant, yet their language was always
too large for their limitations, When the King, who was to reign over the Gentiles,
should be revealed as the glory of His people Israel, He would certainly be revealed
as the Light to lighten all the nations; i.e., whensoever He appeared as the Christ
of God, He would certainly appear as the Bridegroom of humanity. (F. D.
Maurice, M.A.) Christ the Bridegroom :—As a man leaves his father and mother
that he may join himself to his wife, so Christ surrenders His heaveuly glory that
He may become one flesh with His Church: He did it when He became flesh, and
He does it still in the Lord’s Supper, until He comes fully to satisfy the bride’s
longing for Him. Oh, what will it be when on that day the cry is made: ‘* Behold,
the Bridegroom cometh!” (R. Besser, D.D.) The love of Christ in espousing the
Church :—It magnifies the pure and endless love of Christ towards His Church,
that He should so love us, as to make us His beloved spouse. Men marry
commonly either for beauty, or person, or wealth, or parentage, Beauty often
sways men’s affections, where nought else. And where beauty and person are
wanting, yet wealth and riches will mend all. Yet where all these are wanting, yet
sometimes good manners, education, nature, and grace are means to make women
gracious in men’s eyes, and these are spokesmen to woo for them. All these, or
some of these, commonly are the cement of men’s affections. But, behold, Christ’s
love is pure love; we had nothing in us to move Him, or win or woo Him, neither
person, parts, portion, beauty or grace in us to draw His affections (Hos. ii. 19).
His own mercy was our spokesman; His compassion of our woe wooed for us. Not
our parentage (Iizek. xvi. 3), not our wealth or credit (Ezek. xvi. 5), not our beauty
See what goodly fair pieces we were (Ezek. xvi. 6). In every one argument of
loathing, and cause of distaste. He loved not us because we loved Him first, for
we hated Him: not for our portion, for we were miserable, and poor, and naked
(Rev. iii). Not for our beauty (Rev. iii, 17; Ezek. xvi. 7). (J. Dyke.) The
purpose of being :—1, Every man has his own life-work as truly as the Baptist
had his. 2. The importance of knowing what this is is obvious. 3, Thig
moreover, is (1) ascertainable—by Divine direction. (2) Accomplishable—by
Divine help. (3) Blessed. By fulfilling the purpose of our being we shall
realize—I. THE Joy OF HAVING DONE SOME TRUE THING. Our sleep is more restful
after a day of worthy toil. The man who works apart from the Divine plan
does nothing satisfactory or satisfying. Ou» Master found work most joyous—


;
j
E


CHAP. III.] ST. JOHN. 281


‘My meat is to do,” &c. II. Tue Joy oF HAVING DONE OUR OWN WoRK. — There is
blessedness in knowing that we are filling the place appointed by God, however
lowly (Gal. vi. 4). III. Tur soy-or ANTICIPATING OUR REWARD. Much of this is reaped
in this world, but most is ‘‘reserved in heaven” for those who are faithful on earth.
IY. THE JOY OF WITNESSING THE INFLUENCE OF OUR Work, in the comfort of the
sorrowful, the strengthening of the weak, the saving of the lost. V. THs Joy or
HAVING DONE SOMETHING IN WORKING OUT THE PLAN OF Gop. ‘That plan, the restora-
tion of fallen humanity, seems far too magnificent for us to take any part in it.
Yet this is, and will through eternity be, the Christian worker’s joy. (W. Jones.)
John’s joy at His Master’s increase :—Envy is a pain and torment in the heart at
the sight of superior excellence and happiness. It ismost dangerous. ‘ For envy”
our Master was delivered up. We find it among good people. The disciples of
John were envious for their Master. We are to guard against this and subdue it,
and are incited thereto by the noble example of the Baptist. I. War arg wE To
UNDERSTAND WHEN JOHN says, “He must IncREASE.” 1. That He would increase
in the esteem and affection of all who knew Him. 2. That Hé would increase in
the number of His followers and the extent of His empire. 3. That the happiness
of Christ’s subjects would increase. IJ. By WHAT MEANS ARE THE INTERESTS OF CHRIST
anp His KIncpom PRoMorED. 1. By the diffusion of knowledge. 2. By the preach-
ing of the gospel. 3. By the influences of the Holy Spirit. III. How po we Know
THAT He must 1NcREASE? 1. Because of the natural tendency of religion itself. 2.
Because of the zealous efforts of Christ’s people. 38. Because the Lord has said it.
IV. How 1s THE PROSPECT OF THE INCREASE OF CHRIST’S KINGDOM A SOURCE OF JOY.
1. Satan does not rojoice, nor infidels, wicked men, nor even nominal professors,
It affords true joy however to—2. All who are become true converts of Christ, 3.
All God’s people. 4. All Christ’s ministers. 5. The angels of God. 6. Jesus
Himself. Conclusion: 1. A word to all enemies of Christ—you cannot oppose Christ
with success, and without injury. 2. A word to the friends of Christ—how en-
couraging to know that we follow a Captain who shall not fail nor be discouraged.
3. A word to ministers—(1) Young ministers—you must increase, safely, humbly,
universally, unostentatiously. (2) Fathers—you must decrease. Learn this lesson
go as to profit by it, and be encouraged to know that our work will not fail when we
do. (John Stephens.)


Ver. 30. He must increase, but I must decrease. I. Joun’s MacNnanimity. His
character was here put to the proof—1. For it is natural to envy the growing repu-
tation of others, and to be jealous when it seems likely to trench upon our own.
We speak, and justly, of this as littleness of mind ; but it belongs to most, if not to
all; and he wins a fine triumph who can be contented, provided that the cause of
God be advanced. In God’s service, by its very nature, God’s glory, and not per-
sonal distinction and aggrandisement, is the thing aimed at; and there is therefore
ground for expecting, if this end is reached, there will be gladness in all Christians,
whoever may be the honoured agent. Alas, for the infirmity of human nature!
9. It is here that St. John’s character is displayed under its most striking aspect.
We can admire him as he lives a severe life in the desert, and as he stands before
Herod; but nowhere does he appear so transcendently great as here. II. Tur
TRUTHS WHICH JOHN INTENDED To convey, 1. The temporary character of his own
mission, and the enduring character of Christ’s. He well knew that he had not
taught the truths that were to be revealed under the new dispensation; that his
baptism had been but introductory ; that the mortification of the flesh and the
performance of certain duties which he had urged could not secure men from
wrath ; and that, consequently, unless he were to be followed by one charged with a
clear message of mercy, his own would be fruitless and leave the world where he
found it. And, therefore, it was far from his wish that he should not be displaced
by Christ. It was his glory to feel that when the Sun of Righteousness, to which
he had served as the morning star, should arise, he himself would decline and sink
out of sight. 2. Personal religion: what it is, and how alone it can flourish. The
Gospel is a system, constructed on purpose to abase the sinner and exalt the
Saviour. The glories of Christ are discerned in the same degree as our own vile-
ness and depravity. John’s confession is what every true Christian must say. The
sufficiency of Christ’s sacrifice, the cleansing power of His blood, the prevalence of
His intercession—these must be increasingly recognized. Though He cannot
become greater in Himself, He must become greater in our esteem. 3. The words
are prophetic, He echoed the prediction of Isaiah : ‘‘ Of the increase of His govern-


282 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP. IIL
eS re ee
ment there shall be no end.” Here we launch on an ocean without a shore’
(H. Melville, B.D.) The servant and the Son:—I. THE UNCONSCIOUS GREATNESS
oF THE SERVANT. 1. His lofty contentment (ver. 27, cf. 1 Chron. xxix. 14; Psa,
xxix. 1,2; Dan. iv. 35; Acts. xvii. 26) a maxim of universal application, in the
realm of nature (Rom. xi. 36) and in the sphere of grace (1 Cor. iv. 7; xii. 6; James
i. 17); specially significant with reference to individual success, in the world (Psa.
lvii. 2), in the Church (2 Cor. iii. 5). Christ’s popularity, so far from exciting John
to jealousy, filled him with holy peace; exhibiting the spirit afterwards exemplified
by Christ (Matt. xi. 26; xxvi. 39) and by Paul (Acts xxi. 14). 2. His profound
humility (ver. 28). This man, who was in danger of being mistaken for the Messiah,
and whom Christ pronounces the greatest of men, forms the most lowly estimate of
himself throughout, in chap. i. as here. 3. His absolute unselfishness (ver. 29).
Had he been inflamed with ambition, he could have played the réle of a Messianic
pretender, and snatched a crown; or have founded a rabbinical school; or at least
drawn around him an independent gathering. Instead of this, the end of his
aspiration and effort was to espouse the nation to its Lover, and then stand aside.
John pleased not himself, but lived for his Lord. 4. His cheerful resignation (ver.
30). This was just what he desired, for what he had lived ; he could, therefore,
view Christ’s popularity and his own supercession with delight. II. THe tTrRan-
SCENDENT GLORY OF THE Son (ver. 31-36). 1. His pre-existent Being. The historical
appearing cannot be explained on natural principles. 2. His universal sovereignty
‘“‘ above all ’’—uall persons, all things—in the dignity of His person, the elevation of
His character, the vastness of His power, the absoluteness of His anthority and
sway. They are His creatures, for He made them (chap. i. 3,10; 1 Cor. viii. 6;
Eph. iii. 9; Col. i. 16,17; Heb. i. 2); His property (ver. 35); His subjects (Psa.
vili. 6; 1 Cor. xv. 24-28; Eph. i. 22; Heb. ii. 8). 3. His aUTHORITATIVE TESTI-
mony. John exhibits this as resting on three things, which mark him off from
ordinary witness bearers: (1) A direct vision of the truth (ver. 32). (2) A special
commission to reveal the truth (ver. 34). (3) A complete impartation to Him of
the truth (ver. 34). 4. His supreme Divinity, implied in what has already been
said and in His Sonship. 5. His twofold work. (1) Salvation. (2) Condemna.-
tion. Lessons: 1. The secret of true greatness: humility before Christ. 2. The
insignificance of human glory compared with that of Christ. 3. The dignity of
ministerial service: that of acting as Christ’s friend. 4. The pathway to renown :
to efface one’s self for the sake of Christ. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) The increase of
Christ :—I. Wuy Do WE, IN THE FACE OF UNBELIEF AND ADVERSE CRITICISM, ENDORSE
THE ASSERTION THAT CHRIST MUST INCREASE? 1. Because this is the design of God
the Father. He has commissioned His Son to destroy the works of the devil, and
to fill the world with His glory (Isa. ix. 7; Psa. ii. 7,8; Phil. ii. 10). Failure in
this is impossible. For what Divine design has failed? (1) When our first parents
sinned, He promised a Deliverer. Let the manger, the cross, and the open tomb
say whether He failed. (2) Did He fail when He threatened the Flood? (3) Did
He fail to give Canaan to Abraham’s seed, although Egypt and five centuries lay
between the promise and the fulfilment? 2. Because the forces employed are
adequate. (1) Love. To what is not human love, imperfect as it is not equal?
But this force is the love of God, making, redeeming, and preparing heaven for
man. (2) The Holy Spirit, who has power to convert every sinner upon earth. 3.
The Holy Scriptures. Ask Mohammedanism why it fears the Bible? Because the
Koran, when it comes in contact with it, loses its power. Ask Romanism. Because
the power of priestcraft dies in its presence, and the chains of superstition are
sundered, Is the Bible a power? Ask the fires in which its enemies have endea-
voured to burn it. While the writings of Porphyry, Julian, Hume, Voltaire, are
lost or forgotten, where is the Bible? Wherever there is light. These, with their
adjuncts, are adequate to the consummation of the text. II. Wuar bors ruars
INCREASE MEAN? 1, Individual felicity, Hixamine the experience of all who have
fully embraced Christ. With this increase the circle of those enjoying happiness
will extend. 2. Social elevation. The increase of Christ subdues the savage in
man’s breast, make marriage honourable, child-life happy, elevates woman, liberates
the slave, provides refuges for the homeless, &c. 8. National advancement. Look
at once famous empires, and compare them with the condition of countries in which
Christ has increase. III. How 1s rH1s INCREASE To BE SECURED? 1. By individual
effort and influence (chap. i. 40-51). One of the conditions of Christ’s increase in
the heart is to contribute to His increase in the world. 2. By organised advance
upon the strongholds of darkness. (A. B, Chambers, LL.B.) John was one of


wah of aie


omar. nr.] ST. JOHN. 283


God’s nobility. Christ was deeply impressed with his intellectual, moral, and even
professional greatness. The commanding proof of this is his state of heart and his
conduct relative to the Messiah. The popularity of Jesus perplexed and annoyed
John’s disciples, but it made him profoundly glad. As a friend of the Bridegroom,
the Bridegroom’s voice was to him the sweetest music. I. “I must pEcRrEASE.”
John was not thinking of himself—1. As subject to the law of decay and death.
We are all subject to that, good and bad; and in the article of tenporal death there
was no difference between John and Jesus. 2. As an immortal being. His path
shone more and more unto the perfect day. We can put no limit to the growth of
holy intelligencies. 3. As being held in lesser esteem in the future. He is thought
as highly of now as he was then; and the Master passed upon him the highest
eulogium, and this Christians accept. 4. But that his authority and influence as
the forerunner, or a religious reformer, would of necessity be taken up and absorbed
by the higher authority and influence of the Messiah. After Christ’s entrance,
there was nothing for John but to point to him. ‘Behold the Lamb of God” now
took the place of ‘ Repent.” Christ’s rise was unavoidably John’s fall; and to no
one was it clearer or more welcome than John. It would have been a serious thing
for John as a sinner and as a forerunner had this not been the case. But his
influence was only relatively lost as a river flowing into the sea. II. “He must
INCREASE.” About this there is a glorious indefiniteness. John did not go into
details as to the amount and manner. All he says is that it was a moral necessity.
1. When we take to account the marvellous progress already made, we can see
that ‘‘ Christ shall see the travail of his soul,’ &c. Ths leaven must go working
on. The issue of the great contest between Christ and Satan is not uncertain.
“He must reign,” &c. 2. Some Christians cannot see this as they look on hin-
drances, corrupt institutions, depraved customs, false systems, inert and incon-
sistent Christians; but Christ must increase. 3. Not that God will ever compel
men. All that the Gospel wants is a fair chance; and this it will eventually
secure for itself. 4. The advance of Christianity is undoubted, although it has
receded in certain places. 5. The real progress is much greater than the seeming
progress. The atmosphere of certain countries has become impregnated with
Christian elements, and their inhabitants cannot help breathing it. 6. Humanity
needs Christ, and Christ is adapted to humanity. So much so, that the two
must coalesce. A strong confirmation of the Baptist’s saying. (G. Cross.) The
increase of Christ:—I. AN IRREFRAGABLE TRUTH. 1. That Christ must still
increase would appear probable even though we had no express assurances of 1b.
(1) God has abolished a partial dispensation and established one suitable to all
mankind. (2) Christ has made by His atonement a satisfaction for the sins of all.
(3) Therefore we naturally believe and hope and desire that the tidings of salvation
will be carried to all for whom He was given. 2. But we have stronger grounds—
the plain and. unequivocal promises of God—and are therefore firmly persuaded.
Listen to David (Psa. xxii. 27, lxxii. 8, 11, Ixxxvi. 9). To Isaiah (ii. 2, xi. 5; xl. oe
To Daniel (vii. 18, 14, 27). To Malachi (i. 11). To John (Rev. xiv. 6, xi. 15).
3. Can these promises fail? If so; owing to what? Want of wisdom? Want of
power? Want of faithfulness? (Num, xxiii. 19). 4, Resting, then, on the promises
of a God omniscient, almighty, faithful, the Church may bid defiance to all her
enemies (Isa. viii. 9,10). II. AS a SOURCE OF CONSOLATION. 1, Can a man inflamed
with love to God fail to be grieved as he views the idolatry of the heathen and. the
sins of nominal Christendom? His mind can find no rest but in the assurance of
the increase of Christ. 2. This truth is no less effectual to heal those wounds
which proceed from love to the Saviour as it contemplates His present wide-spread
rejection. 3, The lover of mankind is comforted by the thought that the increase of
Christ will exterminate the rampant miseries over which he groans. TTT
DIRECTORY oF DUTY. 1. Weshould pray earnestly. 2. Labour diligently. 3. Give
liberally. (EZ. D. Griffin, D.D.) The increase of Christ:—I. Tue ULTIMATE
CONVERSION OF THE WORLD TO CHRIST IS A MATTER OF INDUBITABLE CERTAINTY.
1. Many things render this probable. (1) The introduction of a system adapted to
the wants of the whole race. (2). The known kindness of Jehovah, (3) The
amazing apparatus of the Gospel. 2. The prophecies render it certain. II. Tus
GREAT MORAL REVOLUTION WILL BE ACCOMPLISHED BY ORDINARY MEANS OF HUMAN
INSTRUMENTALITY UNDER THE BLESSING OF THE DIVINE Sprrit. 1. Not by miracles.
2. Not by a Millennial dispensation. 3. But by the preaching of the gospel.
III, AMONG THE MEANS MISSIONARY SOCIETIES HOLD A HIGH AND DISTINGUISHED
pLAcE—-not excluding individual efforts. (J. 4. James.) Spiritual increase :—


2. at a Sead Se


284 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [OHAP, Im.


I. This is true of Curist Hutsenr—take His miracles, e.g.—beginning with water
turned into wine and culminating at the Resurrection. II. This is true of His
Cuurcu. At first a few persons meeting in an upper room, now in millions and still
there is room. Increase will be promoted by—1l. Preaching. 2. A good example,
3. Prayer, III. This is true of Curisrians. We must grow in grace. (H.J. W.
Buxton, M.A.) Great workers must be content to die and be replaced by others :—
It is a humbling lesson to human vanity and tends to check the growth of self-
importance to consider how well the world will go on when we are laid in the
dust and no longer partake in the direction of its affairs. Leaves fall in autumn!
trees are felled in the spring! but the next vernal season renews the foliage. Another
age replaces the veteran oak removed by the axe or the tempest, and the forest still
presents its broad expanse and deep shade to the eye of the traveller. So'it is with
the Church of God. Its members and its ministers die; but others are baptised
for the dead and fill up their vacant seats in the spiritual house. (J. A. James.)
John here figures himself by the moon, whose light wanes and decreases when the
month is drawing to a close, and when the morning light of the sun begins to break
forth; and he figures Jesus Christ by the sun, which is to eclipse and destroy his
brightness. John the Baptist, the witness of Jesus Christ, is justly figured by the
moon, which is called the faithful witness in heaven; being the witness to the sun’s
existence, and of his future coming, whereas it is not yet seen, because it shines by
a borrowed light, and except for the sun’s existence and original light, it would not
itself shine, and would be as nothing. So when, and as soon as the day begins to
spring, the light of the moon fades and is invisible, and all eyes which were turned
to it, and delighted in it, are now at once turned to the sun itself, as all men now
came to Christ to be baptized, who before delighted and were satisfied to be baptized
with John’s baptism. (S. R. Bosanquet.) . Opinions of self :—Opinion of our-
selves is like the casting of a shadow, which is always longest when the sun is at
the greatest distance; but by the degrees that the sun approaches the shadow still
shortens, and under the direct meridian light it becomes none at all; it is so with
our opinion of ourselves: whilst the good influences of God are the greatest
distance from us, it is then always that we conceive best of ourselves; but still, as
God approaches, the conceit lessens; till such time as we receive the fuller
measures of His graces; and then we become absolutely voided, pure nothing in
our own conceit, and God appears to be (as really He is) ‘Allin all.” (Dean Young.)
Self abnegation:—Mr. Durham, a father of the Scottish Church was walking one
Sabbath to his place of worship with a much admired young minister who was to
officiate in one adjoining. Multitudes were thronging into the one, and only a few
into the other. ‘ Brother,” said he to his young friend, ‘‘ you will have a crowded
church to-day.” ‘ Truly,” said the other, ‘ they are greatly to blame who leave you
and come tome.” ‘Not so, dear brother,” replied Mr, Durham; “for a minister can
receive no such honour and success in his ministry except it be given him from
heaven. I rejoice that Christ is preached, and that His kingdom and interests are
gaining ground, though my estimation in people’s hearts should decrease; for I am
content to be anything, so that Christ may be all in all.” (W. Baxendale.)
The certain increase of the glory and kingdom of Jesus :—I: Ir 18 PROPOSED TO coN-
SIDER THE NATURE OF THAT INCREASE, WHICH THE Baprist CONFIDENTLY EXPECTED
SHOULD ATTEND HIS BLESSED Lorp. 1. It was announced, that ‘* He must increase”:
and, lo! in the midst of poverty and reproach, of apparent weakness, and of cruel
sufferings, Jesus exhibited an increasing display of Godlike fortitude and resolution ;
of spotless purity and rectitude; of infinite zeal for His Father’s honour; and of
the riches of grace and compassion for wretched ruined man. 2. On these transac.
tions all the future increase of His kingdom absolutely depended. But now the
purchase of redemption has been completed, what shall prevent the Saviour from
receiving His full reward (John xii. 23, 24)? 3. Well, then, might John the
Baptist. affirm, “* He must increase,’ when he foresaw that Hig shameful death
would be followed by so glorious a resurrection. 4. And how much more did the
transactions of Pentecost justify this blessed prediction. II, Ler me PRocrEp To
LAY BEFORE YOU SOME CONSIDERATIONS WHICH MAY CONFIRM OUR FAITH IN THE AS-
SURED EXPECTATION THAT He must incREASE. 1. Because He is the Son of God, in
the highest and most absolute sense, and therefore heir of all things. 2. We are
persuaded, therefore, that He must increase, because He hath all power to over-
come every enemy that opposeth His blessed reign. 8. He must increase, for the
decrees of heaven ascertain the great event. 4. A great part of Scripture ‘consists
of promises of the increase of the Messiah’s kingdum, and it is evident that the


OHAP. r11.] ST. JOHN. 285


season of their chief accomplishment is yet future (see Isa. xl., Ix.). 5. We
conclude that Jesus must increase, since this world and all others were ‘‘ made by
Him, and for Him.” (J. Ryland, D.D.) Christ's increase, and our decrease :—
I. “ He must increase.” In one sense the words do not apply. The Saviouris God,
very God of very God, and there can be no increase to that which is already infinite.
He is also perfect man, without spot or imperfection, but it was in His office of
Mediator, and in the glories of His mediatorial kingdom, that the Saviour was
capable of increase. The greatness and glory of His work was to be manifested ;
the love which promoted, and the wisdom which carried out, the wondrous plan of
salvation, were to be revealed, and fresh conquests to be achieved. Through faith
in a crucified, yet risen and ascended Saviour, His people also shall prevail, yea,
and be made more than conquerors through Him that loved them; and then as
one nation after another has been brought into professed subjection to Christ, and
as soul after soul has been rescued from Satan and brought into the glorious
liberty of the children of God, we see the fulfilment of the words, ‘‘ He must in-
crease.” II. “I must DECREASE.” We have already noticed, that in a high and
important sense, the increase of Christ is the increase of His people—they are con-
cerned in the triumphs of His grace, and are to share His glory. But there is also
a sense in which the believer in Christ, who is rejoicing in his Lord, and in the
full salvation he has secured, can join in these words of the Baptist, ‘1 muss
decrease.” Yes, there is the carnal self, that which is of the earth, earthy—the
old man, the oid nature—which still retains so much of power, even in the regene
rate, that which the believer desires daily to crucify, the flesh with its affections
and lusts. All this is to decrease, and finally—although not entirely until he has
put off the body of this death—to disappear. Surely we greatly need to decrease in
self-esteem, in pride, in carnality, in all that tends to hinder us in our Christian
life, and bring dishonour on our Christian profession. We are to decrease in hav-
ing self as the all-engrossing object. New hopes and desires are to have fuller
power over us; the great motive of the love of Christ is to have its place, constrain-
ing, compelling, drawing. Opportunities of usefulness, and of actively working for
God, may also be diminished, and in failing strength and energies the Christian
reads the words, ‘I must decrease.” The work of Christ, indeed, will not suffer.
(J. H. Holford, M.A.)


Vers. 31-36. He that cometh from above is above all. Christ ‘above all” as a
Teacher :—I. In THE suBLIMITY or His ontem (ver. 1). All others, from Enoch to
Malachi were ‘of the earth.” II. In tHe cuaracTER or His bocrRINEs. What
does He teach? 1. The realities of which He Himself was conscious (ver. 2) and
not speculations. 2. Realities which were moral in their influence upon His hearers.
They were not compelled to receive them, so many rejected Him. But those who
believed Him had an assured consciousness that God was true (ver. 33). 3. Realities
which were pre-eminently Divine (ver. 34): not the sciences, but God Himself, the
Root and Branch, Centre and Circumference of all truth. III, IN THE AFFECTION
or His Fatuer (ver. 85). 1. No teacher shared so much of the Divine love as Christ.
The Father loveth all. AJ] true teachers may expect a special share of this affection.
But He loves Christ pre-eminently, and as He presents His Well-beloved He says,
‘Hear ye Him,’’ 2. No teacher deserved so much of the Divine love as Christ did.
He never offended the Father or misrepresented Him in doctrine or conduct.
3. No teacher ever had such demonstrations of Divine love as Christ. ‘ All things,”
the administration of all blessings and the authority over all souls. IV. In THE
EXTENT oF His ENDowMENTS (ver. 34). Other teachers had the Spirit in a limited
degree; Christ fully. This is clear from the fact that He knew what was in man,
and from His miracles. But He had more of the Spirit than the old prophets, as
is manifest by comparing—l. Their theology with His. 2. Their spirit with His.
3. Their lives with His. V. IN THE NecEssiTy or His MISSION. Faith in Him is
essential to man’s eternal welfare (ver. 36). 1. The faith He requires is faith in
Him: not merely in the facts of His history, or the truth of His prepositions, but
in Himself as the Son of God, the Saviour of the world. No other teacher ever
required this. To so trust the pest of them would be ruin. 2. Faith in Him
determines the destiny of the soul. (1) Those who believe in Him have now
everlasting life, (2) God’s wrath abides on the unbeliever. (D. Thomas, D.D.)
Christ is above all :—Cesar is not Cmsar still, nor Alexander Alexander still: but
Jesus is Jesus still, and shall be for ever. (). Donne.) Christ is God as well as
man :—We have seen a copy of the Gospels and Epistles which was warranted free


286 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cHar. Tif.
ON ee
from all trace of the Trinity, but it was not the testament of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ. We beheld it and we received instruction. It did not want
beauty, for the parables, and the Sermon on the Mount, and many a touching
passage were still there. It looked like a coronation tapestry with all the golden
threads torn out, or an exquisite mosaic from which some unscrupulous finger had
abstracted the gems and left only the common stones. It was a casket without the
pearl. It was a shrine without the Shekinah. And yet, after all, it was not
sufficiently expurgated; for, after reading it, the thought would recur, How much
easier to fabricate a Gnostic testament, exempt from all trace of our Lord’s
humanity, than a Trinitarian testament ignoring His Divinity. (J. Hamilton, D.D.)
An earthly mind :—As ducklings have always their bills in the mud, as swine are
ever recking in the mire; like that fish in the gospel, either dumb or with nothing
but money in their mouths, (J. Trapp.) Earthly mindedness :—It is storied of
Henry the Fourth of Frapce, asking the Duke of Alva if he had observed the
eclipses happening in that year? He answered, that he had so much business on
earth, that he had no leisure to look up toheaven. A sad thing itis for men to be so
bent, and their hearts so set on the things of this world, as not to cast up a look to
the things that are in heaven; nay, not to regard though God brings heaven down
to them in His Word and Sacraments. Yet so it is, most men are of this Spanish
general’s mind; witness the oxen, the farms, the pleasures, the profits and
preferments that men are so fast glued unto, that they have hardly leisure to
entertain a thought of any goodness. Christ’s testimony to be received :—
J, CHRIST'S UNIVERSAL SUPREMACY, WHICH EXCLUDES ALL COMPARISON WITH WHAT IS
EARTHLY (ver. 31). 1. Christ was from above. Thence He came to His own. Of
Him alone can this be asserted: a glory belonging to Him and not to another.
(1) He is pre-eminent; with reference to the whole creation, among all that are
illustrious in His Church, all His predecessors who are types of Him and all His
followers who are sent by Him. (2) He is invested with universal dominion.
(3) John speaks of what He is, not has been or will be, merely. (4) It was true
therefore that Christ must increase. There could be no result but progress.
2. John was of the earth—(1) In His origin and condition, as were all His
predecessors and all His followers, partaking of weakness and imperfection.
(2) In His office and doctrine, receiving both as an earthly teacher, and inferior
therefore to Christ as earth was to heaven. 3. Let us be impressed—(1) With
Christ’s glory and yield the submission and obedience which are Hisdue. (2) With
the subordinate place occupied by His ministers yet rejoicing that He employs
them. II. TH DISTINCTIVE CHARACTER oF His TEACHING AND ITS GENERAL RESULT
(ver. 82). 1. Christ’s testimony is of what He has seen and heard (ver. 11).
It was direct without the intervention of a third party, as in the case of Moses
and the prophets. 2. The general result—(1) Not what might have been
expected, but, (2)—sadly true, then and now. III. THe rmporTANCE OF RECEIVING
His vrestrmony (ver. 33). 1. God thus submits Himself to the judgments of
men. They can have a full knowledge of His character in no other way.
He demands, therefore, that they shall consider the testimony thus uttered.
2. Those who receive Christ and His doctrine find that they have to do with a true
God. (A. Beith, D.D.) What He hath seen and heard that He testifieth.—John’s
last testimony to Christ :—I. Tux Divinrness or Curist’s TEsTIMony (ver. 82). II.
THE UNBELIEF WITH WHICH CHRIST’S TESTIMONY WAS RECEIVED (ver. 32). ‘All men
come to Him! Why no man believes Him!’’ The emotions aroused by John’s
preaching of repentance and the Lamb of God had passed off; for were not His
disciples setting Him up against His Lord? And it took Christ’s chosen ones three
years to receive it. How differently a man counts who loves and adores Jesus from
a mere hero worshipper. John would have not large crowds merely going after
Jesus, but genuine believers. II. Tum apprectarion OF THOSE WHO DID BELIEVE
IN ANY DEGREE (ver. 33), like Andrew and John (chap. i. 40). This is a fine and
simple account of faith in its nature. Some document is produced having legal
authority behind it. Those who, believing in the King as true, will sign their names
to it become entitled to certain privileges. Men go forward and append their
signatures, realizing in sc doing, “The privilege is mine.” But here is one who
cannot write, He goes forward, seal in hand, and stamps it down, which is as good
as signing. That is faith, stamping down one seal, with decisiveness, to that gospel
text, saying as we doit, “‘Thatis true.” IV. Tue Drvinenass or Curist’s TEACHING
REAFFIRMED (ver. 34). ‘‘ For” is emphatic. The reception and attestation of what
Jesus spake was the reception and attestation of what God spake. V. ANTICIPATION


Se ee


. oy


CHAP. 111.] ST. JOHN. 287


OF THE worps or Curist Himsenr (ver. 35; cf. Matt. xi. 27, xxviii. 18 ; Luke x.
22; Heb. ii. 8). VI. Wat on wor (ver. 36). 1. True faith is faith in the true
thing. ‘‘On the Son’’—atonement, resurrection, and glory were yet to come.
Christ Himself the object of faith. 2. The wrath of God cannot abide in a being
who has ceased to be. The Baptist warned men before to ‘‘ flee from the wrath to
come.” 3. Our relation or non-relation to Jesus Christ determines where we shall
spend our eternity. (A. B. Grosart, D.D.) Christ the Divine teacher :—We
notice the perfect originality and independence of His teaching. We have a great
many men who are original, in the sense of being originators, within a certain
boundary of educated thought. But the originality of Christ is uneducated. That
He draws nothing from the stores of learning can be seen at a glance. The
impression we have in reading His instructions justifies to the letter the language
of His contemporaries, when they say, ‘‘ This man hath never learned.” There is
nothing in any of His allusions or forms of speech that indicates learning. Indeed,
there is nothing in Him that belongs to His age or country—no one opinion, or task,
or prejudice. The attempts that have been made, in a way of establishing His
mere natural manhood, to show that He borrowed His sentiments from the Persians
and the Eastern forms of religion, or that He had been intimate with the Essenes,
and borrowed from them, or that He must have been acquainted with the schools
and religions of Egypt, deriving His doctrine from them—all attempts of the kind
having so palpably failed, as not even to require a deliberate answer. If He is
simply a man, as we hear, then He is most certainly a new and singular kind of
man, never before heard of ; one who visibly is quite as great a miracle in the world
as if He were nota man. Wecan see for ourselves, in the simple directness and
freedom of His teachings, that whatever He advances is for Himself. Shakespeare,
for instance, whom we name as being probably the most creative and original spirit
the world has ever produced, one of the class, too, that are called self-made men,
is yet tinged in all his works with human learning. His glory is, indeed, that so
much of what is great in history and historic character lives and appears in his
dramatic creations. He is the high-priest, we sometimes hear, of human nature.
But Christ, understanding human nature so as to address it more skilfully than he,
never draws from its historic treasures. He is the High Priest, rather, of the Divine
nature, speaking as one that has come out from God, and has nothing to borrow
from the world. It is not to be detected by any sign that the human sphere in
which He moved imparted anything to Him. His teachings are just as full of
Divine nature as Shakespeare’s of human. (H. Bushnell, D.D.) Why men refuse
Christ :—Among those who stay away from Christ, who will not believe in Him,
who will not come to Him, the motive of the chief part has ever been, that they
are destitute of the consciousness of sin, and of all thoughts and wishes rising
above the objects of the senses, or else that they love their sins, and are determined
to cleave to them, in despite of all that God can do to draw them away. Others
there are who will not believe in Christ through pride and self-righteousness.
Others have involved themselves inextricably in the labyrinthine abstractions of a
sceptical understanding. Some will say, in their high-swelling imaginations, that
they need no Redeemer, no Ransom, no Reconciler, no Atonement, no Pardon—
that they can find the way to God by themselves—that they can build up a tower
of their own virtues, a grand and gorgeous tower, virtue above virtue, the top of
which shall reach to heaven. Such men there have been more or less in all ages ;
and the way their devices have been baffled has ever been the same, by the confusion
of tongues, They have been unable to understand one another’s language. When
one of them has asked for bread, his neighbour has given him a stone; when asked
for a fish, he has given a serpent ; indifference and scorn, instead of sympathy and
encouragement. ‘Ihe hand of each has been against bis brother. _There has been
no unity of spirit amongst them, but variance and strife and railing: they have
never entered into the bond of peace. This is the other form of sin by which men
are kept away from Christ. The great mass stay away because their hearts are
paralyzed and crumbled by carelessness and self-indulgence, or rotted by the
eankering pleasures of sin; the few, because their hearts are hardened and stiffened
by pride. (Archdeacon Hare.) Many mey.are deaf to the charms of the gospel: —
A musical amateur of eminence, who had often observed Mr. Cadogan’s inattention
to his performances, said to him one day, “Come, I am determined to make you
feel the power of music; pay particular attention to this piece. » It was played.
“ Well, what do you say now?” “ Just what I said before.” | “What! can you
hear this and not be charmed? Iam surprised at your insensibility! Where are


288 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. 11.
PR a a
your ears?’’ “Bear with me, my lord,” replied Mr. Cadogan, ‘‘ since I too have
had my surprise; I have from the pulpit set before you the most striking and
affecting truths; I have found notes that might have awaked the dead; I have said,
Surely he will feel now; but you never seemed charmed with my music, though
infinitely more interesting than yours, I too might have said—‘ Where are his
ears?’” Few hearers saved :—Though a gun be discharged at a whole flight of
birds, there are but a few killed. Though the net be spread over the whole pond,
but a few fishes are taken: so most hearers do busy their heads with their own
sensual or worldly thoughts, and so escape the pain of the truth. (Train.) Christ
often refused :—It is said of Handel, the great musician, that while composing the
well-known oratorio of ‘‘ The Messiah,” he was frequently found in tears, and that
one day, while sobbing bitterly, it was found that the words which had broken down
his spirit were these thrce words of the prophet Isaiah, ‘‘He was despised.” And
yet this short saying wag abundantly fulfilled when Jesus came to show us His
great love. (R. Brewin.) The sureness of Christ’s testimony and its rejection :—
1. It is Christ’s prerogative to have the knowledge of Divine truths of Himself
from the Father, and to have all others who know anything beholden to His bounty
and illumination; for, His doctrine is, ‘‘ what He hath seen and heard,” in a way
peculiar to Him. 2. It sets out the bounty of Christ, that He doth not keep this
knowledge, but discovereth it, that so sinners may have a sure guide and teacher,
and the solemn testimony of an eye and ear witness, on which they may lean ; for,
“what He hath seen and heard, that He testifieth.” It is called a testifying both in
respect of the certainty of the matter, and in respect of Christ’s earnest persuading
of men to embrace it (Acts xviii. 5). 3. Christ’s gracious condescendence in
revealing the counsel of God concerning man’s salvation, gets but ill entertainment
in the world; the most part of men either not hearkening to Him, or not embracing
His offer with respect, affection or faith, for no man (that is, very few or none in
comparison of them who do otherwise, though some there are, ver. 33) receiveth
His testimony. Let them hear it as they will, yet they do not receive nor embrace
it as becometh; and therefore also it is called a testimony, as witnessing against
them, that they receive not so certain a truth. 4. It ought and will be matter of
regret to all the friends and servants of Christ, that His doctrine is so ill received
in the world; for, whereas John’s disciples complained (ver. 26) that all men came
to Christ, He seeth rather cause to complain that no man receiveth His testimony.
(G. Hutcheson.) To Jesus nothing seems more natural and familiar than the
heavenly state, when He discourses of it. It is like a prince, who having been
educated in a splendid court, could speak with ease of many magnificent things,
at the sudden view of which a peasant would be swallowed up in astonishment, and
would find himself greatly embarrassed in an attempt to explain them to his equals
at home. (Doddridge.) He that hath received His testimony hath set to his
seal that God is true.—The sealed testimony :—I. Tum Saviour’s TESTIMony (Isa. lv.
4, cf. John xviii. 37; Rev. i. 5). Christ came into the world when it was enveloped
in ignorance and begirt with the miasma of heathen superstitions and unconsecrated
philosophies. Even the Jewish Church had lost its glory and a wretched formalism
taken the place of spiritual religion. Christ came to give us a testimony which
should be all-sufficient in reference to the way of salvation. 1. Its nature. It
included—(1) The revelation of God (chap. i. 18). The knowledge of God was fast
perishing. The spirituality of His nature—the perfection of His attributes—the
sovereignty of His government—the boundless depths of His mercy, were rescued
from oblivion by Christ and received clearer light and richer illustration. His own
life was a revelation of God (chap. xiv. 9). (2) The true character of man. Here
all heathen sages had failed, They did not know man, his antecedents, require-
ments, capacities. Hence their specitics fell short of the occasion. Christ discovers
the heart of man to Himself (chap. ii. 25). (3) The exposition of the ancient
Scriptures, He constantly taught that His life and labours were the fulfilment of
prophecy. (4) Many sublime and precious subjects—the dispensation of the Spirit ;
the nature, worth, and reality of prayer; practical religion; future rewards and
punishments; the resurrection of the body. 2. Its manner. Note—(1) The
simplicity of His precepts. (2) The familiarity of His examples. (3) The expres-
siveness of His figures. (4) The grace of His method. (5) The gentleness of His
language. (6) The condescension of His temper. (7) His patience with the
ignorant. (8) His encouragement of the inquiring. (9) His comfort of the
sorrowful, II. THe RIGHT MODE OF ITS RECEPTION. 1. Divine truth demands
admittance into the heart. It first accosts the intellectual faculties, then accosts


CHAP. II1.} ST. JOHN. 289


the conscience, but completely triumphs only when it enters the holiest of all.
Human learning appeals only to the intelligence. Christ claims the heart. 2. Its
impartation proceeds directly from Christ (Gal. i. 12; John iv. 42; 2 Cor. x. 5).
The practical improvement of the process is that which makes us solicitous for
evidence of the work of God in the soul through the Spirit’s effectual conveyance
of the Word. 3. We should rejoice in its reception, because the deliverance it
works is so great, the blessings it imparts so vast, and the prospect it opens so
excellent. III. THe EFFECT ASCRIBED TO BELIEF IN 17. Just as unbelief ig an
imputation on the Divine veracity, so cordial, unprejudiced reception is a mark of
adoption into His family. It liberates a man from harassments and doubts, The
obedience of the heart leads after it conviction of mind (chap. vil. 17). The
believer can set his seal over against the promise and affirm that ‘ vot one thing
hath failed.” Many an ancient mark may be seen in the aged saint’s Bible showing
that the promise has been fulfilled. (W. G. Lewis.) The testimony and the seal :
—I. THE TRUE NOTION OF CHRIST’S DOCTRINE—IT IS A TESTIMONY. 1, The nature
of it, A testimony is a sort of proof necessary in matters that cannot otherwise
be decided by rational discourse. (1) In matters that depend upon the arbitrary
will of another. The gospel cannot be found out by the light of nature, but Christ,
who was in the bosom of the Father, knew His heart and hath given testimony
how it stands affected to the salvation of men (Matt. xi. 27, cf. John iii. 16).
Salvation proceedeth from the free motion of God’s will. (2) In matters of fact.
Matters of law are argued by reason, but matters of fact is only proved by credible
witnesses. In this sense the gospel is a testimony that Christ came into the world,
taught the way of salvation, died for our sins, and rose again to confirm all. The
apostles were witnesses of these things (Acts i. 21-22; ii. 32; x. 39). 2. The
value of Christ’s testimony which will appear if we consider—(1) The person
witnessing. He who was promised in paradise (Gen. iii. 15), shadowed in the
sacrifices of the law, and foretold by the prophets (chap. v. 39); He who was owned
of God by a voice from heaven (Matt. iii. 17, xvii. 5; John xii. 28); it is His
testimony whom God the Father hath sealed (chap. vi. 27); and to whom He has
given the Spirit without measure (ver. 34). (2) The testimony itself. (a) It is such
a testimony as men need. Men need a religion that will allay their fears and satisfy
their desires. The gospel provides pardon for sin and eternal peace and happiness.
(b) It has @ fair correspondency with the principles of reason. That there is a wise,
good, and powerful God; that men have sinned and become liable to punishment ;
that there are not hopes of freedom from this punishment but by satisfaction ; that
the universal soul must have higher and more abiding satisfactions than those
afforded by the world. (c) It has a convincing evidence in itself (2 Cor. iv. 2-4).
3. The use of it as atestimony. (1) To bless God that the way of enjoying Him is
not left to our uncertain guesses, but is made known in an authentic way by
Christ. (2) To show us with what success we may build upon the hopes of the
gospel ; it is God’s testimony (1 John v. 9). (3) Our danger is great if we disbelieve
and reject this testimony (Matt. xxiv. 14; ¢f. Mark xiii. 9). First, to them, then
against them. II. THe RESPECT THAT IS DUE TO THIS TESTIMONY. 1. Hear it or
regard it we must. For us to disregard it is the greatest affront that we can offer
God (Matt. xxii. 5). 2. Understand it we must, or we do not receive it. A man
must have it (chap. xiv. 21) in his judgment before he can keep it in his memory,
heart, and conscience. 3. We must firmly consent to and acquiesce in this testi-
mony (1 Tim. i. 15; John vi. 69, xvii. 8). 4. To embrace it with all affection
(Acts ii. 41). 5. To build our hope and confidence thereupon while we continue
with patience in well-doing (Psa. cxix. 166; Luke xviii. 15). IIL. He raat one
RECEIVETH DOTH RATIFY THE TRUTH oF Gop and solemnly bear witness to ie :
The manner of confirming. Doubtful things we do not confirm, but those things
of which we are assured (1 Kings xxi. 8; Neh. ix. 38; Esther viii. 8; Jer. oes
18). But how can we confirm the truth of God? God’s truth is the ge ae
needeth not our confirmation, but He will put this honour upon us that we shou
honour His truth by our subscription (Rom. iii. 4). Our senling 18 fs a Se
(1) To ourselves. To bind us more firmly to believe that doctrine and life Meat
ing to it which we have owned by our consent (Isa. xliv. 5; Psa. lxxxvil. 6). (2)
To others (Isa. xliii. 10). God’s people that have such proofs of His gone ee
providence are able to give sufficient testimony for Him, and others are an eras
in the faith of that which we attest when we live in holiness, patient and joy

i - e matter confirmed—that God is true. (1)
under the cross (1 Thess. 1.5-7). 2. The mé faacres to
God’s truth is a great prop of faith (Heb. -xi. 11). God can do anything, but ean-


- a


290 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaP. IIL
(ni iitanh ici atau SL Sa
not lie. (2) The honour of His veracity is most pleasing to God (Psa. exxxviil. 2),
just as men cannot endure the imputation of falsehood. (3) The setting to one’s
seal that God is true supposeth some precedent obligation. God is engaged by
promise to Christ that He will justify, sanctify, and glorify all those who believe in
Him (Isa. liii. 10,11), The soul that receiveth this testimony giveth it under hand
and seal that God is as good as His word. 8. The use is to persuade us to so
receive Christ’s testimony that we put to our seal that God is true. (1) From the
honour done to God. (2) The honour put upon us that we should confirm God's
promises, (3) The dishonour to God done by discrediting His word (1 John v. 10).
Conclusion : In this sealing there are many things implied that most people want.
1. Spiritual evidence (1 Cor. ii, 14; Eph. i. 17, 18). 2. Some experience of the
truth in comforting and changing the heart (1 John i. 1, 2). 3. Confidence in
temptations (Job xiii. 15). 4. Holiness (1 Thess. i, 5-7). (T. Manion, D.D.)
Christ’s testimony received :-—I. Tus TESTIMONY THAT HAS BEEN BORNE. 1. The
testimony borne to Christ antecedently to the completion of His work, (1) That of
prophecy. (2) That of the angels and the magi at the incarnation. (3) That of
Anna and Simeon in the temple. (4) That of the Father at the baptism. 2. The
testimony which Christ bore Himself. (1) As to the nature of His ministry. “‘ The
Spirit of the Lord God is upon Me,” &. ‘I am come not to be ministered
to,” &e. (2) To His Messiahship. “I and My Father are One.” ‘God 80
loved,” &c. (3) To His own purpose and plans. (4) To the everlasting awards.
(5) All the truth taught by Christ was on His part a witness. 3. The testimony
which came afterwards. (1) By angels again. (2) By the apostles. (3) By the
Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost. (4) By Paul. 4. Remark—(1) That know-
ledge is for the most part derived from testimony. Everything in connection with
ancient history, biography, foreign countries. It is easy to ridicule testimony, but
without it a great tract of our life would be left in darkness. (2) ‘hat the testimony
borne to Christ and His salvation comes to us with the clearest signatures and the
strongest authentications. It comes to us in a book which is unique in its con-
demnation of lying. IJ. THe REcEPYION oF THE TESTIMONY. 1. It must be
examined with precision, so that we may know what it is. 2. This reception
embraces the admission of the things contained init as true. As to the great
matters in question, they are true or false; if false, let them be rejected; if true,
let them be accepted as true. 3. There must be no hostility to it, because it is
very possible that the testimony may be understood and accepted, and yet hated,
as it is by the devils, as it was by the Jews. This is of the nature of the sin
against the Holy Ghost. 4. There should be appreciation of the value, importance,
and dignity of it. 5. It must be loved. ‘ With the heart man believeth unto
righteousness.” (1) Love of Christ Himself. (2) Love of His truth. 6. There is
a course of life and conduct to be adopted in accordance with the truth of the
testimorfy. III. Having received the testimony, we can sET TO OUR SEAL. A seal
and signature are intended to authenticate a document and the thing which that
document contains. We not calling God a liar, but, attesting the truth of the
witness of the Lord Jesus, are said to “set to our seal that God is true.” But
mark—l, The truth of God and the testimony of Christ are true irrespective of
our seal, God cannot lie; and the matter for amazement is that God should
condescend to receive our attestations. 2. Then let the signature be written.
Bring in the document. What signatures are already there! Those of
apostles, martyrs, &c. 38. If you put your signature to the truth of God, God will
put His on thee. (1) On thy forehead, the mark of His preservation. (2) On thy
heart, the mark of His grace. (James Stratten.) Sealed unto Christ :—I, Tue
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE SEAL. ‘The seal is one of the old legal forms that still
survives, and gives a peculiar character to documents on which it is stamped. Let
us note some of its characteristics. 1. Asa necessity. In many cases an instru-
ment without a seal is of none effect. The lawyer may draw up a will with the
utmost care, but until the seal is affixed to the will the lawyer's skill and the
Jegator’s resolve count for nothing. So one may hear the gospel preached, but that
is not suflicient. He must set to his seal the testimony—receive it, believe it live
in accordance with it. 2. As a personal distinction. In the old times few men
knew how to write even their own names. They could do no more than make their
mark, which was easily counterfeited ; therefore each man who had occasion to use
it, if possible posses-ed his own seal. Joseph was placed in charge of the king’s
seal, and wherever he affixed it, it carried all the king’s authority with it, So
religion is an intensely personal matter. Hach must settle the great question of


wa ee


cwapP. 111.) ST. JOHN. 291


salvation for himself. No one can accept Christ for me. I must set to my seal
that God is true. 3. Asa finality. The ancient seal was often used to denote the
conclusion of a matter. Daniel was told to seal up the prophecies—implying that
they were finished. He that accepts Christ, accepts Him for all time. We enter
into God’s service, not for a few years, not merely for a lifetime, but for eternity.
‘‘There is no discharge in that war.’’ We have set to our seal that God is true,
once forall. II. THe nature oF THE TESTIMoNy. It is—1. An indictment. God
charges us with violation of His law, and we are to plead guilty or not guilty. If we
deny our guilt we reject the very first proposition with which the Saviour comes to us.
Shall any one dare to do this? Nicodemus thought he had kept the law, but the
Saviour told him that he must be born again, and Paul felt this when he wrote (Rom.
vii. 9), “*I was alive without the lawonce; but when the commandment came, sin re-
vived andI died.” 2. Pardon. After the American civil war, when a general amnesty
was offered, each man, to profit by the act, was required first to take the oath of
allegiance. We are rebels against God; from Him alone can we look for pardon.
Through Christ it is offered to every one, but it must be accepted before it becomes
effective. We must set to our seal this testimony of pardon—take the oath of
allegiance to God’s government. 3. A testament. If property comes into my
possession by will, it is necessary that my name and a seal be affixed to the will
before the property is at my disposal. The testimony of the gospel is that God has
made a testament for us. He not only grants us pardon, but peace and joy in this
life, and in the world to come life eternal. These are offered to each of us freely;
but we must set our seal to the testimony by accepting it in faith. (G@. H. Smith.)
Set to his seal:—The method of sealing seems to have been very ancient. Judah
had a signet as well as a bracelet. The document sent to the elders respecting
Naboth and his vineyard is said to have been sealed with the king’s signature. So
was that which commanded the extermination of the Jews in the time of Esther
sealed. So in the days of Jeremiah, when his property was sold, the document
which contained the account of the sale was sealed and signed. So have we the
great seal of England, which affixed to a document authenticates the document,
There are the seals and signatures in like manner of foreign potentates. And to make
it still more clear and easy, and to bring it nearer home, in many matters of busi-
ness, in the ordinary transactions between man and man, there is an agreement
which is signed and sealed. Being signed, and sealed, and attested, the document
stands ; it is good and substantial, and has authority and weight in law. When in
like manner, I suppose, we are represented as putting our seal and signature to
God’s great document, authenticating it as far as our belief and our conviction goes
ag true, this is what is meant. Exactly as in the prophet Isaiah, when it is said
by the Almighty, “Ye are My witnesses.” We set to our seal that God is true.
(James Stratten.) Sealing the truth :—The firmness of the venerable Polycarp in
persecution unto death is known to all. Urged by the chief officer to pay religious
honours to the emperor, he mildly replied, ‘‘I shall not do as you advise me.”
‘‘ Swear, curse Christ, and I release you.” ‘‘ Sixty-eight years have I served Him,
and He has done me nothing but good; how, then, can I curse Him, my Lord and
my Saviour?” At the stake, when they were about to bind him, he said, “ Leave
measlam. He who has strengthened me to encounter the flames, will enable
me to stand firm at the stake.” The testimony of human experience to the
Divinity of Christ :—As there can be no argument in chemistry in proof of
odours like a present perfume itself; as the shining of the stars is a better proof
of their presence than the figures of an astronomer; as the restored health of his
patients is a better argument of skill in a physician than laboured examinations
and certificates; as the testimony of the almanac that summer comes with June is
not so convincing as the coming of summer itself in the sky, in the air, in the
fields, on hill and mountain, so the power of Christ upon the human soul is to the
goul evidence of His Divinity based upon a living experience, and transcending in
conclusiveness any convictions of the intellect alone, founded upon 4 contemplation
of mere ideas, however just and sound. If Christ is the wisdom of God and the
power of God, in the experience of those who trust and love Him there needs no
further argument of His Divinity. (H. W. Beecher.) The best evidence of the
truth of Christianity :—As I looked upon the sun this November morning shining
through some beautiful clouds, a man called upon me to prove that the sun was, in
his judgment, as far as he could make out by “ the tables,” about sufficient to
light the world. He turned over long pages of logarithms, fractions, and decimals,
and long processions of figures. He asked me for a slate and pencil, and he was going


Bion) Pao MN a
292 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP, Hh
ee —
to make it out to my satisfaction that the sun was just about sufficient to enlighten
a hemisphere at a time. I ordered him off! Why? I sawit! I felt it! (J. Parker,
D.D.) Experience the teacher’s best helper :—‘‘ Oh! when a truth has broken your
heart; when it has afterwards bound it up; when Christ has spoken it to you till you
have felt it, then will you speak as men could speak who are ambassadors for God.
George Fox was called a Quaker because, when he preached, he often trembled. Was
that a folly? No. He had s0 felt the power of what he spoke that his very body
trembled while he delivered that truth to others, and well may you and I tremble
at His Word. Whenever that Word, however, comes home to the heart with ¢
sweetness, why, then, with what sweetness a man tells it again! There is nobody '
can speak it like the man who has experienced it. You know the tale of a tale, the ’
report of a reportis a very poor thing ; but when a man says, ‘I saw it, I was there,’
then you listen to him. So, if you can say of Christ, ‘ He is precious, for He is
precious to me; He can save, for He has saved me; He can comfort and cheer and
gladden, for He has done all that to me,’ then you speak with power because Christ
has spoken with power toyou.” (C. H. Spurgeon.) Seal :—The supposed necessity
of a seal to attest the signature is shown in the following: ‘‘ At Jezreel, the chief
desired Captain Wilson to make a report to the governor at Jenin, and our drago-
man was accordingly directed to write a letter in Arabic, and submit it for signature.
.. . This was duly signed by Captain Wilson ; and as the chief insisted on a seal
being appended to the signature, an old monogram was cut off a sheet of note
paper and affixed to the letter. This was supposed to prove the genuineness of
the document, as a man’s seal cannot be forged.” (Recovery of Jerusalem.) The
purpose of sealing :—In courts of law, in olden times, a witness gave his statement
of that which he professed was truth. Having done so, parties present who were
cognisant of the veracity of the speaker, or who were in circumstances that they
might be expected to be so, when called on to testify their knowledge, in confirma-
tion of what had been asserted, by doing this set to their seal that what had been
spoken was true, and that the witness who had spoken was faithful. But parties
who, being thus appealed to, and being qualified to testify, declined to speak in
corroboration of the testimony delivered, were held, by that declining, to make the
witness a liar. To this practice allusion is made in the text. God hath spoken by
His Son to the world; He has spoken that which all men may know, that which
all men are bound to know to be true, that they may be able to confirm it as His
word of truth. Being commanded to become acquainted with the things which
are spoken, they are then, as a great duty, commanded to bear testimony to the
truth, to the veracity of Him by whom it has been uttered. When they refuse to
know what God speaks, they offend against His authority. When they refuse to
testify to the truth—to set to their seal that He is true in the Word which has been
given to them—they offend against His veracity; they make Him a liar. (A.
Beith, D.D.)


Vers. 34-36. He whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God.—The
Mediator :—I, Cunrist’s EXCELLENCY IN His PROPHETICAL OFFICE (ver. 34). 1. He
is the sent of God. His mission is the measure of Divine love to the world, God
sent other messengers, the prophets, John, ministers ; but as there is but one sun in
the firmament, though men have furnished themselves with many derived lights
so there is but one messenger from God—one great centre of illumination for the
use of all who are beyond the limits of the unapproachable light. 2. They are
the words of God which He speaketh. The same is true of every true minister
but they are derived. Christ spoke the very oracles of God. 8. God giveth not
the Spirit by measure to His Son. The prophets had the Spirit to discharge
their commissions, but under such limitations as were necessary to their limited
capacities and occasions. But there was no such limit in regard to Christ II
CuRIST’S DIGNITY AS THE APPOINTED SOURCE OF ALL GOOD TO THE CHURCH (ver 35).
For the use of this language the Baptist had Old Testament warrant. 1 The
Father loveth the Son. He loves the world—some with a love of good will
others with a love of delight, but not even angels share such a love as this: and
indeed they and men are loved for and in the Son, 2. All things have been given
into Christ’s hands. If God so loved the world that He gave His Son, He so loves
the Son that He hath given Him all things—all government, all the econom of
redemption. 38. What obedience then is due to the Son! If God hath withheld
nothing, shall we? III. Tue sarEry OF THE SOUL IS DEPENDENT ON CHRIST (ver. 36)
1, Salvation is laid up in Christ as its fountain and dispensing author. 2. This


;
F

4
i


CHAP. III] ST, JOHN. 293


salvation is to be sought in Christ by faith. 38. No salvation without faith.
Unbelief refuses Christ’s testimony, declines all personal alliance with Christ,
opposes God’s purpose, and is the fruit of an evil heart. 4. The unbeliever shall
not see life. 5. Upon the unbeliever the wrath of God abides. (A. Beith, D.D.)
The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into His hand.—Cunrist’s
RELATION TO THE Farner AND TO MAN. 1. The excellency of Christ above all
other ambassadors is that He is the Son and they are but servants. 2. Christ is
the object of the Father’s love in a peculiar way: as a Son, and not a servant in
respect of His Person; and as Mediator, He is pointed out as the beloved Son in
whom God will be found well pleased (Matt. iii. 17); as He who is beloved, and
hath purchased love to others because of His death (John x. 17) (so willing was
the Father to be reconciled), as He whose being beloved answereth our being
unworthy of love, and is a pledge of the Father’s love to us (John xvii. 23). 3.
In carrying on the redemption of sinners, as the matter is accorded betwixt the
Father and the Son, so the redeemed are not left to themselves, but are put on
Christ’s hand, to purchase and be forthcoming for them; and all things are
concredited to Him that may tend to their good. Under ‘‘all things” we are to
comprehend the elect themselves, together with all the gifts and graces of the
Spirit (ver. 34) needful for their conversion and salyation, which are not entrusted
to ourselves, but to Him who can keep us and them, and let them out as we
need ; and a dominion over all things that may contribute to help or hinder His
people’s happiness, that He may order them so as may be for their good. And
this power He hath as God with the Father, and as Man and Mediator, by
donation and gift from the Father (Matt. xi. 27; xxviii. 18), And thus the
believer’s happiness is firm, being transacted between such parties, the Father
being satisfied in the Mediator, and they entrusted to Him whose dear purchase
they are, and therefore He ‘will not lose them, who hath capacity to receive their
furniture far above what they could hold, power to maintain, wisdom to guide
and dispense their allowance, dominion to curb all enemies and opposition, and a
commission and charge to be answerable for them. All which may invite us to be
content that we be nothing, and that we and all our furniture be in His hand.
(G. Hutcheson.) All things in Christ’s hand :—The verse gives us the following
teachings—1l. The Father is the Origin and Arranger of all things. 2. In His
arrangements all things are put into the hands of His Son, 3. One reason of this
is the love of the Father towards the Son. 4. Ere Christ came to men there had
been a sublime transaction in which a vast administration had been entrusted on
the one hand and accepted on the other. ‘To confine ourselves to our point—
What things are put into the Redeemer’s hand?—I,. Tue act or creation. ‘ All
things were made by Him.” Thus He is clearly marked off from aught that is
created. This fact establishes His essential equality with God and His official
subordination to God. II. Rrvenation. Creation had to do with all worlds;
revelation with this. God indeed reveals Himself by His works, the laws of social
life, the voice of conscience. But we want a revelation fuller and clearer. Here
it is: ‘He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father.” III. Proprrrarion. Where
sin is, a revelation of God is not enough: but the Revealer says, “‘ No man cometh
unto the Father but by Me.” A serious state of things when a man’s way to his
Father is blocked up save as a Mediator clears it! Yet so it is; but He has put
away sin by the sacrifice of Himself. IV. Hearr conquust, A power is needed to
make the mediation effective mauward, At the same moment that the herald
says ‘Behold the Lamb of God,” He declares “ This is He which baptizeth with
the Holy Ghost.” The bestowment of the Spirit to convict, convert, and train the
Church, is the prerogative of Christ. V. Apministrarion. When won over to
Christ, men have to be governed and sanctified. The subjects of the kingdom of
grace have to be inspired with a supreme desire to leaven the world with righteous-
ness. His holy inspiration is begun and sustained by Christ. As He formed the
kingdom of grace, so He administers it. V1. Tur ConSUMMATION OF ALL THINGS.
He who sent Peter to reap the first-fruits will send forth His angels to reap the
harvest. (C. Clemance, D.D.) What things?—I. Licur for your mind. II.
Lire for your souls. III. Love for your hearts. IV. Ricureousness for your
nature. V. Atonement for your sins. VI. Grace for strengthening. VIL
Comrort for sorrow. VIII. Heaven. (Bp. Gregg.) _The Father loveth the
Son :—Therefore faith may have firm footing. God hath laid help upon one that is
mighty that our faith and hope may be in God. (J. Trapp.) _ He who has
Christ has all things:—King Porus, when Alexander asked him, being then his


a


294 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [orap. rt
Me ee Se
prisoner, how he would be used, answered in one word, ‘ Basilikeios,” that is,
‘Tike a king.’ Alexander again replying, “Do you desire nothing else?
“No,” said he, “all things are in this one word, ‘ Like a king.’” Whereupon
Alexander restored him again. But this has not always been the happiness of
kings and princes. Yet, however, he that hath God hath all things, because God
is all things. Take a pen, and write down riches, honours, preferments, they are
but as go many ciphers—they signify nothing; but write down God alone, and He
will raise them to thousands—hundreds of thousands. And then it is that a
Christian is truly happy, when he can find himself, and all things, in his God.


Ver. 36. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting Ufe.—Faith and unbelief;
with their repective consequences :—There are three kinds of death. 1. Temporal:
the separation of soul from body, the approach of which is usually marked by
failure of mental energy and increasing bodily debility. 2. Spiritual: the separa-
tion of both body and soul from the Divine favour in this life—the symptoms of
which are ignorance of God, neglect of His Word, worldliness, and carelessness
about salvation. 3. Eternal: the separation of the whole man from the Divine
presence and glory in the world to come—the ills of which will be hope destroyed,
despair, the awakening and disappointment of insatiable desire, tormenting sensi-
bility of sin and irremediable woe. This state of things induced by the Fall, Christ
has come to remedy. Note—I. THE HAPPY CONSEQUENCE OF BELIEVING ON THE SON
oF Gop. He that believeth on the Son hath—1. Life in his Redeemer. God gave
us life in Adam, which, with its attendant happiness, we lost. This is restored
not directly to us, butin His Son. 2, Life in himself. Once he was unconcerned
about spiritual things, buried in the cares, business, and pleasures of the world.
Now the Spirit of life having breathed upon him, he is alive from the dead, and the
life he now lives in the flesh he lives by the faith of the Son of God. He is a
fruit-bearing branch of the living Vine, a lively stone of a living Temple. This life
derived from Christ is maintained by communion with Him. 3. Life in promise,
The “exceeding great and precious promises” bear upon this, and support the
Christian amidst his conflicts and weakness. 4. Life in prospect. He shall dwell
in a paradise fairer than Eden for ever, without care, pain, disease, sin, in
unalloyed happiness. Because his Redeemer lives he shall live also. II. Tue
UNHAPPY CONSEQUENCES OF NOT BELIEVING ON THE Son oF Gop. The unbeliever
shall not see life. Of all that the believer enjoys he is deprived, and will be, if he
persists, for ever. He may have a name to live, but he is dead, condemned already,
bearing the eternal wrath of God. If these things be so, then see—1. What is the
great condemning sin of the world, the sin comprehending every other sin—
Unbelief. For this makes God.a liar, tramples on Christ’s salvation, does despite
to the Spirit of grace, shuts heaven and opens hell. 2. What is the faith of the
gospel. Not a dead, inoperative belief, but a vigorous, influential principle, moved
by the Holy Spirit, to serve and please God, to fear His displeasure, to obey His
will out of love and not from dread of punishment or hope of reward. $8. Who
alone are secure from Divine displeasure. Those only who are found in Christ
(Acts iv. 10-12). 4. How we may escape God’s wrath. By taking shelter in
Christ through faith. (W. Mudge, B.A.) Faith and unbelief :—Evangelical
texts lose their freshness from over-familiarity. In order to appreciate their
power we must realize their effects on those who have them for the first time. Let
us reduce the text to a series of propositions. I. THaT THE HIGHEST GOOD 18
ETERNAL LIFE. No heathen needs to be informed that life is more than existence,
We cannot feel for a stone as we do fora tree which possesses life in its lowest
form, We have a mere community of feeling for animal life; but this is as
nothing compared with our regard for human nature. For rational life is better
than irrational. But this can be conceived without the capacity of moral distine-
tions—which men have, however. But, alas! we know that this moral life, if it
may be so called, is quite compatible with spiritual death. Men are alive to the
perception of moral good, but dead to its enjoyment. Is it not plain that a resur-
rection from this exalts us into a higher life, spiritual, not merely the life of our
spirits, for in a lower sense they were alive before, but a life produced by the Spirit
of God and doing God’s will and enjoying His favour. This is the highest life of
which a creature is capable in kind ; its purification from the evils that mar it, its
endlessness, and the perfection of its blessedness for body and soul in heaven
make it the highest life in degree, II. Let us suppose a serious heathen to have
formed this conception of eternal life, and to be filled with admiration. He would


a eo ee


, —_


omapP. 111.) ST. JOHN. 295


s00n compare it with his own experience and see that between him and it there was
a great gulf fixed. That life presupposes a God holy in Himself and in His
requisitions. The inquirer thus sees himself opposite to God and odious in
proportion to His excellence. A fond hope arises. As sin has been his death, he
will sin no more. Now comes anew revelation. He is the slave of sin, and his
heart is dead in sin. Can he give it life? No. Here is a new despair. He


turns to another method of escape. God will forgive him, and by a sovereign act


make him a new creature. As he looks towards the inaccessible light he is
completely undeceived on this point. He sees no shadow of connivance at sin.
He withdraws his eyes, as he thinks, in eternal darkness. But on that darkness a
new light begins to steal. His eye follows it to a point beyond himself, an
intermediate object between God’s inexorable justice and himself. Sin may be
punished and the sinner saved. But a cloud passes over this celestial light.
All men are alike, and if a man cannot make satisfaction for himself, how
can he for another? But may not God? The thought seems impious till
the lost veil is withdrawn and the astonished soul beholds the great mys-
tery of godliness. God manifested in the flesh and becoming the propitiation for
sin. But the work demanded of the sinner is hard because so easy: hard to do
nothing when we think we must do all, to believe we have only to believe, when we
expected to achieve our redemption. When once the soul is brought, however, to
see that this is truly God’s plan—that the Son of God is able and willing to save,
and avcepts this salvation, the work is done, and the man justified and safe for ever.
By some such process we may suppose @ heathen to arrive at the second proposi-
tion, viz., THAT ETERNAL LIFE MAY BE ATLAINED BY SIMPLY BELIEVING IN THE SON OF
Gop. III. From this He would infer THAT UNBELIEF INVOLVES THE LOSS OF ALL THAT
PERFECT AND ENDURING BLESSEDNESS CALLED ETERNAL Lirs. But here he would be
liable to error. The mcre loss of heaven would not affect the hearts of those who
know it not. Indeed, they refuse it, preferring the pleasures of sin. Deprivation,
therefore, would be no punishment. The doctrine of the gospel is that he that
loses heaven loses this world also. ‘ The wrath of God abideth on him.” Hell is
the deprivation of all that makes.a life of sin tolerable here. 1. Sinners here par-
ticipate in the outward advantages of the believer, but the wrath of God will
separate the lost from the saved for ever, and from all the advantages of order,
comfort, and mutual constraint consequent. 2. Sinners have positive enjoy-
ment in sin—those are sentenced to be only for a season, and its native ten-
dency to misery to go on for ever. 3. Sinners are ignorant of anything better which
could make the most dissatisfied wish sinful pleasure, The wrath of God will
awaken conscience, which will have sufficient light to plant its daggers with unerring
accuracy, and the sinner shall know what he has lost. IV. WHat THESE TRUTHS
WOULD BE TO A HEATHEN THEY ARE TO US. If to him they involve the whole way of
salvation, they involve no less to us. We have here—1. The great end of existence,
eternal life and Divine favour. 2. Its opposite, eternal death and Divine wrath.
3, The way of life by faith, 4. The object of this faith the Son of God, the one
sacrifice for sin. In conclusion, On the unbeliever the wrath of God abides
already. Let the procrastinating soul be undeceived. Distance of time and place
works strange transformations. ‘Tell one who violates the law of man that he will
be condemned for it, and he may laugh the law and you to scorn. _But how few
laugh when told that they are condemned already. Took at the convict at the bar,
and see how different his aspect and demeanour from his aspect and demeanour when
at large. Such isyour case. You are not yet arrested, but you are under sentence.
You are condemned already, aud reprieve or pardon is your only hope. (J. A. Alex-
ander, D.D.) Everlasting life connected with believing on the Son oy God :—I. WHat
Ig THIS BELIEVING ON THE Son? 1. This believing on the Son, as here mentioned,
supposes & distinct knowledge of Him—of His person, natures, and offices. 2. It in-
cludes assent to the record that God the Father has given of Him. 3. It includes,
in consequence of both the knowledge of Him, and assent to the testimony of God
concerning Him, our hearty approbation of Him, as every way qualified, able,
faithful, and willing, to save to the uttermost all that believe (Heb. vii. 25, ii. 17;
Jobn vi. 37). 4. Chiefly it includes a cordial acceptance of Christ, as offered in the
gospel. II. SHow IN WHAT RESPECTS TRUE BELIEVERS IN CHRIST MAY BE SAID TO HAVE
EVERLASTING Lire. 1. They have it in title and right of purchase. 2. They have
the blessedness of the heavenly state in the promises of it; therefore it is called
“eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, has promised ” (Tit. i. 2). 3. Believers
have the eternal happiness of heaven in their glorified Head and forerunner. He,


296 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. 111.
:


Spirit’ (Rom. viii. 23), and the ‘‘earnest of the heavenly inheritance” (Eph. i. 14).
(Sketches of Sermons.) The unbeliever’s unhappy condition :—John the Baptist
was @ preacher who knew how to discriminate. He does not address the people as
all lost or saved, but shows the two classes and the line of demarcation. I. THE
@UILTY oNES. 1. They arecommon. They abound in our sanctuaries, and are to
be met by thousands in our streets. 2. They are not necessarily sceptics. Many |
of them are quite orthodox. 3. Nota few are blameless in morals, but like the
young man lack the great thing. 4. Manyare religious after a sort, attend worship,
read the Bible, &., but alas! there is a worm at the centre of all this fair fruit. 5.
If they were criminals no one would wonder, but many of them are highly respect-
able. II. Tuurr orrence. They have not believed on the Son of God. 1. They
refuse to accept the mercy of God. Men rejected God’s law, now they reject His
gospel. To refuse such a blessing provided at such a cost, cannot be a small sin.
It is the greatest, for when the Holy Ghost comes to convince the world of sin, that
sin is unbelief. 2. In this rejection the unbeliever displays an intense venom
against God. He must either accept mercy or condemvation. He chooses the
latter. What has God done to deserve this? 3. The unbeliever touches God in a
very tender place: slighting the greatest manifestation of His love. 4. He per-
petrates an offence against every person in the blessed Trinity. 5. He insults
every Divine attribute, justice, wisdom, mercy. III. THE souRcEs oF THIS UN-
BELIEF. 1. In many, careless ignorance of the way of salvation, and this in a land
of churches and Bibles, is so far from being an excuse that it is anaggravation. 2.
Indifference. Men are aware that they are not quite right, but hope to be at last;
meanwhile it does not trouble them. What grosser impertinence can there be against
the supreme Ruler? 3. Pride. Salvation is all very well for harlots, drunkards, &c.
4. Love of sin. IV. THe TERRIBLE RESULT. The wrath of God abideth now and
always. 1. You will not escape by ceasing to exist. The Divine wrath cannot
rest on a non-existent creature. 2. This must be so because you reject the only
remedy. There is but one door, and you close it by unbelief. 3. The wrath will
produce no saving or softening effect, but will go on to harden. 4. God has never
taken an oath against any but unbelievers. ‘To whom sware He in His wrath
that they should not enter into His rest, but to them that believed not?’ Con-
tinued unbelief God will never forgive, because His word binds Him not to
do so. In conclusion. There is a blessed alternative: ‘He that believeth
on the Son hath everlasting life.” (C. H. Spurgeon.) The life eternal:—
I. Lirz ETERNAL IN THIS worLD. 1. It has its origin here. It is not death,
but regeneration—that is the entrance gate to it. He begins to live the same
life as he will live in heaven—only that here he is in a state of childhood,
and many are the childish things which he does. 2. It is nourished here. God has
promised food for it; He has stewards to furnish it with nourishment in due season;
and the cupboard and larder is open for it to help itself whenever it likes. The food
contained in the Bible is the produce of its native country, and it will not look well
unless it will feed often on this. 3. It is trained here for its home. It is away
from home here, in an ungenial climate and a strange land. It is not to be
wondered at if at times it appears to be weak and feeble; it must do so if it remain
long in the unhealthy atmosphere of this world. There is something tender, yet
strong, about it. It is too strong ever to die, but it is tender enough to appear
sickly. II. Lirm ETERNAL IN THE WORLD To comE, 1. It will be of age there—‘a
perfect man unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.” The believer
is but an infant, in his minority, here. Parents do not allow very young children
to enter their drawing-rooms and mingle with their distinguished guests; but they
have to wait until they are of a fit age, and know how to conduct themselves in
noble company. When they are infants they are not allowed to meddle with the
papers and writings of their father ; but as they approach maturity it is pleasant to
see them take interest in the circumstances and movements of the household. 2
: will be in its own climate there. There are many impediments to its progresa
ere. It is exposed to many diseases, and the believer has to take many a bitter
drug, and has to undergo treatment oftentimes which is, for the present, not joyous
but grievous. But by such things is the inward man renewed day by aay. vThe
bitter things will not be needed in the world to come; there the climate will be


a


CHAP, 11.) ST, JOHN. 297
Bee ciece, TESS ead Seale hat eed pete ite la BS mana id a NY Pe a a el
genial, the atmosphere perfectly healthy; and none of the inhabitants shall say, 1
am sick.” 3. It will then be in its home. It is but a pilgrim here, travelling
through the enemy’s land; the god of this world and the children of this world are
hostile to it, and do their best to kill it. The Christian has often feared that the
‘* Divine nature” has received a death-blow, he felt so weak and faint. 4. It will
be in its Father’s house. The believer is away at school; and the only intercourse
between him and the Father is by correspondence. Note—1. Heaven or hell will
be but a continuation of what man is here. The principle which is now in thy soul,
having reached its climax, will constitute thy heaven or thy hell; and that in its
native element. 2. All men begin in this world to live the “ eternal life” or begin
to die the “eternal death.” (David Roberts, D.D.) Christ is the sinner’s only
hope :—On a huge cross by the side of an Italian highway hung a hideous
caricature of the Beloved of our souls, who poured out His life for our re-
demption. Out of reverence to the living Christ we turned aside, disgusted, from
the revolting image, but not until we had espied the words ‘“Spes unica”’ in
capitals over its head. Here was truth emblazoned on an idol, Yes, indeed,
Jesus, our now exalted, but once crucified Lord, is the sole and only hope of
man, Assuredly, O Lord Jesus, thou art spes unica to our soul, ‘ Other
refuge have we none, Hangs our helpless soul on Thee.” We found this
diamond in the mire of superstition: does it sparkle any the less? Believe
or perish :—Faith in Jesus is the only way of salvation, and if I will not walk
in that way, there is no other. Our Lord’s teaching leaves us no room to hope
for the salvation of unbelievers, ‘He that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved”; but what of those who do not believe? May they not be sincerely mis-
taken? May they not he very good people after all, and be saved in their own way?
Our Lord’s reply is sharp, clear, and decisive, ‘‘ He that believeth not shall be
damned.” He hath nothing else for them but that. Christ is too great and too
honest to court popularity, as many do nowadays, by an affectation that right and
wrong are much the same. The wicked charity of this age sickens us with its
deceptive cant, as it whines out, “It will little matter what you believe; nothing
nowadays is of very great consequence; believe what you like, and it shall be all
right in the long run.” Nay, but according to the gospel of Jesus you must believe
the truth, and have faith in the power of the truth, for a lie will not regenerate you,
a lie will not fit you to see the face of God, a lie will not conduct you to heaven, but
only that truth which hath the stamp and seal of God and of His Holy Spirit. (C.
H. Spurgeon.) The peril of wnbelievers :—Your peace, sinner, is that terribly
prophetic calm which the traveller occasionally perceives upon the higher Alps.
Everything is still. The birds suspend their notes, fly low, and cower down with
fear. The hum of bees among the flowersis hushed. A horrible stillness rules
the hour, as if death had silenced all things by stretching over them his awful
sceptre. Perceive ye not what is surely at hand? The tempest is preparing;
the lightning will soon cast abroad its flames of fire. Harth will rock with thunder-
blasts ; granite peaks will be dissolved; all nature will tremble beneath the fury of
the storm. Yours is that solemn calm to-day, sinner. Rejoice not in it, for the
hurricane of wrath is coming, the whirlwind and the tribulation which shall sweep
you away and utterly destroy you. The dreadful wrath of God:—A young man
went to hear Mr. Whitefield, who took the above passage for his text. ‘‘ Mr. White.
field,’ said the young man, “‘ described the Sadducees’ character ; this did not touch
me—I thought myself as good a Christian as any manin England. From this he
went to that of the Pharisees. He dessribed their exterior decency, but observed
that the poison of hypocrisy rankled in their hearts. This rather shook me. At
length, in the course of his sermon, he abruptly broke off, paused for a few moments,
then burst into a flood of tears, lifted up his eyes and hands and exclaimed, ‘ My
hearers! the wrath to come! the wrath to come!’ These words sank into my
heart, like lead in the waters. I wept, and when tie sermon ended, retired alone,
For days and weeks I could think of nothing else. Those awful words would follow
me wherever I went. ‘The wrath to come! the wrath tocome!’”’ The result was
that the young man soon after made a public profession of religion, and in a short
time became an eminent preacher. Christ the only refuge from apprehensions of
the future :—I. ALL MEN NEED SOME REFUGE FROM THESE APPREINENSIONS, Our
ignorance prevents us from seeing into a future state, and our sinfulness damps
what discoveries we may make by a sense of foreboding and an apprehension of
punishment. Man needs light and peace. II. Most MEN FEEL THIS NEED MORE OR
LESS, AND RESORT TO EXPEDIENTS AGAINST THE FEAR OF WHAT FOLLOWS DEATH, No


~


298 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fouap. rv.
Te pe tig tp a rr
man of ordinary culture is asleep on this point, and this leads to modes of thinking
and action which only disappoint. III. Apart FROM REVELATION, ALL SYSTEMS IN
WHICH MEN SEEK REFUGE ARE VAIN. Some, indeed, have been partially successful.
Cf. the rites of Paganism and the delusions of Mohammed. But go where we will,
if not to Christ, we have no rest. 1. Shall we go to atheism, the madness of human
nature? This does not extinguish fear. It is certain we exist now. How! By
chance, says the atheist. But on the same principle of chance may not life be pro-
tracted after death? 2. Shall we go to Deism? Nothing can assure the Deist
that the Bible is not the Word of God. All he can say is ‘‘ probably” it is not.
But suppose it should be true, what is his position then? IV. CuristT ONLY HAS THE
GIFT OF ETERNAL LIFE. 1. He is the only effective teacher of it. The idea of im-
mortality existed before; but He brought it down from the clouds into sober cer-
tainty (John v. 24-25). So with the apostles (2 Cor. v. 1). Who dared to say “ We
know ” but disciples of this Master? 2. He has revealed the only scheme of it
consistent with the principles of the Divine government. By answering all the
designs of justice in punishing, it has removed the necessity of punishment, and
givesroom for salvation. 3. The miracles of Jesus prove that He has eternal life—
(1) By establishing the divinity of His mission. (2) By proving His power to do
whatever He has promised. 4. Facts of every-day occurrence prove that Jesus has
eternal life. We do not see Him call Lazarus from the grave, but daily He calls
dead souls into life. Every true Christian has witness within himself of this. Con-
clusion. 1. Those who reject the Gospel Saviour reject their life. 2. Those who
receive Him are eternally secure. (A. M’Clelland, D.D.) The wrath of God :—
The wrath of man is fearful to view, and especially to feel. But the wrath of God—
no pen can describe it, or imagination conceive it. What will the realization of it
be? And this wrath impends over every impenitent sinner, I. It is suRE TO FALL
UPON HIMIN DUE TIME. 1. It is not a simple possibility. 2. Nota threat to terrify.
3. It is as sure as God Almighty’s throne. (1) Eternal and Omnipotent Justice
has decreed it. (2) Revelation declares it on almost every page. (3) The providence
of God illustrates and confirms His Word. II. It is sure in due time To FALL UPON
THE SINNER IN ALL THE TERRIBLENESS OF ITS POWER AND SEVERITY. 1. Here mercy
tempers justice. Wrath is restrained and grace works. 2. This is the world of
probation, not of finalaward. 3. The day of reckoning is appointed after death.
III, THis WRATH I8 JUSTLY DESERVED. 1. It might have been turned aside. 2.
Voluntary sin and the persistent refusal of mercy and grace provoke it. (J. M.
Sherwood, D.D.)


CHAPTER IV.


Vers. 1-42. When therefore the Lord knew.—The first visit to Samaria :—-J. Tur
STORY ITsELF. 1. The memorable halt (vers. 1-6). 2. The surprising request (vers.
7-9). 3. The opened vista (ver. 10). 4. The proud reminiscence (vers. 11, 12). 5.
The perennial fountain (vers. 13, 14). 6. The weary request (ver. 15). 7. The
merciful wound (vers. 16-18). 8. The everlasting debate (vers. 19, 20). 9. The
majestic annunciation (vers. 21-24), 10. The sublime claim (vers. 25, 26). 11.
The marvellous wonder (vers. 17). 12. The startling surmise (vers. 28-30). 13.
The hidden manna (vers. 81-34), 14, The cheery parable (vers. 35-38). 15. The
glorious harvest (vers. 39-42). II. Lessons or tHe story: 1. The duty of seizing
opportunities, 2. A model for religious conversation. 3. The true method of
quenching the soul’s thirst (vers. 13, 14). 4. The spirituality of Christian worship
(vers. 21-24). 5. A test of Messiahship (ver. 29). 6. The sense of vocation the true
food (ver. 31-34). 7%. Harvesting the Church’s privilege and duty (ver. 35). 8. The
community of Christian fruition (ver. 36). 9. The present the harvest of the past
(vers. 37, 38). 10, The power of @ single conversion (ver. 39). 11. Spiritual
privileges to be cherished (ver. 40). 12. The superiority of personal experience
(ver. 41, 42), 13. A pastor’s personal invitation. (G.D. Boardman, D.D.) Christ
at Jacob’s well :—This history teaches us that—I. No soun 1s so Lost BUT THE Lorp
GaN FiInp 1t. Frivolity was natural to this woman. She had lived without restraint
and morality. Woman has one safeguard against sin—innate delicacy. This lost
all is lost; and this was so with the Samaritan. How many would have turned
away from her as hopeless, But Christ turns to her because she is a soul whom


cmap. rv.) ST. JOHN. 299


the Father has given Him to save. II. No occasion 1s so TRIFLING BUT THE LoRD
CAN Us IT. The woman comes to draw water, a common act, by a common way.
Who would have thought that the way would have led to everlasting life? The
least triflemay become in God’s hand a means of salvation: a word spoken at ran-
dom, a familiar scene, an unforeseen hindrance, the monotony of life, the influence
of a friend. God’s seeking grace encompasses us like the air we breathe. III. No
STBENGTH I8 SO FEEBLE BUT THE LORD CAN INCREASE IT. Few could have been
morally weaker than this woman. She lacked the power to understand Christ and
to know herself. Christ had to awaken everything in her. So are we impotent ;
but the Spirit of Christ helps our infirmities. Christ asks in order that He may
give. He requires humility, but only to exalt, the surrender of the old life in order
to confer life eternal. IV. No BEGINNING IS SO SMALL BUT THE LORD CAN LEAD IT
TO A BLESSED END. What a small beginning here! And yet before long a disciple
and evangelist is found. Don’t despise little beginnings and struggling souls.
(Carl Keogh, D.D.) Jesus at the well:—I. A SymparHETIc companion. 1. Sharing
human infirmity (ver. 6; Isa. liii. 3; Matt. iv. 2; Mark xiv. 34; John xi. 35, xix.
28). 2. Accepting human supplies (ver. 7; Matt. xxi. 17; Mark ii. 16; Luke vii.
36, xix. 5, xxiv. 41). 3. Surpassing human expectations (ver. 9; Matt. viii, 27, ix.
viii., xxii, 22; Mark v.20; Johniii.9). II. A HELPFUL companion. 1. Dispelling igno-
rance (ver. 10; Mark ii. 10; Luke xix. 42; John x. 38, xiii. 7,xv.15). 2. Arousing
desire (ver. 14; Matt. v. 6; xi.28; Johniii. 12, xiv. 12, xvi.24). 3. Begetting prayer
(ver.15; Matt. ix. 27, xv. 22, xx. 30; Mark x. 47; Luke xvili. 41). III. A Divine com-
PANION. 1. Knowing all things (ver.17 ; John i. 48, ii. 25, xvi. 80, xxi. 17; Col. ii. 3).
2. Illustrating true worship (ver. 23; Exod. xx. 3; 2 Kings xvii. 35; Psa. xevi. 9; Jer.
xxv. 6; Matt. iv. 10). 8. Avowing the Messiahship (ver. 26; Psa. ii. 6; Matt. xvi.
16; John xi. 27; Acts iii. 18, xvii. 7. (S. S. Times.) Jesus at the well :—How
immense the distance between ‘* Give Me to drink ” and ‘‘I am He.” I. An oBgxct-
LESSON IN THE ART OF RELIGIOUS CONVERSATION. 1. No duty more difficult than
that of opening out a conversation on the things of the soul. This an art, because
we must learn it by practice through mistakes and discouragement, Jesus left few
discourses, because His teaching was mostly conversational, suggested by passing
things. Beginning here with human thirst and eliciting questions, He gradually
and naturally led up and on to the highest truths. 2. Notice the skill with which
Jesus avoids a plain answer to a plain question, and so replies that He becomes the
questioner and arouses deepening curiosity and interest. 3. The use He made of
the woman’s moral intuitions and the truths she already knew. ‘This was the
favourite method of His dialectics. 4. Here do we need our lesson from Christ.
(1) How perfectly He entered into human need! (2) He had infinite patience with
the narrow and dull and earthbound. (3) With all this went an equal faith in that
hidden but immortal power to‘which He appealed. IJ. THe TRUTHS OF THIS DIS-
course. 1. Living water. (1) The comparison of spiritual blessings to water
familiar in Scripture. (2) The characteristic of this water is that itis a gift. Men
do not have to fetch, buy, nor earn salvation, but receive it. (3) This water of life
is not Christ, for He gives it, but the whole truth and grace which make for salva-
tion. 2. True worship. (1) The vital inward power brings one into the true
attitude of worship. The heart first, form afterwards. (2) True worship must be
an inward secret thing. Ritual, music, &c., only aid the silent movements of the
soul towards God. (3) True worship must be true to God’s requirements and our
own moral wants, not merely honest and sincere, although misguided, but in
accordance with the reality of things. (4) The Father seeks such worship. 3.
Jesus the Messiah. Salvation was of the Jews, but Christ was the fulfilment of
hopes as old as the race. (Sermons by the Monday Club.) The woman of
Samaria :—1. The person here introduced was ® member of a race specially
hateful to the Jews; but Jesus was above the prejudice of His nation. 2. The
Samaritan was a woman. ‘Never speak to a woman in the street, even if she be
thy wife”; ‘‘ Burn the words of the law rather than teach them to a woman,” were
current maxims in Jewish society. But Christ, in the unsullied purity of His
manhood, brushed aside as cobwebs all social regulations which tended to per-
petuate feminine servitude. 3. This woman lived in habitual sin, But Christ
came to save sinners. Notice Jesus Christ—I. ENLIGHTENING THE WOMAN. He
leads her from natural to spiritual subjects. 1. Observe His sweet courtesy. He
opens the conversation, not with a sneer or opprobrious epithet, after the manner
of » Jew, but with a request; and notwithstanding her ungracious rebuff, not one
word of rebuke escapes Him. A most gentlemanly stranger. True religion teachea


a
300 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Tv.


$$


us to be courteous. This urbanity impressed her, and He became successively in
her eyes Jew, Sir, Prophet, Christ. The truth must be spoken in love, and love
will impress quite as much as truth. 2. Notice that the woman’s lack of culture
did not hinder Christ making the grandest disclosures. A radical mistake is made
when the attempt is made to simplify the gospel beyond what Christ has done. The
sublime will always awaken the corresponding consciousness. This is one reason
why the words of Christ have more power and permanence than the systems of
men. 38, The Lord made a discovery to this woman which He never made to any
one else—His Messiahship. Why? Because that would not have been safe in
Judea or Galilee? Rather because of the different dispositions of those He
addressed. II. Recuarmine THE woman. The object of His enlightening her was
to save her. 1. Christ always aimed at doing good. (1) In ancient times men did
good spasmodically ; relief was the result of natural impulse. But in Christianity
impulse has been dignified into a principle. (2) Plato and Aristotle teach you to
love men for your own sakes; Christ for their sakes and His. The essence of the
gospel is not self-interest, but self-sacrifice. 2. He sought to do the highest good
by reclaiming the worst characters. There are three stages in history relative to
this subject. (1) A state of well-nigh complete insensibility. The Iliad delineated
heroes and cowards, strong men and weak, but not good and bad. (2) The next
stage is marked by the awakening of conscienve and of the idea of right and wrong.
Virtue is applauded, vice censured. But the idea of justice taught men to sym-
pathize with the man sinned against, not the sinner. (3) The last stage is that of
full-orbed mercy in Christ, teaching us to compassionate both the injurer and the
injured. Christ changed the attitude of the world in respect to its notorious sinners.
3. To accomplish these ends He threw into His philanthropic movements unpre-
cedented zeal (ver. 34). (1) He had infinite faith in human nature. He saw its
hidden potentialities. A lady, examining one of Turner’s pictures, remarked :
“But, Mr. T., I do not see these things in nature.” ‘‘ Madam,” replied the artist,
with pardonable naiveté, ‘‘don’t you wish you did?” Christ saw what none of His
contemporaries saw. The age was pessimistic; Christ was the only optimist of
His time. (2) According to the strength of His hope was the fervour of His zeal.
III. InsprrIne THE woman, inparting to her His own enthusiasm. 1. She at once
set about converting her neighbours. She did not lecture them; she only related
her experience. We can also ‘‘say” if we cannot preach. Despise not the day of
small things. Her “saying” led to the evangelization of a whole city. 2. The
success attending the woman’s simple efforts filled the Saviour with holy joy. (J.
Cynddylan Jones, D.D.) Christ and the woman of Samaria:—I. THE MINGLED
TACT AND CONDESCENSION OF CHRIST IN DEALING WITH A CARELESS SINNER. He does
not begin with reproof, but with a request for water, a subject uppermost in her
thoughts. This at once threw a bridge across the gulf between them. So Christian
workers must go to the sinful, and bear down upon them in the spirit of friendly
aggression, studying the best avenues to their hearts, and avoiding any show of
superiority. II. Curisr’s READINESS TO GIVE MERCIES TO CARELESS SINNERS. If she
had asked, He would have given. ‘Ask and receive.” III. Tur pricELESS EXCEL-
LENCE OF CHRIST’8 GIFTS WHEN COMPARED WITH THE THINGS OF THIS WORLD (vers.
13, 14). Thousands of men have every temporal good, and are yet weary and
dissatisfied, Jesus alone can give solid happiness, His waters may have their
ebbing seasons, but they are never completely dried. IV. Tur ABSOLUTE NECESSITY
OF CONVICTION TO CONVERSION. ‘The woman was comparatively unmoved until our
Lord exposed her breach of the seventh commandment. From that moment she is
an inquirer after truth. ‘Till a sinner sees himself as God sees him he will continue
careless and trifling. Conscience must be pricked by the preaching of the law. V.
THE USELESSNESS OF ANY RELIGION WHICH ONLY CONSISTS OF FORMALITY. True and
acceptable worship depends on the state of the worshipper’s heart (1 Sam. xvi. 7).
VI. CHRIST’S GRACIOUS WILLINGNESS TO REVEAL HIMSELF TO THE CHIEF OF SINNERS.
Nowhere in the gospels do we find such an explicit avowal as in ver. 26. Whatever
a man’s past life may hawe been there is hope and a remedy for him in Christ. He
will undertake to cure the apparently incurable. (Bp. Ryle.) The lost one met
and saved:—I. Tut sourney, 1. The occasion (ver. 1; cf. Isa. li. 13), 2. The
route. There were four routes (Matt, xix. 2; Acts xxiii, 23). The Jews usually
chose that by the Jordan valley, to avoid Samaria. 3. The reason (Luke ix,
10). 4. The rest. Notice Christ’s humanity. II. Tus merrinc. 1. The
woman—(1) A Samaritan; (2) with some knowledge of God (ver. 20); (3)
expecting the Messiah (ver. 25). 2. The time. Midday. Not the usual hour for


Fim ie He


a i i


omar. 1v.] ST. JOHN. 301


—*


drawing water ; but a time for such an one to do so unobserved. 3. The request.
Compliance with it would have done honour to an archangel. Christ placed Him-
self in the position of one desiring a benefit. 4. The reply (ver.9). This man is
not like other Jews. III. Tue conversion. 1. The first flash of light (ver. 10; ef.
Eph. v. 14). Water is sold in Egypt as the “ gift of God.” 2. Its reception (vers.
11, 12), The woman is perplexed, and seems to struggle between the literal and
the spiritual. She changes her mode of address—‘ Sir.” Our Lord takes no
notice of her query, but addresses her state of mind. 38, The leading on (vers. 18,
14), The woman’s desire is intensified. The light becomes obscured. How true a
picture of an awakening soul! 4. The revelation (ver. 16). The request is granted
in Christ’s way, not in her’s. He flashes light on her soul and her past (vers. 18,
29). 5. Her anxious inquiry (vers. 19, 20). How is salvation to be obtained?
Not by forms, places, &c. 6. The gift received (vers. 25, 26). IV. THe Errect
(ver. 28). She hastens away a saved sinner to save others (John i. 41-45). See a
mark of her change, as showing its reality in the fulness of her confession (ver.
29; cf. ver. 17; Luke xix. 8, xxiii. 41; Rom. x. 10). (J. Gill.) Jesus at the
well of Sychar :—The Fourth Gospel may be called the Gospels of the Conver-
sations, for, more than any other, it reports particular interviews of our Lord
with individuals. These conversations, too, are real conversations, for Jesus was
not like some famous men, who discourse in monologue. Even His addresses to the
multitude were often interrupted by the inquiries or remarks of. others, and, in
smaller companies, He guided the conversation, while apparently taking the lesser
part. The “golden silences” of Jesus are very marked, and George Borrow, in
that fascinating book, ‘‘ The Bible in Spain,” relates that the taciturn people of the
little Republic of Andorra noticed these silences, and said of them, ‘‘ Jesus played
the Andorran.” While He spoke with authority, yet He dispelled all feeling of
restraint, and even seemed to awaken in others unwonted freedom. Not un-
frequently He gave the thought, and let them do the talking. Christ never appears
to have saved anything for a large audience, nor feared that any utterance of truth,
breathed into the receptive heart of however humble a hearer, could fail of its
effect. And these conversations all have a personal turn. They attach great
principles to common life, and they lead people through their own needs to the
grandest spiritual truths. Jesus evidently has confidence in the living power of
truth, and therefore does not press it, but leaves His hearers to follow out the idea
and make the application for themselves. If, then, we would understand the effect
of our Lord’s conversation with the woman of Samaria, we must read it in the
message she bore to her people: ‘‘ Come, see a man which told me all things that
ever I did. Can this be the Christ?’ This perfect knowledge of the Christ is our
greatest safeguard. It is needful, to defend us from plunging farther into sin, that
we have the confidence of a loving Saviour. When we are on the verge of tempta-
tion, the thought that He knows and grieves over our past sins may win us back.
When will we learn the noonday lesson taught at the well of Sychar, that it is the
Christ who reveals us to ourselves! It is not for you to find out your sin, but for
Him to reveal it to you. With the Psalmist, you ask God to search you, “ that you
may be led in the way everlasting.” You are to become acquainted with your own
heart by having Him read it to you; and all you can tell Him will be of that which
He has told you before. Repentance now loses its bitterness, because it is the
revelation of the Christ. ‘ Once,” says Luther, ‘‘I thought no word so bitter as
repentance ; now there is none more sweet, and those passages in the Bible that
used to terrify me now smile and sport about me.” In the same spirit, Augustine
says, in his ‘‘ Confessions,” “I will now call to mind my past foulness and the
carnal corruptions of my soul ; not because I love them, but that I may love Thee,
Omy God. For love of Thy love I do it; reviewing my most wicked ways in the
very bitterness of my remembrance, that Thou mayest grow sweet unto me.” ‘The
power of such a revelation of the Christ is manifest in the fact, that the largest
harvest of souls our Lord ever gathered while on earth was reaped in the two days
He spent at Sychar. A soul brought face to face with Him, beholding His glory by
being self-revealed, is a fit instrument to convey to others the advent of the Christ.
(James G. Vose.) The model Teacher :—I. His zuau. 1. He went to a most
unwelcome neighbourhood. His hereditary prejudices were arrayed against it,
yet, when the world of Palestine was open to Him, our Lord must needs go
through it. 2. He became a teacher. What condescension of His; what an
ennobling of the office. 3. He was satisfied with a class of one scholar. He
talked just as long, kindly, and eloquently as He did to thousands. The great


302 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaP. 1.


tan!


doctrines were in many cases given quietly to individuals. Regeneration ta
Nicodemus; resurrection to Martha; spirituality of worship to this woman. 4.
He occupied Himself with a disagreeable pupil. Never was there more unpro-
mising scholar. 5. He laboured with her when He was wearied almost to
exhaustion. II. His Tact. 1. How ingenious He was in catching an illustration
to interest her mind. He took her water-pot for His text, as He did afterwards
fish, loaves, &c. Try to link the unknown on to the known. 2. How quick He
was in turning the illustration so as to impress her conscience. He knew He had
done nothing until He made her feel that she was a sinner. So McCheyne, stand-
ing before a forge fire, said gently to the workmen, ‘“‘ Who can dwell with everlasting
burnings”; and Payson to his coach companion on nearing their destination,
“Are you prepared for the end of the journey which is so much longer than
this??? III. His sprriruauiry, He made the interview religious. Like all other
sinners, the woman wanted to talk about something else. 1. Jesus avoided all
discussion of sectarian questions. She—(1) Proposed sectarian questions; (2)
Suggested ritualistic points; (3) Ventured on speculative inquiries. 2. Jesus
pressed home the one lesson He wanted her to learn first of all. He told her of—
(1) The exact state of her case, and drew her to an admission of it; (2) The
demands of Divine law; (3) The Redeemer’s help. 3. Jesus completed His work
by disclosing Himself. (C.S. Robinson, D.D.) The pedagogy or rudimentary
teaching of Jesus :—The Church has a twofold mission. 1. To collect the masses,
to bear patiently with them and educate them. 2. To go after individuals, person-
ally to lay hold of their inner life in order to bring them into a state of salvation.
Particular communions have leaned some to one side and some to the other.
Romanism has cultivated the social element ; lesser communities have laid greater
stress on individual faith. Both objects ought always to be united. Let us learn
from the pedagogic example of the Lord. Here Hereaches the community through
the individual; but the individual must first be educated to the faith and knowledge
of the truth. There are three steps. I. The first is reached By AWAKENING IN THE
WOMAN A SENSE OF A DEEPER WANT, the desire for something better than this well can
offer. 1. She had regarded life asa matter of sensual enjoyment. The accusa-
tions of conscience had not troubled her, and she was happy in her way. 2. Jesus
makes her discontented. It was not cruel, only inevitably painful, as is a surgical
operation. To destroy quiet is the first step to the cure. Suspended between
heaven and earth our souls are drawn to God, but bound to the world, and in the
latter we seek happiness. This is the delusion of sin. A life of worldliness
assumes a variety of forms, from the most degraded to the most refined, but the
principle is the same, And that all is vanity is the first lesson we must learn and
teach, to excite the desire for “living water.” II. ‘*Go, caALL THY HUSBAND,” is
the second stage. The first is of doubtful result. It may lead right or left; to
pride and contempt of other men who have no aspiration. Christ’s words, there-
fore, lead us from the struggle without to that within, to sin as the occasion
of the mischief. This sin we must willingly know and renounce, ‘This the wornan
was led to by the look of love which read her history in her heart. This teaches
us to enter lovingly into personal life. A tender solicitude unlocks the heart and
encourages confession. ‘The word which exposes sin is the law in the hand of
love. III, Conviction of sin awakens the desire for forgiveness in prayer. The
inquiry respecting Gerizim and Jerusalem was no evasion, but led to the third step
where our Lord refers her to THE HISTORICAL REVELATION FOR SALVATION. Salva.
tion is of the Jews.” God must be worshipped in Spirit, yet the revelation of
Himself was in Israel, and its end the Messias. Itis not enough to tread the path
of inward self-knowledge; we must walk also in the way of faith. Not only do we
move to meet God, He is come to meet us. The truth of salvation is historical
and the historical gospel is a moral certainty. So the woman proved. The saved
individual now seeks to save society. ‘She left her water-pot,” &c. Conclusion;
1. We should go forth and lead souls to Christ as Christ led this woman, 2. No
doubt we shall be weary sometimes, but, if the Master was weary, we need not be
ashamed, Andthewells which men have dug will then be doubly refreshing; for what.
ever the Creator has given to man to enjoy is also given for the refreshment of the
soul. 3. But the soul lives not by these alone, and when the highest matters
press we must be prepared to renounce them, for they do not quench the soul’s
deepest thirst. (C, H. Luthardt, D.D.) Characteristics of Christ displayed in
this conversation :—I. Our Lord’s mercy is remarkable. That such an one as He
should deal so graciously with such ® sinner is a striking fact. Il. His wispom


i a i te


CHAP. W.J ST. JOHN. 803


How wise was every step of His way in dealing with this sinful soul! IU. His
PATIENCE. How He bore with the woman’s ignorance, and what trouble He took
to lead her to knowledge. IV. His powzr. What a complete victory He won at
last! How almighty must that grace be which could soften and convert such a
carnal and wicked heart! (Bp. Ryle.) Subsidiary points :—I. Human FoLLy anp
Divine wispDom in contrast. II. Our Lorp’s rmaL HUMANITY in His subjection to
weariness and thirst. III. Our Lorn’s reat Divinrry in the mastery of all the
secrets of the human heart. IV. Our Lorp’s wiLINGNESS TO IMPART THE DEEPEST
TRUTHS TO THE HUMBLEST understanding, thus assuring us that, although God has
hid these things from the wise and prudent, He has revealed them unto babes. (Hi.
J. Van Dyke, D.D.) When ... the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and
baptized more disciples than John.—The journey to Samaria :—I, Tam DEPARTURE.
The reason for it was the jealousy of the Pharisees at Christ’s success. 1. Jesus
saw that a storm was coming, and withdrew. To abandon the profession or defence
of the gospel from dread of suffering is quite a different thing from the persecuted
Christian in one city fleeing to another to there hold forth the Word of life. 2. It
is that persecutors are not always the open enemies, but are sometimes the pro-
fessed friends, of religion, and that the name of God has often been associated with
relentless cruelty. 3. The Pharisees did not hear Christ, but received reports
doubtless exaggerated, for they heard that He personally baptized. 4. The great
work of the ministry is not to baptize, but to preach. They are Christ’s fellow-
workers in discriminating the truth, but not fellow-workers with the Spirit in com-
municating grace. II, Tue arnivan. 1. Although the district was alien, there
were souls to be saved. (1) To the eye of man Jesus appeared to be fleeing from
persecution. (2) To the eye of God the visit was part of a mysterious plan by which
the glory of the Divine government was to be revealed. (3) To the eye of faith it
offers an illustration of the mannerin which the purpose of God is fulfilled. 2. Christ’s
presence and work at Sychar, with its illustrious antecedents, offer encouragements
to prayer for those who are to come after us. (1) Parents should be stimulated to
pray for children’s children. (2) Believers to p'ead for the future of the Church.
(A, Beith, D.D.) Christ driven away :—I. Vatse TEACHERS ARE ENEMIES TO THE
rrvz. They will join with corrupt magistrates and favour their villainies (Isa. ix.
15), as the Pharisees did Herod against John. Christ, therefore, will rather trust
Herod in Galilee than the Pharisees in Judea (cf. Acts xxv. 11). II. Ir 1s no
UNCHARITABLENESS, BUT WISDOM, TO SUSPECT WICKED MEN; as Christ did the
Puariskes. III, WHEN ONE TEACHER IS GONE GOD CAN RAISE UP ANOTHER. The
Pharisees thought themselves well when John was out of the way, but Christ
gives them more displeasure (Mark i. 14). They thought themselves sure when
Christ was crucified, but Christ raised up twelve more to do greater things than
Himself. Ministers are mortal, but the Church is immortal (Psa, ii. 1). IV.
PROMISES ARE TO BE SEALED TO THOSE ONLY WHO REPENT AND BELIEVE. 1. Disciples
were made—2. Then were baptized. V. Gop TURNS THE MALICE OF MEN TO THE
coop oF His Cuurcn. The Pharisees drove Christ to Galilee, but on the way a
whole city was brought to Him. An ill wind that blows nobody good. (Jer. Dyke.)
The retreat of Jesus :—The first turning point in His official life, I. Motives. The
Pharisees began to watch Him with hostile eyes; the Baptist is imprisoned. II.
Cuaracter. Free consciousness. He retreats—1. In free discretion, without fear,
2. In holy discretion, “the Lord knew.” II. Ricu Resvuurs. Beneficent sojourn
in Samaria. IV. Sienrricancy. 1. He ceases to baptize. 2. He tarries in Samaria
on His return. Lhe rite of baptism :—I. As PRACTISED BY JOHN (chap. i. 25-28,
33, iii. 23; cf. Matt. iii. 12; Mark i, 4-8; Luke iii. 3, 20). 1. Its nature—water
baptism. Its mode uncertain. The word signifies either the application of an
object to water or water to.an object. Hence to immerse (2 Kings v. 14) or to wash
(Mark vii. 4; Luke xi. 38). Against immersion in the present case stand—(1) The
multitudes ; (2) The impromptu and public manner ; (3) Its practice in all seasons.
In favour of pouring is the contraposition of * with water” and “with the Spirit”
(chap. i. 33), by which the two baptisms are distinguished. The believer is not
immersed in the Holy Ghost, but the Holy Ghost descends on the believer. 2. Its
import—purification of the outer life ; reformation rather than regeneration. 3.
Its design—preparation for Messiah. 4, Its obligation—faith. The recipient was
bound to believe in and go over to the Messiah when He appeared. II. As
CELEBRATED BY Curist (through His disciples) (chap. ili. 22-26). 1. Its resemblance
to John’s. (1) Performed in the same way. (2) Possessed the same significance.
(3) Looked towards the same end. 2. Its difference from John’s, Administered —


304 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Iv.
Ow eee
(1) By Christ’s express authority. (2) To such as professed their faith in a
“gome’? Messiah. (3) With a view of admitting to Christian discipleship, (4)
As an acknowledgment of obligation to learn and obey. III. As ADMINISTERED BY
THE APOSTLES (Matt. xxviii. 19; Mark xvi. 16; Actsii. 38,41, vii. 13, 36, ix. 18, &.). 1.
How far it agreed with the preceding. (1) In form it was a baptism with water.
(2) In authority it rested on the commandment of Christ. (3) In significance it
symbolized purification and sealed faith in the Messiah. (4) In effect it introduced
to the Messianic Church. (5) In design it bound to acceptance of the teaching and
obedience to the rule of Christ. 2. How far it went beyond the preceding. It—
(1) Rested on the anthority of the risen as well as of the incarnate Christ. (2)
Symbolized inward renewal by the reception of the Holy Ghost. (3) Was
administered on a profession of faith, not simply in the Messiah, but in the
Trinity. (4) Was not restricted to the Jewish people. (5) Was not provisional,
but permanent. (ZT. Whitelaw, D.D.) Why Christ did not personally baptize :—
Lightfoot mentions because—1. He was not sent so much to baptize as to preach,
2. It might have been taken as a thing somewhat improper for Christ to baptize in
His own name. 38. The baptizing that was most proper for Christ to use was not
with water, but with the Holy Ghost. 4. He would prevent all quarrels and
disputes among men about their baptism, which might have risen if some had been
baptized by Christ and others only by His disciples. To these reasons we may
add another of considerable importance. Our Lord would show us that the effect
and benefit of baptism do not depend on the person who administers it. We can-
not doubt that Judas Iscariot baptized some. The intention of the minister does
not affect the validity of the sacrament. One thing seems abundantly clear, and
that is, that baptism is not an ordinance of primary, but of subordinate, impor-
‘tance in Christianity. The high-flown and extravagant language used by some
divines about the sacrament of baptism and its effects is quite irreconcilable with
the text before us, as well as with the general teaching of Scripture (see Acts x. 48;
1 Cor. i. 17). The three baptisms :—There are three degrees in the institution:
John’s baptism, which was a general consecration to the Messianic kingdom by
repentance ; the baptitm of Jesus, an attachment to His person as a disciple;
baptism as reconstituted by Jesus after His resurrection as a consecration to the
possession of salvation thenceforth acquired by Him for the whole world. We do
not find that the subjects of the first baptism (the apostles, e.g.) were afterwards
subjected to the second or third. It was they, on the contrary, who were charged
with administering the two last (ver. 2; Acts ii.). (F. Godet, D.D.) He left
Judza.—From Jerusalem to Nazareth, by way of the hill towns of Shiloh, Sychar,
Nain, and Endor, the distance, as a bird would fly, is about sixty-four miles, being
nearly the same as that from Oxford to London. By the camel paths, and there
are no other, it is eighty miles. A good rider, having little baggage and less
curiosity, may get over the ground in two long days; to do so, however, he must
make up bis mind to spend twelve hours each day in the saddle, on stony hill-sides
with very little water, and still less shade, under the blazing light of a Syrian sun.
An easy journey, with time to rest and read, to see the wells, ruins, and cities on
the route, may be made in four days; though better stillin five. The Lord and His
disciples went through the land on foot, resting by the wells, under the shade of
fig-trees, in the caves of rocks. The first part of this journey, a ride of thirty-six
miles from the Damascus gate, to be done in about twelve hours, brings you to one
of the most lovely and attractive spots in Palestine—the site of Joseph’s tomb and
Jacob’s well. (W.H. Dizon.) The original word, aginut, is a remarkable one;
cara\eizo might have been expected (Matt. iv. 15; Heb. xi. 27); and there is no
exact parallel in the New Testament to this usage (yet comp. chap. xvi. 28). The
general idea that it conveys is that of leaving anything to itself, to its own
wishes, ways, fate; of withdrawing whatever controlling power was exercised
before. Christ had claimed Jerusalem as the seat of His royal power, and Judea
as His kingdom. That claim He now in one sense gave up. (Canon Westcott.)
He must needs go through Samaria.—Christ and the Samaritans.—The ministry of
Christ may be divided into two sections, the Galilean and the Judean. Taking
Capernaum as a centre and describing a circle of ten miles, and taking the Temple
as a centre and describing another circle of equal radius—between these two points
the life of Christ oscillated. Separating the two provinces was a strip of country
inhabited by a mongrel semi-alien race—the Samaritans, between whom and the
Jews there was a long-standing feud. How will Christ treat it? Will He pass
round it? Will He widen the chasm? Or will He join the two in one? Let us


oHAP, Iv.} ST. JOHN. 805


see. I. WHEN CHRIST SPEAKS OF THE SAMARITANS IT IS IN WORDS OF FAVOUR AND COM-
MENDATION. 1. In the Samaritan ‘‘Stranger” of Luke xvii. 11-20, He finds the
truest worship of Jehovah offered, not on Moriah, nor yet on Gerizim, but by the
wayside. 2. In the parable of the Good Samaritan a comparison is drawn between
the Samaritan and the Jew, to the eternal honour of the one, and the eternal shame
of the other. The former is placed beside the very élite of Judaism, the priest and
Levite,.and the Master uses their selfish inhumanity as a foil to throw out more
clearly and brightly the noble generosity of this “stranger.” 3. Christ is Himself
called a Samaritan (chap. viii. 48), doubtless because of His strong Samaritan
leanings, and He does not protest. II. Curist sEEKS TO REMOVE THE PREJUDICES
or His DISCIPLES BY PERSONAL CONTACT WITH THE DESPISED RACE. 1. The exception
(Matt. x. 5) is due to their narrow views and prejudices. 2. Christ takes them with
Him into Samaria (chap. iv.) and sends them to ‘“‘have dealings” with the Samari-
tans; and tarries with them there two days (ver. 40), and thus the old prejudices
are removed by friendly hospitalities. III. Curist oFFERED TO THE SAMARITANS THE
PRIVILEGES oF His xinaepom. 1. He deigns to ask a favour of the Samaritan woman


~ and speaks one of the sublimest discourses of Hisministry. 2. She and her fellow-


citizens proclaim Christ the Messiah. 3. Asa result of this the chasm is filled up
(Acts i. 8, viii. 5-8). Henceforth the Samaritan is no more the ‘‘ stranger,” but ‘‘a
fellow-citizen with the saints, and of the household of God.” (H. Burton, M.A.)
Utilizing disagreeable necessities :—1. The first signs of hostility to Christ (ver. 1).
2. The prudence of the Master. Just as it was necessary for Him to die for a
world’s salvation, so now it is required that He should live in order that the true
cause and nature of His death may be manifest. There is therefore nothing
unworthy about this escape. 3. We must seek the explanation of this movement,
not in the eternal decrees. Samaria would proveaneutral zone to keep His enemies
at a distance, and while passing through it would not probably be followed. And
besides, it admitted of His utilizing what might have been an anxious period and a
waste of time. I. He IGNORED A FALSE DISTINCTION. Ceremonial cleanness and
goodness were confounded by the Jews; a confusion rectified by the Parable of the
Good Samaritan. Church and society are still full of such distinctions. 1. It is
for us, not wantonly, but on sufficient occasion to expose and set at nought the
error. 2. To get at true distinctions one must first expose false ones. But we must
be sure that it is false and that the true does not preponderate, and that we have
something better to substitute. 3. Wisdom and courage are, therefore, necessary.
4. No safer guide can be found than a strong desire to do good and glorify God.
II. He convERTED AN INCONVENIENCE TO A SPIRITUAL USE. He is a fugitive, but He
does not hurry through the country, nor forget its spiritual destitution in His own
sorrows. 1, Annoyance or ill temper at the disturbance of settled plans ought not
to make us weary in well doing. Many are idle in the Church because they cannot
get the particular thing they like best. But the greatest discoveries and reforms
have been effected by the determination to do what we can. 2. Illtreatment on the
part of professors is no excuse for idleness or cynicism. 3. Nor ought we to be
engrossed with our own troubles. Doing good is the way to recovery. 4. Let us
try to improve the unpleasant and unfortunate people and leave the world better
than we find it. III. A SPECIAL BLESSING ATTENDED His IRREGULAR EXTEMPORIZED
misston. Each incident links itself easily on to another. It almost seems a beau-
tiful creature of circumstances. Inconyeniences are often Providential. A fault in
the strata may point to richer seams. (A. I’. Muir, M A.) The needs be :—I. By
THE DETERMINATE COUNSEL AND ‘FOREKNOWLEDGE oF Gop. 1, A wandering star was
to be reclaimed from its devious orbit. 2. The locality was most unpromising. a
What the Church would have missed had this chapter been lacking. II. Tue
PEERLESS VALUE OF A SINGLE SOUL IN THE sicHT or Cunist. The narrative is the
parable of the Lost Sheep in impressive reality. III. THe YEARNING PERSONAL LOVE
oF THE Saviour. IV. LET NONE DEEM THEMSELVES BEYOND THE PALE OF CHRIST’S
SYMPATHY AND succour. (J. Macduff, D.D.) The occasion of the journey :—He
must needs go through Samaria, not only because that province lay in His way, but
because He was hungry, and in poor half-heathen Samaria lay the savoury meat
which His soul loved. In the same manner He must needs pass through our nature
and our world, as He goes from the glory of the eternity past to the glory of the
eternity to come. It was not any physical necessity ; for the Maker of all worlds
might have found another path from glory to glory without visiting this shooting
star. But He must needs pass through the abode of fallen humanity on His way
to the throne of the kingdom, because He longed to save the lost with a longing like


=>


806 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. 1¥.
iE eee nnn am eh ia TkN RSP PS
hunger, and here only could be found the food that would satisfy His soul. Hisown
sovereign love laid the necessity upon Himself. The sun, His creature, is under an
inherent necessity of giving out light; so Christ, the light of the world, must needs
give out the light of life, and therefore He casts Himself in the way of a dark world,
as the hungry seeks food and the thirsty makes his way towards water-springs. (W.

Arnot, D.D.) In the path of Christ:—Happy for them that they lay in our
Saviour’s way to be looked upon: His paths drop fatness. Luther had rather be
in hell with Christ than in heaven without Him. (J. Trapp.) Providence shown
in conversions :—Now, there are divers things in those providences which are versant
about this work, and exceedingly sweet and taking; as, viz., The wonderful strange-
ness and unaccountableness of this work of Providence in casting us into the way,
and ordering the occasions, yea, the minutest circumstances about this work. Thus
you find in Acts viii. 26-30. The eunuch, at that very instant when he was reading
the prophet Isaiah, had an interpreter, one among a thousand, that joins his chariot
just as his mind was, by a fit occasion, prepared to receive the first light of the
knowledge of Christ. So, for the conversion of the Samaritans, if is observed
(chap. iv. 4) Christ must needs go that way, because it lay just in the road betwixt
Judea and Galilee, and at the sixth hour, i.e., high noon, He rests Himself upon
Jacob’s well, still seeming to have no other design but His own refreshment, by
sitting and drinking there; but, oh! what a train of blessed providences follow this,
which seemed but an accidental thing! First, the woman of Samaria, and then
many more in that city, are brought to believe in Christ, as you find in verses 29
and 41. (J. Flavel.) Unquenchable enthusiasm :—When I was going to Europe
in 1867, my friend Mr. Stuart, of Philadelphia, said, ‘Be sure to be at the General
Assembly in Edinburgh, in June. I was there last year,” said he, “and it did me
a world of good.” He said that a returned missionary (Dr. Duff) from India was
invited to speak to the General Assembly on the wants of India. This veteran
missionary, after a brief address, told the pastors who were present to go home and
stir up their churches to send young men to India to preach the gospel. He spoke
with such earnestness, that after awhile he fainted, and they carried him from the
Hall. When he recovered he asked where he was, and they told him the circum-
stances under which he had been brought there. ‘ Yes,” he said, ‘I was making a
plea for India, and I did not quite finish my speech, did I?” After being told that
he did not, he said, “ Well, take me back and let me finish it.” But they said,
‘*No, you will die in the attempt.’’ ‘* Well,” said he, ‘I shall die if I do not,” and
the old man asked again that they would allow him to finish his plea, When he
was taken back, the whole congregation stood as one man, and as they brought him
on the platform, with a trembling voice he said: ‘‘ Fathers and mothers of Scotland,
is it true that you will not let your sons go to India? I spent twenty-five years of
my life there. I lost my health, and I have come back with sickness and shattered
health. If itis true that we have no strong grandsons to go to India, I will pack
up what I have and be off to-morrow, and I will let those heathen know that if I
cannot live for them I will die for them.” (D. L. Moody.) Commendable
enthusiasm :—Exception being taken, as I have said, to his energy and vehemence

Rowland Hill told how he had once seen a vast bank of earth, below which some men
were at work, suddenly rend asunder; and leaving its bed, precipitate itself forward to
bury them alive before they could utter a cry, or move a foot to escape. And who
then, he asked, found fault with me, because, in my anxiety to save them, my cries
for help were loud enough to call the neighbourhood td the rescue, and be heard a
long mile away. Left there, they perished, miserably perished—needing what God,
not man, always is, ‘‘a very present help in trouble.” (Dr. Guthrie.) Our
attitude towards Samaria :—There is much in the disposition of the Samaritans
that reminds us of the feelings of thousands of our own population to-day. Not
only are they alienated from our faith, but they suspect us of a haughty and exelu-
sive, or at least patronising attitude towards them. There is no fiercer resentment
than the pharisaic spirit excites. Note the example of Christ. I. Curist pors Not
AvoiD Samaria. He will not shun those who entertain prejudices unpleas»nt to
encounter, And we shall never restore the slums to piety if we skirt them with
dainty feet. II. Curisr porns Not HURRY THROUGH SAMARIA, BUT SEEKS CONVERSE
WITH ITS INHABITANTS. None mere hurried visits to the headquarters of prejudice

rushing as through a cloud of suffocating smoke we must encounter, but amidst
which we will not stay, will suffice. There must be true intercourse. III. Curisr
IS FORBEARING IN His atrirupr. His first overture is met with a half-playful, half.
bitter reminder of what He never sanctioned, the division of sentiment between


»*
ime


>. 27a


=


CHAP. IV.
rv.) . ST. JOHN. 807


Jew and Samaritan. Whatdo we oftener meet? It is irritati i

the conduct of those whose spirit we do not share, ee ee
their religious name. But weruin our influence by recrimination or bitter re idee
Like Christ, we must gently ignore the taunt. IV. Curist, witH eae TACT,
INTRODUCES His cosrrn. Had He commenced controversially, the woman’s heart
would have been hardened; had He commenced with His final announcement (ver
26), she would have been sceptical; had He commenced with such words as He
used to learned Nicodemus, she would have been hopelessly bewildered. But He
takes “water” for His text to this water-carrier, and in a picture lesson unfolds the
truth. Ours are blind eyes if they see not texts in the commonest things, where-
from we may preach the gospel of the kingdom. In that gospel Jew and Samaritan
alike find hope and peace. (W. Hawkins.) He cometh to a city of Samaria
called Sychar.—The locality :—This name is only found in St. John iv. 5, but
it is universally considered to be the same as Sichem or Shechem which is
frequently mentioned in the Old Testament history. Dr. Robinson "(Bib Res
iii, 118) says, ‘‘ In consequence of the batred of the Jews, and in allusion to the
idolatry of the Samaritans, the town Sichem probably received among the Jewish
common people the by-name of Sychar, which we find in the Gospel of St. John;
while Stephen, in addressing the more courtly Sanhedrim, employs the ancient
name (Acts. vii. 16). Sychar might be derived from a Hebrew root, meaning either
falsehood or drunkard.” Josephus describes Shechem as between Mount Gerizim
and Mount Ebal. The present Nabulus is a corruption of Neapolis; and Neapolis
succeeded the more ancient Shechem. The city received its new name from
Vespasian. The situation of the town is one of surpassing beauty. It lies in a
sheltered valley, protected by Gerizim on the south and Ebal on the north. The
feet of these mountains, where they rise from the town, are not more than 500
yards apart. The bottom of the valley is about 1,800 feet above the level of the sea
and the top of Gerizim 800 feet higher still. The site of the present city, which is
believed to have been also that of the Hebrew city, occurs exactly on the water-
summit; and streams issuing from the numerous springs there, flow down the
opposite slopes of the valley, spreading verdure and fertility in every direction.
Travellers vie with each other in the language which they employ to describe the
scene that bursts here so suddenly upon them on arriving in spring or early summer
at this paradise of the Holy Land. ‘‘Here,” says Dr. Robinson (iii. 96) ‘a scene
of luxuriant and almost unparalleled verdure burst upon our view. The whole
valley was filled with gardens of vegetables, and orchards of all kinds of fruit,
watered by several fountains, which burst forth in various parts, and flow westward
in refreshing streams. It came upon us suddenly like a scene of fairy enchantment.
We saw nothing to compare with it in all Palestine. Here, beneath the shade of
an immense mulberry-tree, by the side of a purling rill, we pitched our tent for the
remainder of the day and night. . . . We rose early, awakened by-the songs of
nightingales and other birds, of which the gardens around us were full.” (#. H.
Dunwell, B.A.) Its history :—Few places in Palestine, after Jerusalem, have had
so much of Bible history connected with them, Here God first appeared to
Abraham (Gen. xii.6). Here Jacob dwelt when he first returned from Padan-aram,
and here the disgraceful history of Dinah, and the consequent murder of the
Shechemites took place (Gen. xxxiv. 2, &c.). Here Joseph’s brethren fed their flocks
when Jacob sent him to them, little thinking he would not see him again for many
years (Gen, xxxvii.12). Here, when Israel took possession of the land of Canaan,
was one of the cities of refuge (Josh. xx.7,8). Here Joshua gathered all the tribes,
when he addressed them for the last time (Josh. xxiv. 1). Here the bones of Joseph
were buried, and all the patriarchs were interred (Josh. xxiv. 32; Acts vii.16). Here
the principal events in the history of Abimelech took place (Judges ix. 1, &c.). Here
Rehoboam met the tribes of Israel after Solomon’s death, and gave the answer
which rent his kingdom in two (1 Kings xii.1). Here Jeroboam first dwelt, when he
was made king of Israel (1 Kings xii. 25). And finally, close by Shechem was the
city of Samaria itself, and the two hills of Ebal and Gerizim, where the solemn
blessings and cursings were recited, after Israel entered Canaan (Josh. viii. 33). A
more interesting neighbourhood it is difficult to imagine. Whichever way the eye
of a wearied traveller looked, he would see something to remind him of Israel’s
history. (Bp. Ryle.) The parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
In two different ways this had come into the hands of Jacob. First, he had
purchased it from the ‘‘ children of Hamor,” and then, when the Amorite invaded
it, and took violent, unrighteous possession, he had, with his ‘“ sword and his bow,”


308 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. 1%
recovered it. The land thus belonged to Jacob by right of purchase and by right
of conquest: it became the property of his son by gift, by inheritance, and by
grateful acceptance on his part. Our spiritual Jacob has both purchased our


inheritance and taken it out of the hand of the Amorite; so likewise He bestows it


freely on His dear children and they gratefully receive it, and rejoice in it as their
portion. Eternal life is at once the gift of God and the fruit of faith. It becomes
ours according to His eternal purpose, and also by the faith which accepts it—such
faith as that of Joseph. Joseph was in Egypt, apparently independent of Canaan.
The time when he or his seed could claim the inheritance was far distant—four
hundred years of dreadful bondage were included in the intervening period—but
Joseph believed. ‘‘ God will surely visit you,” said he to his descendants, when he
was dying, ‘and ye shall carry up my bones frem hence.” A similar faith had
dictated the words of Jacob. ‘Behold I die, but God shall be with you, and
bring you again to the land of your fathers.” A faith having the same origin,
exercised against the same discouragements, and producing the same blessed
fruits of patience, endurance, and hope, must be ours. (A. Beith, D.D.)
Now Jacob’s well was there.—Jesus found at the well:—Some years since there
lived in the west of England a well-known character called ‘ Foolish Dick.”
Not being considered quite sharp, one day he was going for a pitcher of
water, when a good old man hailed him with ‘‘So, Dick, you are going to
the well.” ‘‘ Yes,” he replied. ‘Well, Dick, the woman of Samaria found
Jesus at the well.” ‘‘Did she?” was the answer. ‘“ Yes,’’ said the good old
Christian. Dick passed on, full of thought; the remark riveted on his mind
by the Holy Spirit, quickening him into new life. He thought, ‘‘Why should
T not find Jesus at the well? Oh, thatI could find Him! Will He come to me?”
He prayed, and found Christ at the well; left his water-pot to tell his neighbours
what he had found, and from that time proved the reality of his conversion by his
holy and active life, proclaiming Christ to others. Suffering begets sympathy :—
Jesus Himself being weary was the more able and apt to help this poor Samaritress.
He that hath had the toothache will pity those that haveit. ‘* Weare orphans all,”
said Queen Elizabeth in her speech to the children at Christ’s Hospital, ‘‘ let me
enjoy your prayers, and ye shall be sure of my assistance.” (J. Trapp.) No
sympathy without suffering :—Johnson, whose robust frame was not in the least
affected by cofd, scolded me as if my shivering had been a paltry effeminacy, say-
ing, ‘‘ Why do you shiver?” Sir William Scott told me that when he complained
of a headache, in the post-chaise, Johnson treated him in the same manner. ‘“ At
your age, sir, I had no headache.” (Boswell.) Jesus sitting on the well :—Many
things remind us of our Lord: a well, a weary peasant resting atnoon. How truly
human was Jesus! 1. How worn was His humanity. He was more weary than
His disciples, (1) He had a greater mental strain than they. (2) He had a
weariness they knew not of. 2. His self-denials even then were remarkable, (1)
He would in all points be made like unto His brethren. (2) He would. not
exempt Himself from fatigue. (3) He would not work a miracle for His own
refreshment. (4) He would not refuse to bear heat, thirst, exhaustion. 3. Hehas
thus made Himself able to sympathize with—(1) The traveller who rests by the
road-side. (2) The labourer worn out with toil. (3) The sufferer who feels pain.
(4) The poor man who must rest on a cold stone, and look for refreshment to the
public fountain. (5) The weary mind. I. Ler your conscrmNcr DRAW A SPIRITUAL
PICTURE OF YOUR WEARIED Saviour. He is wearied with our—l. Sins (Isa. xliii. 24).
2. Formal worship (Isa, i. 14). 3. Errings through unbelief (Psa. xev.10). 4.
Resistance of His Spirit (Isa. lxiii. 10), 5. Cavillings and rebellions (Mal. ii. 17).
Perhaps we have specially wearied the Lord, as we read in Amos ii. 13, where sin-
gular provocations are mentioned, That is a grave question asked by the prophet
Isaiah (vii.13). II. Ler your conscreNcr DRAW A SPIRITUAL PICTURE OF YOUR WAIT-
ina Saviour. He waits—l. For comers to the well: He seizes on all occasions
to bless, such as affliction, the hearing of the Word, the recurrence of a birthday, or
even the simplest event of life. Men have other errands; they come to the well
only to draw water, but the Lord meets them with His greater‘errand. 2, For the
most sinful: she that had five husbands. 8. To enlighten, convince, convert.
4, To accept and to commission. 5. To begin by one convert the ingathering of
a great harvest. How long He has waited for some of you! At how many points
has He been on the outlook for you? Is He not waiting for you at this very hour ?
Will you not yield to His patient love? III. Luv youR PENITENCE DRAW ANOTHER Pio-
TURE. Alter the position of the character. 1. Be yourself weary of your sinful way.


CHAP, IVv.] ST. JOHN. 309
Sneha og NN 5! aa
2. Sit down on the well of your Lord’s gracious ordinances, 3. Waitand watch till
your Saviour comes. 4. Ask Him to give you to drink, and, in so doing, give Him
to drink, for this is His best refreshment. 5. Drink yourselves of the living water
and then run to tell uthers, Conclusion: Will you not do this at once? May His
Holy Spirit so direct you! (C. H. Spurgeon.) Lhe weary pilgrim :—1. If now,
with all the comforts of tent and equipage, the modern traveller finds locomotion
oppressive and exhausting, what must it have been to Christ with no aid but the
staff and rough sandal? 2. It is in such incidental occurrences that our Lord’s
humanity’and condescension are most touchingly exemplified. 3. He worked
miracles for others, never for Himself. 4. My Saviour is my brother. He took
not on Him the nature of angels. (1) Because angelic natureis a Spiritual essence
and incapable of corporeal suffering. (2) Because He could not then have partici-
pated in feeling with those He came to redeem. 5. But my Saviour is my Lord or
He could never have relieved my want. I. Let the weary WITH LIFE’s JOURNEY,
with pain, travail, and loneliness consider Him, lest they be weary and faint in their
souls. II, Let the weary wir sin who have come up through hot valleys of temp-
tation, and are now sitting by poisoned wells, the pitcher broken at the cistern, the
zest of life gone, without shelter, hear Him say, ‘‘ Come unto Me and I will give you
rest.” III. Let those wEARY WITH THE BURDEN AND HEAT OF THE DAY IN THE MIDST
OF THEIR LIFE’S CALLING, in manhood’s sixth hour, one half of existence over, hasten
to Him, lest the valley of death, like the valley of Shechem, be close at hand while
the fountain of life is neglected. Conclusion. You are Spiritually between the Ebal
of courses andthe Gerizim of blessings—Which are you tochoose? (J. R. Macduff,
D.D.) Christ in His human weakness and Divine exaltation ;—I, WEARY AND YET
THE REST OF A WEARY souL. II. Tuirsty AnD yeT a FounrTAIN, III. Hunary
AND YET ENJOYING HEAVENLY FooD. IV. Lrrr anonn AND YET IN SPIRIT suUR-
ROUNDED WITH APPROACHING NATIONS. (Lange.) Weariness and work ;—1. This
world is a place of weariness through sin; but love is a weariness that heaven
approves, that of the Shepherd seeking the lost sheep. 2. There is a great mystery
in this weariness: for the weary man was God; but He was weary that we might
have rest. I. CHRIST’s WEARINESS AS IT REFLECTS OUR OwN. 1. Christ was weary
in His work, not of it. 2. We need not be surprised, therefore, if we are weary.
3. When so, wait upon Him to renew thy strength. JI. Wrariness CAN BE PUT TO
purpPosE. 1. Under the most unlikely circumstances God can bring us work and
refreshment at the same time. Christ had to all appearance turned His back on
His work; but He had-not, and when He seemed most unfit He did it most effec-
tively. So Paul was taken from work to prison, but then he was instrumental in
the jailers conversion. 2. The willing heart will often create its own opportunities.
Christ was weary but watchful, A willing heart can find its work at any time and
place. We think we could do more were we better placed. But Christ says, ‘‘ He
that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much.” 3. An earnest
mind will avail itself of small opportunities, and through little things become really
great. Christ was contented with a congregation of one. He did not preach sen-
sational sermons, but sermons which created a sensation. He spake as earnestly to
one as toa thousand. III. Curisr asks us tHRouGH His WEARY REPRESENTATIVES
TO MINISTER To His weariness. The poor, sick, widows, orphans, overworked
pastors, &c., in Christ’s name ery, ‘‘Give me to drink.” (W. Poole Balfern.)
The realness of the scene:—By a singular fate this authentic and expressive
memorial of the earliest dawn of Jewish history became the memorial no less
authentic and expressive of its sacred close. Of all the special localities of our
Lord’s life in Palestine, this is almost the only one absolutely undisputed. By the
edge of the well, in the touching language of the ancient hymn, “ Qucereus me,
sedisti lassus.” Here He halted, as travellers still halt, in the noon or evening of
the day. Up that valley His disciples ‘went away into the city.” Down the
same gorge came the woman to draw water, according to the unchanged custom of
the East; which still, in the lively concourse of veiled figures round the wayside
wells, reproduce the image of Rebekah, and Rachel, and Zipporah. Above
them, as they talked, rose ‘this mountain” of Gerizim, crowned by the Temple,
of which vestiges still remain, where the Samaritan sect ‘‘said men ought
to worship,” and to which still, after so many centuries, their descendants turn
as to the only sacred spot in the universe: the strongest example of local wor-
ship in the world, where the sacredness of local worship was declared to be at
an end. And round about them spread far and wide the noble plain of waving
corn. It was still winter or early spring, “four months yet to the harvest;


a si


310 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. IV.
iden Divirtinmatet MES RESO Se
and the bright golden ears had not yet ‘‘ whitened” their unbroken expanse
of verdure. He gazed upon them; and we almost seem to see how the glorious
vision of the Gentile world, with each successive turnin the conversation, unfolded
itself more and more distinctly before Him, as He sate absorbed in the opening
prospect, silent amidst His silent and astonished disciples. (Dean Stanley.) Jacob’s
well an emblem of the sanctuary :—Note that—I. No Good DEEDS ARE EVER DONE IN
VAIN, AND THAT THEY HAVE POWER TO BLESS MANY AGES TO coME. 1. None can measure
his power for good. Influence may be mightier after death than in life. When
Jacob dug that well, he little thought of the multitudes for whose refreshment he
was providing, or of this sacred incident. Do you think the discoverer of printing
foresaw the penny newspaper, or Columbus New York, and Boston, and Chicago?
God watches over good efforts, and influences to bless them. 2. But if Jacob knew
not all his well would do, he knew it would bless. How like a well is a gospel
sanctuary! Look at the desert all around—how refreshing this spot in contrast.
Here the weary find rest, the thirsty water. 3. Churches, like wells (1) are made
by man’s effort, but filled with God’s gift; (2) Are not stagnant pools but living
springs? II. Jesus stILL REFRESSES HIMSELF AT WELLS BUILT BY His PEOPLE. a:
What was it that refreshed Him here? ‘My meat,” &. 2. And Jesus still comes
into our sanctuaries, and asks for small gifts of love as the return for His own
greater love. He is yearning to find satisfaction in souls—waiting to see the full
fruits of His servants efforts to save men. 38. How grateful was Jesus for this seat.
He commanded John to record this gratitude. None of us will ever regret anything
done to please Jesus. 4. You say, if I had seen Him, I would have invited Him to
my home. Have you opened you heart to the heavenly Guest? III. Tus wEu 18
CHRIST’S APPOINTED PLACE TO MEET UNSATISFIED souts. 1. He was there before the
woman, waiting for her, and thoughtfully sent away the disciples that no restraint
might check her conversation. Has He not promised to meet His people in His
house? Have you not often said, “It was as though the preacher knew all my
circumstances.” 2. That woman, often like ourselves, little expected to find her
Saviour. 3. She left her water-pot, and how often have you left your burdens.
IV. THis WELL IS THE PLACE FOR QUIET FREE CONVERSATION WITH THE SAVIOUR,
where Christ wants to enlighten, refresh, and pardon. (R. H. Lovell.) Why
religious ordinances are sometimes unprofitable :—The ordinances of religion are
compared to wells of water; but then they are like Jacob’s well. The water lies
far below the surface, and to the man of the world, the mere professor of religion,
who has the name but not the faith of a Christian, we may say, as the woman said
to our Lord, ‘ Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the wellis deep.” Faith
is, as it were, the rope, and our souls the vessels, which we let down into this well
to fill them with living water. But that they do no good to some forms no reason
why we should despise or neglect ordinances. It is no fault in the bread that,
thrust between a dead man’s teeth, it does not nourish him. Water will revive a
withering, but not a withered, plant; wine will revive a dying, but not a dead,
man; the breath of your mouth, or the breeze of heaven, will re-kindle the
smouldering coal, but not the cold, grey ashes of the hearth. And it is only
spiritual life that can derive benefit from such ordinances as are intended to revive
the faint and give strength to the weary. (D. Guthrie, D.D.) The ordinances
necessary :—Christ is the well of the water of life. Itis by faith the soul reaches out
after this living water. Faith is the soul’s muscular action, by which the water is
drawn up and brought into use. But faith needs as an implement those means
which Christ has appointed. These means are the pitcher in which the water is
conveyed. Faithis not a Christ; neither are sacraments a Christ; but faith (under
all circumstances) and sacraments where they may be had, are necessary to the ap-
propriation and enjoyment of Christ. (Dean Goulburn.) Influence after death :—
It is related of a broker in one of the Italian cities that his strict economy brought
on him the reputation of miserliness, He lived plainly and poorly, and at his death
a hundred thousand men in the city were ready to curse him until his will was
opened, in which he declared that early his heart was touched with the sufferings of
the poor in the city for the lack of water. Springs there were none, and the public
wells were bad; and he had spent his life in accumulating a fortune that should be
devoted to bringing, by an aqueduct, from the neighbouring mountains, streams that
should pour abundantly into the baths and dwellings of the poor of the city; and
he not only denied himself of many of the comforts of life, but toiled by day and by
night, yea, and bore obloquy, that he might bless his fellow-citizens. He is dead ;
but those streams pour their health yet into the city. (H. W. Beecher.) Value


CHAP. Iv.] ST, JOHN. 811
of a wellin the East :—When we remember that in the land where most of the
Scriptures were written there was, for the greater part of the year, but burning and
scorching heat ; that there was no winter, as we understand the term; that water
was as precious as gold; and that the digging of a well was the work of kings and
princes ; that shadow was a luxury, to attain which hours of sore and weary
travelling were accounted well spent—we can understand the beauty and force of
such figures as Jesus uses in speaking to the woman of Samaria. Digging
a well rendered a man the benefactor of his race, ‘‘Canst thou do more than
dig a well?’’ was the meaning of the woman’s question to Jesus. (Ibid.) Topo-
graphy of Jacob’s well and neighbourhood:—As the well is near magnificent
splings gushing from the roots of Gerizim, and flowing to the East, the Patriarch’s
tack in sinking so deep a well and building a wall round it, can only be explained
by the jealousy which the Canaanites, like all Eastern peoples, regarded their own
springs. To have trusted to these would have been to invite trouble. It was,
therefore, much better for Jacob to have a well of his own, so as to be independent.
This well lies a little off the road, on the right hand. There is nothing visible now
above ground. A little chapel,about twenty feet long, once built over the well, has long
ago fallen; its stones lying about in heaps. The ground slopes up to the fragments
of the broken-down wall. The church dates from the fifth century, but, except
these stones, the only traces of it are some remains of tessellated pavements and
carvings, which are hidden beneath the rubbish. Over the well is a large stone,
with a round hole in the middle, large enough for the skin buckets of the peasantry
to pass down. This stone is probably as old as the twelfth century. The mouth is
7% feet across, and its depth, which some centuries ago was 105 feet, is still about
75 feet, though for ages every visitor has thrown down stones to hear the echo when
they strike the bottom, It is cut through a thick bed of soil, and then through soft
rock; the water filtering through the sides to the depth occasionally of 12 feet,
though it is dry sometimes for years together. Ii is thus rather a ‘‘ beer’’ or rain
pit than a spring well; hence, the contrast between “this water”? and ‘‘ living
water.” Our Lord must have sat with His face towards the S.W., since He speaks
of Gerizim as “this mountain.” Around Him were the same sights as are before
the visitor of to-day—the rich valley running up westward towards Shechem, with
a rippling streamlet in its centre; the groves that border the town hiding the houses
from view ; the heights of Gerizim, towering in rounded masses one over another
to a great height, close before Him on the south. Mount Ebal, steep but terraced
almost to the top into gardens of prickly pear, lay behind them; the little hamlet
of Baldta, where Abraham’s altar once stood under the sacred tree ; the mud huts of
Sychar; a little village now called Askar, not half as far off as Shechem, and the dome
of Joseph’s tomb being at its foot. To the east, beyond the great plain, was Salim,
near to Aunon, where the Baptis? preached, and the wooded Hill of Phinehas, with
the tomb of the once fiery high priest. (C. Geikie, D.D.) The interior of the
well :—-Some men were set to work to clear out the mouth of the well, which was
béing rapidly covered up. A chamber had been excavated to the depth of ten feet,
and in the floor of the chamber was the mouth of the well, like the mouth of a
bottle, and just wide enough to admit a man’s body. We lowered a candle down
the well and found the air perfectly good, and after the usual amount of noise and
talking among the workmen and idlers, I was lashed with a good rope round the
waist, and a loop for my feet, and lowered through the mouth of the well by some
trusty Arabs, directed by my friend, Mr. Falcher, the Protestant missionary. The
sensation was novel and disagreeable. The numerous knots in the rope continued
to tighten and tv creak, and after haying passed through the narrow mouth I found
myself suspended in a cylindrical chamber, in shape and proportion not unlike that
of the barrel of agun. ‘The twisting of the rope caused me to revolve as I was being
lowered, which produced giddiness, and there was the additional unpleasantness of
vibrating from side to side, and touching the sides of the well. I suddenly heard
the people from the top shouting to tell me that I had reached the bottom, so when
I began to move I found myself lying on my back at the bottom of the well: look-
ing up at the mouth the opening seemed like a star. It was fortunate that I had
been securely lashed to the rope, as I had fainted during the operation of lowering.
The well is seventy-five feet deep, seven feet six inches diameter, and is lined
throughout with rough masonry, as it is dug in alluvial soil. The bottom of the
well was perfectly dry at this time of the year (the month of May), and covered
with loose stones. ‘There was a little pitcher lying at the bottom unbroken, and
this was an evidence of there being water in the well at some seasons, as the


312 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cHaP. Iv.
in a en oes See ae Sel Re Sie


pitcher would have been broken had it fallen upon the stones. It is probable that
the well was very much deeper in ancient times, for in ten years it had decreased
ten feet in depth. Every one visiting the well throw stones down for the satis-
faction of hearing them strike the bottom, and in this way, as well as from the
débris of the ruined church built over the well during the fourth century, it has
become filled up to probably more than a halfof its original death. (Lieut. S. Ander-
son, R.E.) Jacob’s well a type :—Now Jacob’s well was there. The Samaritans
were infinitely corrupt in their doctrine and worship, yet they had the fountain
of the Mosaic doctrine among them, They had received the Pentateuch, and
worshipped God according to Jacob’s rites, and the letter of Moses’ law. But the
letter without the spirit is dead. The stagnant well of water, becoming muddy by
agitation, and corrupt by lying undisturbed, is inferior for use and gratification,
and is not like the runving water of the living spring, which continually freshens
itself, and runs itself clear, and is always replenising itself in purity and copious-
ness, for use and enjoyment. A greater than Abraham, or Jacob, or Moses, must
give them this spring. Jacob’s children, after the fiesh, drank of that well, but his
spiritual children, and they only, should drink of this water. (L. R. Bosanquet.)
Christ and the woman of Samaria :—I. Tue Saviour aS A JEWISH TRAVELLER,
Observe three things. 1. The simplicity and humbleness of His life. He comes
to this earth as a poor man. Learn from this: (1) That poverty is perfectly
compatible with extensive religious usefulness. (2) That religion in particular
cases imposes much labour on its disciples. (3) Those who wish to study the
Scriptures, must study and labour hard too. 2. The superiority of moral to
bodily pleasures. Our Saviour was thirsty, but we do not read that He immediately
quenched His thirst. 3. In our Saviour a beautiful instance of amiableness and
general benevolence. II. THE vinw GIVEN OF oUR Saviour 4S A DivingE TEACHER.—
‘“« Sir, I perceive Thou art a prophet!’”? What did He teach? 1. He instructed
the woman in divine worship. 2. Let us look on the same subject in another form,
and consider the Saviour as giving the doctrine of worship. 3. And worship of
God should be in accordance with His nature and character. “God is a Spirit, and
they that worship Him must do so in spirit and in truth. Our Saviour had in view
the overthrow of three great errors: one is atheism. The next error is idolatry.
The other error at that time in reference to God and His worship was pantheism.
4, The other lesson our Lord Jesus Christ taught this woman was, He told her all
that ever she had done. III. Tar rH1rp LIGHT IN WHICH JESUS MANIFESTED HimsELF,
WAS AS THE SAVIOUR OF THE WORLD. Here He spiritualizes the scene, and represents
Himself as possessing that which was essential to the happiness of men—living water.
(Caleb Morris.) The appropriateness of the place for the purpose :—Not inappro-
priate, surely, was it that He should occupy a spot beneath the shadow of Gerizim,
‘“‘ the mountain of blessing ;’ He Himself about to become so, in a nobler sense, to an
outcast, ‘‘ the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.” (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) Sat
thus on the well.—The adverb may designate the attitude of a man who is there,
awaiting what God will say; or it reproduces the notion of fatigue; thoroughly
worn out with fatigue, as He was; or perhaps it signifies, without any prepa-
ration, taking things as He found them. (F. Godet, D.D.) The sixth hour.—
I think that the ‘‘sixth hour,” in the text before us, means twelve o’clock, for the
following reasons: 1. It seems exceedingly improbable that St. John would reckon
time in a manner dif*erent to the other three gospel-writers. 2. It is by no means
clear that the Romans did reckon time in our way, and not in the Jewish way
When the Roman poet, Horace, describes himself as lying late in bed in a morning,
he says, “I lie till the fourth hour.” He must surely mean ten o’clock, and not
four in the afternuon. 3. It is entirely a gratuitous assumption to say that no
woman ever came to draw water except in the evening. There must surely be
exceptions to every rule. The fact of the woman coming alone, seems of itself to
indicate that she came at an unusual hour, and not in the evening. 4. Last, but
not least, it seems far more probable that our Lord would hold a conver-
sation alone with such a person as the Samaritan woman at twelve o’clock in
the day, than at six o’clock in the evening. The conversation was not a
very short one. Then the woman goes away to the city, and tells the men
what has happened, and they all come out to the well to see Jesus. Yet by this
time, in all reasonable probability, it would be quite dark, and the night would have
begun. And yet, after all this, our Lord says to the disciples, “ Lift up your eyes
and look on the fields” (chap. iv. 35). There is a special seemliness in the fact that
our Lord held Hip conversation with such a person as this Samaritan woman at noon,


]
>
¢
:
4
‘


CHAP, Iv.) _ ST. JOHN. 313


day. When He talked to Nicodemus, in the preceding chapter, we are told that it
was at night. But when He talked to a woman of impure life, we are carefully told
that it was twelve o’clock in the day. I see in this fact a beautiful carefulness to
avoid even the appearance of evil, which I shall entirely miss if the sixth hour
meant six o’clock in the evening. I see even more than this. I see a lesson to all
ministers and teachers of the gospel, about the right mode of carrying on the work
of trying to do good to souls like that of the Samaritan woman. Like their Master,
they must be careful about times and hours, especially if they work alone. If a
man will try to do good to a person like the Samaritan woman, alone and without
witnesses, let him take heed that he walks in his Master’s footsteps, both as to the
time of his proceedings as well as to the message he delivers. (Bp. Ryle.) The self-
abnegation of Christ :—In the case of Nicodemus, He was ready to give him the time
set for rest ; here He does the same when tired and thirsty at noon. (C. E. Luthardt,
D.D.) There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water.—Connection between
the conversations with the woman of Samaria and with Nicodemus:—I. Turns 1s
A STRIKING CONTRAST AND COMPLEMENT BETWEEN THE Two. The woman, the Samaritan,
the sinner, is placed over against the Rabbi, the ruler of the Jews, the Pharisee.
The nature of worship takes the place of the necessity of the new birth; yet so that
either truth leads up to the other. The new birth is the condition of entrance into
the kingdom ; true worship flows from Christ’s gift. II. Tomre Is A REMARKABLE
SIMILARITY OF METHOD IN Christ’s teaching in the two cases. Immediate circum-
stances, the wind and the water, furnished present parables, through which deeper
thoughts were suggested, fitted to call out the powers and feelings of a sympathetic
listener. iii. THe mMopE IN WHICH OUR LORD DEALT WITH THE womaN finds a parallel
in the synoptic gospels (Luke vii. 37, &c.; comp. Matt. xxvi. 6, &c.). The other
scattered notices of the Lord’s intercourse with women form a fruitful subject for
study (chap. xi., xx. 14, &c:; Matt. ix. 20 and parallels, xv. 22, &c., and parallels,
XXvil. 55 and parallels, xxviii. 9, &c.; Luke viii. 2, &., x. 38, &c., xi. 27, &., xiii.
11, &.). (Bp. Westcott.) Christ and the woman:—I. A MEMORABLE INTERVIEW
DESCRIBED (ver. 7, 8). 1. Memorable to Jesus. (1) For the place where it occurred:
Jacob’s well, a scene of loveliness and fertility, marred only by the city of liars or
drunkards; a spot consecrated by sacred memories. (2) For the time when it
happened—at noon in Midsummer—an unusual season and hour; at the close of a
long journey in obedience to His Father’s will; at a moment of weariness and
loneliness and perhaps sadness at having to leave Judwa; waiting for the next
opportunity. 2. Memorable to the woman. Because of—(1) The person
she met. (2) The truths to which she listened. (3) The discoveries she
made. (4) Thetreasures shefound. 3. Memorable to the Evangelist. On account
of—(1) The insight it afforded into Christ’s character. (2) The light it cast upon
the work. (3) The prospect it opened of the ultimate triumph of the kingdom of
God. II. A PROFITABLE CONVERSATION OPENeD. 1, A simple request preferred
(ver. 7); natural (Judg. iv. 19); moderate (1 Kings xvii. 20) ; courteous (Psa. xlv.
2; Luke v. 22); condescending (Matt. xi. 27); honouring the woman; gracious,
2. An astonishing answer returned (ver. Af Persons of narrow intelligence
generally surprised to find others capable of throwing off prejudice. 3. An
important truth announced (ver 10). What keeps men from becoming Christians
is ignorance (Eph. iv. 18)—(1) Of God’s gift (John vii. 39; Acts ii. 38); (2) Of
Him through whom that gift is offered (John viii. 19; 1 Cor. ii. 8); (3) Of the
terms upon which it can be secured: by asking (Matt. vii.7; James iv. 3) freely
(Isa. lv. 1); (4) Of the certain success of every application, Christ denying none
who ask (John vi. 37; Rev. xxi. 6); and (5) Of the value of the gift (John vii, 38,
39; Rom. viii. 2; 2 Cor. iii. 6; Gal. vi. 18). (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) The drawer
of water :—I. WHat BRINGS HER THERE? The distance was a mile and a half,
and much nearer were two copious fountains as old as the Canaanites, besides
springs in and around the city. The hour, too, was peculiar. It is only the way-
farer or caravan that pause at noon for refreshment. Moreover, it was not the
public well of the city, because there was no accommodation for drawing water.
The answer is a superstitious virtue supposed to attach to the well. In Europe we
have many monasteries and shrines reared around sacred fountains, to which
pilgrims resort. The objection to this, grounded on the profligacy of the woman,
is answered by the fact that abject superstition is often allied with licentiousness ;
as in the case of many Mohammedans, Roman Catholics, and Hindoos. II. Tue
GUIDING HAND WHICH BROUGHT HER AT THAT TIME. Nothing, in an earthly sense,
was more purely accidental. Who can doubt that all unknown and unforeseen by


314 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Iv.
ee eee
her it was one of those ordinary every-day providences of God which we are com-
pelled to believe if we would unriddle the mystery of the world, The same ‘‘ needs
be” which brought the Redeemer there brought also her. The same truth is often
illustrated in our individual histories, Events apparently trivial and unimportant
form the mighty levers of life shifting our whole future. (J. R. Macduff, D.D.)
The woman of Samuria :—Though this woman was a sinner, her coming forth to
draw water herself was commendable. It is the devil that meets with us when we
are idle. The angel of the Lord appeared to the shepherds while they were keeping
watcb over their flocks by night. Matthew was called at the receipt of custom.
Peter, and Andrew, his brother, were fishing ; James the son of Zebedee, and John,
his brother, were mending their nets, when called by the Saviour. Elisha was
ploughing when Elijah cast his mantle upon him, and said, ‘‘ Follow me.” Saul
was seeking his father’s asses when he met with Samuel, who anointed him king
over Israel. How favourable the season! ‘‘ His disciples were gone away into the
city, to buy meat.’”” How unsuitable would company have been in a case like this,
There is business that can only be tranacted between God and the soul. How often
does religion take its rise from solitude. It teaches us what He is in Himself;
“The gitt of God”; by way of emphasis and distinction. It teaches us what He
has to bestow; ‘‘living water.” It teaches us how we are to obtain this blessed-
ness of Him. We must ask: nothing less is required, nothing more. It teaches
us the reason why men do not apply to Him. It is because they do not know
Him. It is in religion as it is in nature, the understanding sways the will and the
affections, ‘‘ Wisdom is the principal thing’; therefore we are to ‘‘ get wisdom,
and with all cur getting to get understanding.” And hence we see the difference
between this woman and blind Bartimeus, on a similar occasion. Bartimeus was
sitting by the wayside begging, when Jesus was passing by—but he knew that it was
Jesus; and therefore he cried, ‘‘Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me.”
“The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are
foolisuness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned,” (W. Jay.) Give Me to drink.—The thirsting Saviour:—I. A TESTI-
MONY TO THE TRUE HUMANITY OF oUR Lorp, In His spiritual thirst for the woman’s
salvation we must not lose sight of His natural thirst, Christ was thoroughly
human. Grasping this we see—l, His ability to suffer death. 2. The power of
His example. 3, His kinship with us. 4. His sympathy for us, II. An rertca-
Tron oF His Derry. 1. Had He been a man claiming Divine powers would He have
asked for water? A pretender would have attempted a miracle, 2. His Godlike
reserve, Christ is never prodigal of miracles because conscious of the fulness of
His Divine power. He uses natural means whenever they can serve His purposes.
III, AN INSTANCE OF THE FREENESS AND GREATNESS OF HIS LOVE TO SINNERS. 1,
The woman embodied all that could excite the aversion of a Jew. (1) Her
Samaritan birth rendered her an object of sectarian hatred, (2) Her sex forbade a
rabbi to be familiar with her. (3) Her loose life would have brought down the
contempt of a Pharisee. 2. But Christ had no national animosity, sectarian
bigotry, professional dignity, or self-righteous loathing. 3. He sees a lost soul
in whom longings for better things have not been wholly stifled and sets Himself to
save her, IV. A LESSON OF WISDOM, TACT, AND ZEAL IN SAVING souLs, 1. Christ
suits His method to individual characters and circumstances—touching with equal
ease the two extremes of society. 2. He seizes trifling opportunities, 3. He sets
a signal example of turning secular things to sacred uses. 4. The lesson He here
teaches can only be learned by practice. 5, The encouragement to learn this lesson
is that our wise and Divinely-directed efforts in small matters may yield rich
results. V. AN EMBLEM oF His THIRST TO SAVE SINNERS. 1. This was deeper
than His spiritual craving. 2. He thirsts now for you, 3. This thirst can cnly
be quenched by your surrender. (A. Warrack, M.A.) Christ’s request :—-In this
notice—I, A GRACIOUS ACY OF SPIRITUAL AGGRESSION ON A SINNER. He did not
wait for the woman to speak to Him, but was the first to begin conversation, II
AN ACT OF MARVELLOUS CONDESCENSION. He by whom all things were made the
Creator of fountains, brooks, and rivers, is not ashamed to ask a draught of watey
from the hand of one of His sinful creatures. III, AN act FULL OF WISDOM AND
PRUDENCE. He does not at once force-religion on the attention of the woman
and rebuke her for her sins, He begins with a subject apparently indifferent,
and yet one of which the woman’s mind was doubtless full. He asks her for
water, IV. AN ACT FULL OF THE NIcEST TacT, and exhibiting perfect knowledge of
the human mind. He asks a favour, and puts Himself under an obligation. No


CHAP. Iv.] ST. JOHN. 815


line of proceeding, it is well known to all wise people, would be more likely to
conciliate the woman’s feelings towards Him and to make her willing to hear His
teaching, Simple as the request was, it contains principles which deserve the
closest attention of all who desire to do good to ignorant and thoughtless sinners,
(Bp. Ryle.) Christ abolishing prejudices :—I. OF THE ANCIENTS AGAINST THE
FEMALE sux. II, OF STATUTE AGAINST THE FALLEN. III. OF NATIONALITY AGAINST
AN ALIEN RACE. IV. OF RELIGION AGAINST SEPARATISM AND HERESY. (Lange.)
The conference:—Each one of us must come to have a personal dealing with
Christ. 1. It may be at one of the crisis-hours of existence. 2. It may be at a
dying hour. 3. It must be at the day of Judgment. I. Curist orTEN CoMES AND
SPEAKS UNEXPECTEDLY. When the woman left her home she never dreamed of this
interview. Christ often comes—l. In sudden sicknesses. 2. Sudden reverses. 3.
Sudden sanctuary visitations. II, Curist OFTEN COMES AND SPEAKS TO THE SINNER
WHEN ALONE. Had the woman come with other females at the customary evening
hour this conversation would have been impossible, So in another case (chap.
viii. 9, 10). III. Crist OFTEN SPEAKS IN THE MIDST OF THE ORDINARY DUTIES OF
tirr. So with the apostles. Christ thus puts His seal on life’s daily drudgery.
(J. R. Macduff, D.D.) Chance in the Divine economy :—Here, then, we have an
instance of what appeared to be chance, and what was chance as much as any
human affairs can be so, being made subservient to a great and beneficial end. It
was with no design of meeting the woman that Christ passed through Samaria,
nor did He sit down by the well because He knew she would repair thither, but
because He was weary ; neither did the disciples go into the city that Christ might
be left atone for this interview, but to buy meat; nor did the woman go to the well
to meet a teacher and to receive instruction, but to draw water. The coincidences
were all of them unconnected with each other. And this is what in common language
we properly enough call chance, Butin all such cases, though on the part of man
the circumstances and results are undesigned and accidental, on the part of God
they are foreknown and fore-ordained. (J. Fawcett, M.A.) The real significance
of the woman’s coming to Christ :—As at the memorable scene of patriarchal days
the ark of the testimony was placed between the adjacent hills, so now did the true
Ark stand between her and the Ebal of curses directing and conducting her up to
the mountain of blessing, and saying, ‘‘Woman, thy sins are forgiven thee,”
Shechem, her ordinary dwelling-place, was one of the old cities of refuge. She may
possibly have seen with her own eyes the manslayer hastening with fleet foot along
the plain of Mokhna up the narrow valley she had just traversed to be safe within
the appointed walls from the avenger of blood. That Old Testament institution
and type had, in the Adorable Person standing by her side, a nobler meaning and
fulfilment, Though all unconscious at the moment of her peril and danger, He was
to her the great antitypical Refuge from the avenging sword of that law which she
had so flagrantly outraged in heart and life. (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) The Jewish
treatment of women :—It is worth noting that this freedom of speech between man
and woman was condemned by the rabbins, One rabbinic precept is: ‘ Prolong
not speech with a woman ” + a later edition reads: “ One’s own wife is meant—how
much less the wife of another”; and a third statement goes 60 far as to intimate
perilous consequences in the next world for those who disregard this injunction.
The Talmud declares it scandalous for a man to talk to a woman on the street; and
women were prohibited from keeping schools because that would imply consultation
with the fathers of their scholars, (S. S. Times.) The revolution Christ effected
in the treatment of women :—If proof were needed of a strange abnormal disturbance
in the history of the human race, it would be found in the treatment woman has
received at the hands of society. Throughout the animal world the female sex 18
treated with consideration. Among birds and beasts the female is never systema-
tically maltreated. This occurs only among men. The Saviour, however, in the
unsullied purity of His manhood, brushed aside as cobwebs all social regulations
which tended to degrade or oppress women. But He could not do it without
exciting the wonderment even of those who knew Him best. Notwithstanding
her life of illicit indulgence, the Saviour enters into earnest holy conversation
with her. We have an account also of Sogrates once holding parley with the
“strange woman.” What is the purpose of his conversation? Does he endeavour
to reclaim her? Nay; he only teaches her how to ply her infamous trade with
greater SUCCESS, furnishing her, out of his deep knowledge of human nature, with
new foibles wherewith to entrap the unwary. In extenuation of his offence it has
been alleged that he was only making an experiment with his much-vaunted


ea
316 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fcHap, Iv.
ee
method.” Maybe; but it conclusively proves that he had no adequate conception
of the gross turpitude of moral evil, and that he was animated by no strong
desire to win back to virtue those who had fallen from feminine integrity. What
infinite distance separates the conversation of Socrates with the courtesan from the
conversation of Christ with the Samaritan woman! (J. Cynddylan Jones, D.D.)
Christ’s gentleness with the fallen:—A hawthorn, near Glastonbury Church, one
of the oldest churthes within these realms, was reported to bud and blossom in
mid-winter ; whereas the bushes and trees round about looked bare and naked, this
particular one appeared clad in beauty. What was the cause of its flowering in
mid-winter? Tradition answered that Joseph of Arimathxa, the supposed first
missionary of Christianity to Britain, and the accredited founder of the Glastonbury
Church, touched it one day in passing with the fringe of his garment, whereupon
extraordinary virtue flowed into the bush, and it forthwith blossomed. Whatis not
true naturally may be true spiritually. Let men of prickly characters, the
cantankerous thorns of humanity, be gently brushed by the hand of love, and forth-
with they will flower in all the beauty of holiness. (Lbid.) Soul-winning tact :-—
A colporteur entered an Austrian shop. He relates: “A little girl asked me what
I wanted. ‘I have Bibles to sell.’ The little girl brought word that her parents
had plenty of books, and would rather sell than buy. This led me to a little more
boldness in my attack. Iwalkedina little nearer, and talking to some one supposed
to be in the room, I explained what my books were. ‘My husband is a Roman
Catholic,’ was the reply; ‘he would object to read the Bible.’ ‘But Iam very
fond of my Bible; may I just read a short portion to you?’ Withina second room
the husband himself was at work. He overheard our conversation and the passages
read, and, peeping round the corner, said he would buya copy. By-and-by a second
man issued forth from the inner room. He would also take a copy. A regular
talk began, and the people said, ‘ Stay and have some dinner with us.’ I did, and
we parted capital friends.” (Bible Society Report.) Tact and kindness will win
souls :—At Mr. Moody’s mid-day meeting, a minister rose and said he endorsed all
which had gone before, and then related the following incident, ‘I was holding a
mission in a colliery district, and in the course of the morning when I was inviting
people to the evening meeting, I knocked at a door and found a woman at the
washing-tub. I said to her, ‘I called to tell you I.am holding mission services at
such and such a chapel, will you and your family join us?’ ‘Chapel,’ she said;
‘I am upto my eyesin washing. I have three black men coming in, and there’s
that wringing machine, I gave fifty shillings for it, and it’s broken the first round,’
She was in a towering passion, and I thought I would not say any more to her,
so I teok a look at the machine and found it was not broken, but had only
slipped out of its gear, so I unscrewed it altogether, and set it right, and then
said, ‘Now you have been hindered so I'll just take a turn at the wringing.’ So
I went to work, turn, turn, turn. At last she looked up and said: ‘ Where did
you say the chapel was?’ I told her. She said: ‘T’ll tell my husband to-night
and we'll come.’ That woman got blessed, and her husband and all her family,
and she turned out the best worker in the village, and there was a blessed work of
God in that place. She went from house to house, saying, ‘Come and hear the
minister, it’s he as mended the machine!’ ”


Vers. 9-10. How is it that Thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me?—It is
remarkable that while the Samaritan woman here is taunting the Lord with
being a Jew, the Jews, in a somewhat similar passage, charge Him with being
a Samaritan (chap. viii. 48). (G. J. Brown, M.A.) Askest and saith :-—
There is a singular decorum in the use of words here. The woman has said
not unnaturally, “How is it that Thou askest of me?” But airiw is a word
of petition as from an inferior to a superior, in this different from iowrdy, which
has more of equality in it. Christ therefore when He refers to that request ‘of hers
does not take up and allow her word. He says not, ‘‘ Who is it that asketh,” but
who it is that saith (Aéywy) to thee; while the asking is described as the proper
attitude for her, ‘‘Thou wouldest have asked (jrnoac) of Him.’’ There lies often
in such little details an implicit assertion of the unique dignity of His person
which it is very interesting and not unimportant to trace. (Abp. Trench.)
Dealings and gift of God:—The former word seems to explain the first part.of our
Lord’s answer, She had come day by day to draw water at that well. Had she
never known that that water was a gift of God? Had no thirst on a hot day or no
failue of the spring taught her that? Was water a thing to “ traffic in”? (F. D.


OHAP. Iv.]} ST. JOHN. 317
Maurice.) The significance of giving drink :—Among us even an enemy might


ask or receive a drink of water without fear of compromising himself or his
opponent; but not so in the Hast. There, the giving and receiving of a drink
of water is the seeking and the making of a covenant of hospitality, with all that
that covenant implies. It is not, indeed, like a covenant of blood, or a covenant
of salt—indissoluble ; but it is like the covenant of bread-sharing, which makes a
truce, for the time being, between deadliest enemies. Aboolfeda tells, for example,
of the different receptions awarded by Saladeen to the king of the Franks on the
one hand, and to Prince Arnald of Caracca on the other, when the two Christian
leaders were received in his tent by the victorious Saracen after the battle of:
Hatteen. Saladeen seated the Christian king by his side, and gave him drink
cooled with snow. When the king, having tasted it, offered it also to Prince
Arnald, Saladeen protested, saying, ‘‘ This wretch shall not drink of the water with
my permission ; in which there would be safety to him;” and then, rising up, he
smote off the head of the prince with his own sword. Over against this we are
told that when Hormozan, a Perstan ruler, surrendered to the Khaleef Omar, the
successor of Aboo Bekr, and was brought a prisoner into the presence of his captor,
he asked at once fora drink. Omar asked him if he were, thirsty. ‘‘ No,” he
said; ‘‘I only wish to drink in your presence, so that I may be sure of my life.”
He was assured that he might rest perfectly secure; and that assurance was kept.
(H. @. Trumbull, D.D.) History of the Samaritans :—After the Assyrian con-
quest colonies from the East were placed in the deserted cities. The country
having been desolated by war wild beasts multiplied, and became the terror and
scourge of the new inhabitants. The barren heights of Hermon and Lebanon are
to this day infested with bears, panthers, wolves, and jackals. The strangers attri-
buted the calamity to the anger of the local deity, of whose peculiar mode of
worship they were ignorant. They therefore petitioned for Jewish priests to
instruct them in religious rites; and after they had heard them ‘“ they feared the
Lord, and served their own gods” (2 Kings xvii. 24-41). In after times the Jews
refused to acknowledge them in any way, and would not permit them to assist in
building the second temple, though their refucal cost them many trials (Ezra iv.).
Being cast off by the Jews, the Samaritans resolved to erect a temple of their own
on Gerizim. The immediate occasion appears to have been the circumstances
related by Nehemiah, that a son of Joiada, the high priest, had become son-in-law
to Sanballat, and had on this account been expelled from Jerusalem (Neh. xiii. 28).
The date of the temple may thus be-fixed about B.c. 420. Shechem now became
the metropolis of the Samaritans as _a sect, and an asylum for all apostate and lax
Jews (Joseph. “ Antiq.’”’ xi. 8-6). These things tended to foster enmity between the
two nations, which resulted in the total destruction of the Temple of Gerizim by
the Jews under John Hyrcanus. The very name Samaritan became a byword and
a reproach among the Jews, just as the name Yehtdy, “ Jew,” is among modern
Syrians; and some even supposed that the Jews nicknamed the city of Shechem
Sychar, “Falsehood,” to mark their opinion of the pretended origin of its in-
habitants. In our Saviour’s time the Samaritans retained their worship on
Gerizim, though the temple was in ruins; and they had some vague expectations
of a Messiah. During the reign of Vespasian Shechem was rebuilt, and renamed
Neapolis, ‘“‘ New City,” an appellation which has run into the Arabic Nabulus—one
of the very few instances in which the Greek has supplanted the Semitic name.
The ancient Samaritans and modern Druses appear to have had very much in
common both in character and origin. The ancient Samaritan was part heathen,
part Jew; and the modern Druse of Mount Lebanon is part heathen, part Christian ;
and some have thought that the modern Druses derive their origin from the very
game tribes as the ancient Samaritans. ‘After the second captivity of Israel,
Esarhaddon re-peopled the wasted strongholds of Samaria with the tribes whose
names are given with so much particularity in Scripture (2 Kings xvii. 24; and
Ezra iv. 9), races of fierce habit and degraded faith, whose heathen practices,
engrafted on the corrupt Judaism which lingered amongst the earlier Samaritans,
brought down on the new colonies the especial Nemesis of God. Of these fierce
tribes there were some who, Cuthites in name, were of the family of the Royal
Scythians, or Gordyans, from the Gordiwan mountains, whom in-subsequent times
the Greeks knew by the name of Carduchi (Xen. “ Anab.”), and with whom we are
familiar as Koords. Some of these were settled in the Lebanon, and from them
it has been said that the Druses spring, and draw the tenets of an ancient but
unholy worship. (Lord Carnarvon’s ‘‘ Druses of the Lebanon.) The hostility of


>.


318 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. Iv.
TE a ee ee eee
the Samaritans towards the Jews :—The Samaritan sought by every petty annoyance
to irritate the Jew. Their country was the nearest road for the caravans of northern
pilgrims going to the feasts in Jerusalem. The Samaritans churlishly refused
these the poorest rites of hospitality, and compelled them often to avoid maltreat-
ment, by taking the circuitous and more fatiguing route by the Jordan Valley.
Again, it was one of the few consolations enjoyed by the bands of exiled Jews in
Babylon to have announced to them, by means of the only ancient telegraphic com-
munication—beacons on the mountain-tops—the appearance of the pascbal moon.
The first beacon-fire was lit on the summit of Olivet, and thence caught up from
mountain to mountain in luminous succession, until, within sight of the Euphrates,
they could, for the moment at least, take down their harps from the willows as they
remembered Zion and its boly solemnities. But the Samaritans indulged the mis-
chievous delight of perplexing and putting them out of reckoning by the use of
false signals. Another wigked and successful exploit is recorded; and occurring
as it did under the government of Coponius only a few years previous to the gospel
era, may have tended at this time to deepen these animosities. A band of
Samaritans succeeded in stealing to the courts of the Temple of Jerusalem during
the Passover season, and defiling the sacred precincts by scattering them with dead
men’s bones; thus incapacitating the Jews that year from celebrating the great
feast of their nation, (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) Samaritan churlisiness :—On
asking drink from a woman near Nablus who was filling her-pitcher, we were
angrily refused—‘‘ The Christian dogs might get it for themselves.” (Canon
Tristram. ) The hatred of the Jews for the Samaritans :—The Jew was no way
behind in his manifestation of malevolence. The son of Sirach says, ‘“‘ There be
two manner of nations which my heart abhorreth, and the third is no nation; they
that sit upon the mountain of Samaria, and they that dwell among the Philistines,
and that foolish people that dwell in Sichem.” So that this false race dwelling at
Sichem is more offensive to the pious Sirach than apostate Israel, with its worship
of the golden calves on the mountains of Samaria (Ecclus. xlvii. 23, 24), or even
than the Philistines themselves, those hereditary enemies of God’s people. He
abhors an Israel which demeans itself as if it were no Israel; he abhors the no-
Israel which persists in its hostility and defiance to the true Israel; but most deeply
of all does he abhor the no-Israel which demeans itself as if it were Israel, the
heathen wearing the mask of Israelite. To eat with them was for a Jew “‘as if he
did eat swine’s flesh.” He denounced the Samaritan as a base time-server who
would not hesitate to purchase immunity from pains and penalties by forswearing
Jehovah and kissing the impious shrine of Baal or Jove. He regarded him as
unclean as the evaded leper; to harbour him in his house would entail a heritage
of judgments on his children. The name Samaritan became a byword of reproach.
He was publicly cursed in the synagogue—cursed in the name of Jehovah, by the
writing on the two tables of the law, by the curse of the upper and lower house of
judgment. He was pronounced unworthy of eternal life—excommunicated alike
from the Church on earth and the Church in heaven. ‘The bitterest word of scorn
the Jew could hurl at the Infinitely Pure One was this, ‘‘ Thou art a Samaritan,
and hast a devil.” The yet untutored apostles shared the same exasperated
feelings when they asked their Lord to call down fire from heaven on some
Samaritan village. All worthy of remembrance is His gentle but sharp reproof,
“ Ye know not what spirit ye are of.” (Ibid.) The evils of national rivalry :—
I do not know anything more ludicrous among the self-deceptions of well-meaning
people than their notion of patriotism, as requiring them to limit their efforts to
the good of their own country—the notion that charity is a geographical virtue,
and that what is holy and righteous to do for people on one bank of a river is quite
improper and unnatural to do for people on the other. It will be a wonderful
thing some day or other for the Christian world to remember that it went on
thinking for two thousand years that neighbours were neighbours at Jerusalem
but not at Jericho; a wonderful thing for us English to reflect, in after years, how
long it was before we could shake hands with any one across that shallow salt
wash which the very chalk dust of its two shores whitens from Folkestone to
Ambletense. Onemagnificent attribute of the colouring of the late twelfth and the
whole thirteenth and the early fourteenth century was the union of one colour with
another by reciprocal interference, that is to say, if a mass of red is to be set beside
a mass of blue, a piece of the red will be carried into the blue, and the reverse
sometimes in nearly equal proportions, And I call it a magnificent principle for
it is an eternal and universal one, not in act only, but in human life, It is the


4


char. 1v.]} ST. JOHN. 319


great principle of brotherhood, not by equality, nor by likeness, but by giving and
receiving ; the souls that are unlike, and the nations that are unlike, and the
natures that are unlike, being bound into one noble whole, by each receiving some-
thing from and of the other’s gifts and the other’s glory. (John Ruskin.) The
evils of sectarian bigotry :—The utter absence of real charity and love among men
in the days when our Lord was upon earth ought not to be overlooked. Well
would it be if men had never quarrelled about religion after He left the world!
Quarrels among the crew of a sinking ship are not more hideous, unseemly, and
irrational than the majority of quarrels among professors of religion. An historian
might truly apply St. John’s words to many a period in Church history, and say,
“The Romanists have no dealings with the Protestants,” or ‘‘ the Lutherans have
no dealings with the Calvinists,” or ‘the Calvinists have no dealings with the
Arminians,” or ‘“‘the Episcopalians have no dealings with the Presbyterians,” or
*<the Baptists have no dealings with those who baptize infants,” or ‘‘ the Plymouth
Brethren have no dealings with anybody who does not join their company.” These
things ought not so to be. They are the scandal of Christianity, the joy of the
devil, and the greatest stumbling-block to the spread of the gospel. (Bp. Ryle.)
The Jews and Samaritans :—Josephus writeth that at Samaria was a sanctuary
opened by Sanballat for all renegade Jews, &ec. The Jews therefore hated the
presence, the fire, the fashion, the books of a Samaritan. Neither was there any
hatred lost on the Samaritan’s part, for if he had but touched a Jew he would have
thrown himself into the nearest water, clothes and all. (J. Trapp.) The for-
bearance of Christ :—You may have gone along the road on a hot summer day,
tired and thirsty, and have seen the gleam of a cottage in the distance. Suppose
you went to the door and asked for a drink of water, exactiy as our Lord did; but
your speech betrayed you, and you were asked, How do you, being a Protestant,
ask drink of me, a Roman Catholic; or, How do you, being Scotch, ask of me who
am Irish, for the Scotch have no dealings with the Irish ?_ You would have ground
your heel on the gravel, and vowed never to give any one the chance of so speaking
to you again. But insults are just as they are taken; and you can’t insult a man
who won’t let you. Jesus bows His head, and lets your ignorant speeches fly past
Him. (John McNeill.) Christ cares not for classes or races, but for souls :—
People when they talk of “ the working classes” think that they have described the
whole thing with one touch. They imagine that, like the ‘‘enter such and such a
one” in Shakespeare’s stage directions, when they have said “the working
classes,” then everything by way of definition that is to be said, is said. They
label the article, so to speak, and then expect you to understand all about it. How
difficult it is indeed to bridge across the chasm between class and class! But more
difficult it is to remember that ‘the working class,” or any class, is made up of
individual souls. Our dear Lord did not speak to classes only. Jesus spoke to
souls. He took men one by one, and each finite creature with his infinite future,
each immortal being with his own history, his own work, his own sins, his own
feelings, his own sorrows, was an object of tender interest to Jesus Christ. (Knox


Little. )


Ver 10. If thou knewest the gift of God —Wayside opportunities :—I. Tux
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPORTANCE OF WAYSIDE opporTuNrrius. Speaking after the
ordinary manner this transaction was accidental ; apparently unpremeditated on
the part of Christ, unexpected on the part of the woman. 1. We go into transac-
tions which involve our highest good or greatest lossas unexpectedly. The woman
was looking for the Messiah, but she little expected to find Him a tired traveller.
You expect to find God in Church: do you ever expect to find Him in common
events? 2. The character of a man, his real strength or weakness, appears not in
his seizure of great events but of ordinary ones—not in martyrdom, but in endurance.
3. Opportunities for serving Christ are offered when truth has to be done or spoken,
in doing and speaking it not boastfully or independently or impudently, but simply
and in love, 4. You meet Christ by the wayside in every duty, great or small,
which calls you from the wrong to the right. 5. Opportunities for religious in-
struction and worship are not confined to,one day, place, or act, but every day,
everywhere, and by everything that brings us in contact with God. And as the
highest religious truth in nature lies close by the way if we will only pluck it, so in
the Bible the great truths lie on the surface. I. How Curist usep His opror-
ruNITIES. 1. He made them the occasion of a great and effective religious work.
2. The freedom and spontaneousness of Christ’s teaching fill us with wonder. It


320 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. _ [oHap. Iv.

ee

is perfectly independent of times and places, but makes all times and places con-
secrated and effective. 3. Why? Because religion in Him was a real matter. It
is unreality that makes it unnatural, constrained, vague. 4. The man who is truly
religious never forces His religion on any one. It goes wherever he goes. If the
conversation takes a religious turn, what he says comes as spontaneously as it did
from Christ, 5. This is the power of effective preaching. Some preaching is
simply the setting forth of abstract doctrines. The real preaching passes the life
up into the doctrines, being based on the realities of life. IlI. THz womans oppor-
tunity. 1. That of ministration to the necessities of Christ. We cannot do this
as she did; but Christ’s doctrine is, that what is done to the least of His brethren
is done to Him, With every needy, weak claimant by the wayside Christ comes.
2. That of reception. The gift of God was her opportunity. Our evil is that we do
not know our wants, and therefore do not know our opportunities. (EH. H. Chapin,
D.D.) The two fountains :—I. HERE 18 A CONTRAST BETWEEN CHRIST'S PRESENT
BODILY NEED AND HIs PERMANENT SPIRITUAL ABUNDANCE. ‘‘ Give me to drink... .
He would have given thee living water.”” 1. The contrasts in the life of Jesus are
very striking, (1) Even in physical things. He sleeps from weariness, but awakes
to hush the storm; He is hungry, but dooms the fig-tree to perpetual barrenness.
(2) More so in spiritual things, as when, “crucified through weakness,” He promised
life to the malefactor. 2. The living water was not mere happiness, but the Holy
Spirit, the Lord and Giver of Life. There is in man a thirst for God which only
the Spirit can quench, a thirst of need or a thirst of desire. 3. Jesus would not
have had living water to bestow had He not been in a condition to require the
refreshment He asked. It was because He assumed a humanity, tempted in all
points like as we are, that He could give the water of life. II. TuHrre 1s a con-
TRAST HERE BETWEEN THE NARROWNESS OF RELIGIOUS PREJUDICE AND THE GENEROSITY
or CHRISTIAN GRACE. To tell a thirsty man that he belongs to another religion!
The gift of man is hindered by what should have arrested and inspired it, ‘‘ the gift
of God.” Knows no obstacle but our unfitness. 1. The desire to bless was strong,
constant, and spontaneous in Jesus. 2. As we possess Christ’s Spirit we shall do
likewise. Do we want occasions for doing good? It is the occasions rather that
want us; and the heart filled with Divine love will use occasions as they present
themselves, just as water flows through the channels made for it. 3. In proportion
to our likeness to Him will be our generosity. Living water cannot be restrained.
Mere beliefs, feelings, customs, may be stagnant ponds, but the power of the Divine
Spirit is like running water: its movement keeps it fresh. Love must act to live.
Grace gains by giving. III. Here 1s A CONTRAST BETWEEN THE WOMAN’S RELATION
to CHRIST AND HER OWN CONCEPTION OF IT. She did not know Him or the boon
He bore. A man may know and not do, but he cannot do unless he know. And
knowledge of the principles of religion would secure its possession. If men knew
Christ’s tnspeakable gift they could not fail to seek it. The woman’s ignorance
made her look on Christ as one to be ministered to. Had she known Him she
would have been the supplicant. Our ignorance of Him is continually misrepre-
senting His requirements. 1. He requests our obedience, and we consider whether
or not we shall comply, as if in doing we were to oblige Him. A full knowledge
will make us realize our indebtedness to Him, and to see in His mighty help the
only possibility of doing His willand to crave it. 2. The thought applies to the
efficiency of works of faith and love. We think that is due to the intrinsic excel-
lence of our deeds. But He employs us and renders His work effectur!. 3, The
same is applicable to rewards, which we expect on the ground of worti ness; but
all our goodness is from Him, and knowledge of Christ would make eter: al glory a
thing to be sought, not deserved. IV. A coNTRAST BETWEEN EAGERNESS FOR THE
LOWER’ GOOD AND INDIFFERENCE TO THE HIGHER. When the woman mistook Christ
as meaning literal running water she said, ‘‘ Give me the water.’ Yet we are not
told that when she learnt the sense of Jesus, she asked to be supplied with His
spiritual gift. So men labour for the perishing and neglect the eternal. (A. J.
Morris.) The gift of God and living water :—I. Tur airt or Gop. 1. There is
nothing that is nota gift of God. ‘‘Every good and perfect gift is from above.” But
what are all earthly gifts combined compared to the gift of God’s only-begotten
Son? 2. The greatest gift sanctifies all minor ones: as the sun beautifies the
tamest landscape. Christ is like the numeral which, put before the unmeaning
cyphers, invests them with value, 3. While feelingly alive to God’s goodness in
His other gifts we can heartily join in the estimate of the apostle, “‘ Thanks be unto
God for His unspeakable gift.”” With this, ‘‘ Having nothing we possess all things.”?


= ey


rg


CHAP, Iv.] ST. JOHN. 321
ee re a A a to oc ee gn neg
II. Livine warer—the purchased blessing of Christ’s salvation, beginning with
pardon here, and culminating in glory. Observe, it is—1. Living water. The
tiniest stream has more true glory than the stagnant lake: the smallest flower than
the inanimate trunk of the giant tree. So with all dead things wherein the soul
has no part, and which are earthy, the mere accident of fleeting existence. They
are streams, but not living streams—they evaporate as they flow; but the blessings
of salvation are as deathless as the God who gave them. 2. The fountain head of
this water is living. The gift of God is not dry doctrine, but a living Being. III.
THIS VERSE IS A GOLDEN GATE, TO OPEN WHICH THERE ARE TWo KEys, 1. The key
of faith. Had the woman apprehended Christ’s meaning, what a barrier there
would have appeared between her and mercy—how often must she climb Gerizim
to load its altars with sacrifices! Christ says, ‘‘If thou knewest the gift of God.”
Faith brings the soul into immediate contact with the Saviour without the inter-
vention of preparations and penances. 2. The key of prayer. ‘Thou wouldst
have asked.” How many blessings are lost for the want of this! How often is the
Divine saying verified, ‘“‘I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye my face in
vain!” (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) Living water :—The life of the Lord, living water,
in distinction from the stale water of this world’s life. I. The latter provoxes
THirst, the former quENcHEs Ir. II. The one BEcomss Foun, the other Taxzs
AwAy FouLtNEss. III. The one sTANDs IN A MARSH, the other GUSHES AND FLOWS.
IV. The one sinks on EvaporaTEs, the other becomes an ETERNAL FOUNTAIN, (Lange.)
Christ’s testimony concerning His mission :—It is said that ‘‘ there is no passion so
strong in human nature as an educated religious hatred,” and history by many
an example proves the assertion true. When fathers not only hand down to their
children an heritage of antagonism against any party or sect, but, from a sense of
duty to God, conscientiously teach them thut the party or the sect is their natural
foe with whom no terms can ever be made and no intercourse be held, it is not
difficult to see what result will ensue. Bitterness, contempt, strife must be inevit-
able fruits of such an education. At any moment the passionate hostility will
flame forth, and all humane and generous feeling will wither in the burning heat.
How often you may find generation after generation inheriting and perpetuating
the hatreds and conflicts of their ancestors! The memory of some wrong inflicted
long ages ago, or of some fierce controversy which ought to have been dead, buried,
and forgotten, is cherished with religious zeal, and manifests itself whenever an
opportunity occurs. ‘‘ Peace on earth and goodwill among men” are made almost
impossible, because we all more or less inherit our ancestors’ prejudices, We start
in life with an animus against certain people or forms of thought, and the hardest
of all tasks is to free ourselves from the narrowing effects of our education. Illus-
trations of educated religious hatred are not wanting in the various churches of
Christendom at the present day, and they are sometimes as fierce as the enmity
was between the Jew and the Samaritan. This, as you know, rose to such a pitch
that they refused all intercourse with each other. The education of the Jew made
him a very determined hater, and every patriotic impulse and the whole fervour of
his religious feeling quickened and intensified the hatred and contempt with which
he looked upon a mongrel race who practised idolatry—the greatest crime known
to a Jew—under the pretence of a rival worship of Jéhovah. It was because of
this strong national abhorrence that the woman of Samaria, when asked by this
weary stranger for a draught of water, exclaimed, “‘ How is it that Thou, being a
Jew, asketh drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have no
dealings with the Samaritans.” It was a-natural surprise on her part to find one
of the proud race turned into a suppliant. No doubt she regarded Him as an
enemy, and felt something of the antagonism of her race and eduzation excited by
His request. ButIdo not think that she meant to be particularly cruel, or to
allow animosity to destroy her humanity, She had no intention to refuse what
He asked. She seems to have been a shrewd, yet genial, easy-dispositioned sort of
creature; but, human-like—perhaps woman-like—she could not refrain from this
little bit of tantalisation and apparent triumph before giving the stranger what He,
in His weariness, so much required. However, this bitter utterance of hers gives
our Lord the opportunity which He desired to teach her some great spiritual
truths. He makes no mention of the enmity of the two peoples; He will not enter
upon that old controversy which she had started; He will not stir, by the slightest
word of His, any anger in the suul He seeks tosave. Yet in a way He accepts the
challenge, and responds to her words, though in & different manner from that
which she had expected. She had seemingly set herself in antagonism against


ae


822 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP, 1v

Pe eee
Him—“ Thou” asketh “me!”—and Christ answers by putting His power of
supply over against her need, ‘If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that
saith to thee, Give Me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of Him, and He would
have given thee living water.” You will mark here an important difference.
Christ mentions nothing about Samaritan or Jew. He does not say, “If thou,
being a Samaritan, hadst asked of Me, a Jew, I would have given thee living
water,” I, THE CHARACTER IN WHICH JESUS CHRIST PRESENTS HIMSELF TO THE WORLD.
He declares that He is the gift of God. He claims to be a person of the highest
importance. He does not disguise Himself, but boldly announces the majesty of
His nature and the glory of His work. The woman saw in Him as yet only a
wearied, travel-stained man of another race, and as such she treated Him. Her
eye could not penetrate beneath the outward form to the Divine nature enshrined
within it, He begins by awakening her curiosity concerning Himself. ‘You
regard Me,” He seems to say, “only as a Jew; but if thou knewest the gift of God,
and who it is that saith to thee, Give Me to drink, your speech and conduct would
be entirely changed ; for I have resources in Me of which you know nothing.”
‘‘Living water.” As we think of it, however, what could be more delightfully ex-
pressive than such a figure? Perhaps we in these cold lands, where water is often
in superabundance, cannot appreciate the deep and attractive beauty of the phrase ;
but to an Eastern mind the idea conveyed by it is of the most fascinating character.
Water is inexpressibly precious in a land where it is often scarce, where a well is a
family fortune. Had she never known that the water was a gift of God? Had
not thirst on a hot day, or the failure of the spring, taught her that? Was water
a thing to traffic in? Did she never think df the gift of water as something very
free and universal? Christ stands as God’s response to the thirst of human souls.
Friends, there is no real need of your natures, however deep, that Christ cannot
and does not meet. There is one who wants to know truth. He is ever asking
questions that trouble and burden him. Is therea God? Is He mindful of men?
Is He a Father? Is there a life hereafter, or are we extinguished at death?
Brother, Christ meets that thirst of yours with living water, for he that hath seen
Christ hath seen the Father, and He has brought life and immortality to light.
There is another who has aspirations after nobleness, yet is sadly, bitterly conscious
of sin. He would rise, but he is dragged down. Christ came to enter into your
condition, to fight with your temptations, to sacrifice Himself for the removal of
your sins, to stand by you in the terrific encounter, to sanctify your nature, to
make it strong and braveand pure. II. TH EFFECT WHICH A RECOGNITION OF CHRIST
WOULD PRODUCE IN HUMAN HEARTS. There are three things here which are like links
in a chain, a golden chain—three steps which naturally follow one after the other.
First, ‘‘If thou knewest;’’ second, ‘‘ Thou wouldest have asked;”’ third, “ He
would have given.” Let us see how these processes and results are related to one
another. 1. The first is—knowledge. Mark how tenderly and gently our Lord
charges His solitary hearer with ignorance, There is an exquisite tone of com-
passion in the words, ‘if thou knewest.” It recoguizes at once that there is no
wilful opposition to Him as the Christ, or to His great mission, for she had hitherto
had no chance of knowing anything whatever about Him. Her religious responsi-
bility had not yet begun. Reproach! condemnation! Christ has nothing of all
this for the ignorant; it is their misfortune, not their fault. We have received the
knowledge; Christ has been revealed to us. He stands before us in the glory of
His character as the gift of God. To know Christ, that is the first thing; to know
Him in all the glory of His Divine commission, in all the plentitude of His life-
giving power, in all the reviving, refreshing, inspiring sweetress of His love, this
is what is necessary, necessary to awaken trust and love; for does not Christ Him-
self declare, ‘If thou knewest the gift of God, thou wouldest have asked, He would
have given”? Here we have the second step or link. 2. It is confidence, Know-
ledge produces trust. ‘* They that know Thy name will put their trust in Thee.”
Jesus Christ’s confidence in the effect of the revelation of Himself is most decisive

Most firmly do I believe that this is everywhere true. It is He who has created the
desire, the appetite for these things, by making them known to us. It is as with
children—so long as they are ignorant of the various good things which others
enjoy, 80 long, of course, they have no wish for them; but bring them within the
range of their knowledge, show them how beautiful and desirable and attainable
they are, and immediately the craving to possess them arises. Their conceptions
are enlarged by every new object presented to their view, and, as a rule, the desire
to obtain ig follows. It is so in all that pertains to our civilized life—-it is know:


OHAP. Iv.] ST. JOHN. $23
ledge that awakens appetite and longing to possess. All this, however, is general,
and the particular illustration is, perhaps, that which we most require. Therefore
I say that as soon as you and I see Christ as He really is, as soon as we know Him
in the full purpose of His mission, we must seek the gift He has to bestow. When
I see that He has come to teach me about God, I want to know about God; when I
see that He has come to redeem me from sin, I realize how much I need redemp-
tion from sin ; when I hear Him offering heart-rest amid the strifes of the world,
and eternal rest hereafter, I know that is just the supreme and unspeakable blessing
which will satisfy me. I never felt all that till Christ was revealed to me, and so
in my ignorance I did not cry, ‘Give me to drink.” 3. The third link in the chain,
the supreme result, is this—the asking is always followed by the giving. The
asking must precede giving; but let this condition be fulfilled, and the result
will ensue. So Christ teaches this ignorant woman the great secret of Divine
giving. It is the response to prayer. (W. Braden.) Christ and the woman of
Samaria :—These words open up to you three of the features of the Lord Jesus.
1. It shows you His care of individual souls. 2. Christ loves to save the worst. 3.
Christ bears with stupidity. This woman was very stupid in Divine things; the
words of Christ seemed to make no impression. Let us attend closely to these
words, and let us consider—I. THat Curist 1s THE GIFT or Gop. ‘If thou knewest
the gift of God,” &c. This is one of the sweetest names Christ bears—“ the gift
of God.” ‘Thanks be unto God for His unspeakable gift’’; ‘‘God so loved the
world, that He gave His only begotten Son”; ‘The gift of God is eternal life.”
Whose gift is He? The gift of God. Some seem to think that no good thing can
come from God. When they hear that God has kindled eternal fire for the wicked,
they say, can any good thing come from Him? But, ah! there is this and this
good thing. Observe what the gift is—‘‘The gift of God.” He did not give a
creature, He did not give angel or seraph. He gave His Son. Why did He give
this gift? ‘God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son,” &e:
Ah! here is the guilt of unbelief, that you do not take up what God has laid down.
Il. Curist 18 NEAR TO SINNERS. “If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it was
that said unto thee, give Me to drink,” &c. 1. He is nigh thee on account of His
two natures (chap. i. 18). 2. Christ has promised to be near in His ordinances—
‘©T will come near and bless you.” In secret prayer He records His name. In
the broken bread and in the poured out wine He records His name. There are
some of you who are awakened by the Spirit ; now it is to such that Christ is near.
Christ is as near to you as He was to the woman of Samaria. If Christ is so near,
you ought to improve Him. You know that the farmers know how to improve the
seasons. You know, brethren, that merchants do not let seasons pass. III. Ir
IS IGNORANCE THAT KEEPS SINNERS FROM APPLYING To Curist. ‘If thou knewest
the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give Me to drink,” &c. It was
ignorance that made the Jews crucify Christ. It was ignorance that made Paul
persecute the Church. It was ignorance that made the woman answer Christ so
rashly at the well. You are sailing over the sea of life, and you do not know that
there are pearls below you. There is a thought comes over me, and it is this—
that some of you will know when it is too late. IV. Wuar ir IS THAT CHRIST I8
WILLING TO GIVE SINNERS, even the chief, ‘If thou knewest the gift of God,” &c.
The living water here spoken of is the Holy Spirit. Christ offered her here the
very thing that she needed. It was an impure heart ; now, Christ here says, I will
give thee water to make thy heart clean. Again, this woman’s heart was full of
gin. She had a constant craving for sin. But Christ says, I will here give thee
water that will make thee thirst no more. Again, this woman’s heart was con-
stantly boiling up with sin. Christ says to her, I will here give thee a well of
water springing up—not a pond that may dry up—but # well of living water
springing up into everlasting life. Again, this woman’s heart would have ended
in the second death. Christ says, I will here give thee water—a well of water that
will spring up to everlasting life. (R.M. MeCheyne.) _ The gift of living water :—
The turning points in our career have commonly nothing in them to distinguish
them from common events, nothing to show that they are turning points. We do
not know the faces that lie hidden all around us. We pass all our life along side
of that which would make all eternity different to us, and yet, for lack of know-
ledge, for lack of consideration, for lack often of one hour’s serious, heart-searching
thought, the thin veil continues to hide from us our true and lasting blessedness,
Like the crew that were perishing from thirst, though surrounded by the fresh
waters of the River Amazon that penetrated far into the salt ocean; so are we sur.


"il i i es


824 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cuar. Iv


RT See ES =e


rounded on all hands by God—the living, loving God—and upheld by Him, and
living in Him, yet do not know Him, and refrain from dipping our buckets and
drawing out of His life-giving fulness. How often, looking on those who, like this
Samaritan woman, have gone wrong and know no recovery, who go through their
daily duties sad and heavy at heart and weary of sin—how often do these words
rise to our lips, ‘If only thou knewest!” How often does one long to be able to
shed a sudden and universal light into the minds of men, that they may see things
as they really are, that would reveal to them the goodness, the power, the all-
conquering love of God! ‘Two particulars our Lord mentions as being defective in
this woman’s knowledge. I. Suz pip NoT KNOW THE Girt oF Gop. Her expectations
were limited by her earthly condition and her physical wants. She had no belief
that she had to do with the eternal loving God, and that God desired to communi-
cate to her what was in Himself—deep and lasting blessedness. Through all ages,
and for all men, there remains this gift of God, sought and found by those who
know Him; different from, and superior to, the best human gifts, inheritances, and ac-
quisitions ; not to be drawn out of the deepest, most cherished wells of man’s sinking ;
steadily arrogating to itself an infinite superiority to all that men have regarded and
busily sunk their pitchers in—the gift which each man mustask for himself, and having
for himself, knows to be the gift of God to him, the recognition by God of his personal
wants, and the assurance to him of God's everlasting regard. This gift of God,
which carries to each soul the sense of God’s love, is his deliverance from all evil,
his reunion with God Himself, II. SHE pip Not KNow wHo IT was that said to her,
‘¢ Give Me to drink.” And until we know Christ, we cannot know God. Often,
like this woman, we are in Christ’s presence without knowing it, and listen, like
her, to His appeals without understanding the majesty of His person and the great-
ness of our opportunity. It is always the same request that He urges, ‘‘Give Me
to drink.” Is it cruelty to refuse a cup of cold water to a thirsty child, and no
cruelty to refuse to quench the thirst of Him who hung upon the cross for us?
Ought you to feel no shame that the Lord is still in want of what you can
give? Has Christ not sufficiently shown the reality of His thirst for your friend-
ship and faith? (Marcus Dods, D.D.) Characteristics of living water :—I.
Bricutness. II. Rerresument. III. Freeness. IV. Asunpance. V. Con-
Tinuity. ‘Ho, every one that thirsteth, come.” Now. (7. De Witt Talmage,
D.D.) The gift of God :—I. Wuar Is THE Girt oF Gop? 1. The truth. The
Old Testament gives this thought more than once. So Christ was taking an
old illustration and applying it to His gospel. ‘‘The old, old story’? is the
story still. We commonly call this gift revelation. Men could not discover or
shape it. Consider—(1) Its realness as contrasted with the shadows and dreams
of idolatry and philosophy. ‘The truth of God is a fact. Test it, O doubter!
(2) Its finality. Athens, with its thousands of gods, confesses there is an. un-
known God. In the gospel man gets his soul’s desire and is at rest. He has
nothing to do but to keep drinking, (3) Its dogmatic character. We wish to
reason out and understand, but God’s dogmas are all axioms. 2. Christ Himself
(1 Cor. x. 4). Nor does this oppose the first interpretation, for Christ is “the
Truth,” and pre-eminently “the gift of God.” (1) Other good gifts only satisfy
certain parts of our nature; this fully satisfies. (2) Others satisfy only for a time;
this forever. 3. The present opportunity. Every invitation and opportunity is a
gift of God. This woman embraced it. How many neglect it and lose it! II,
How THIS GIFT DESERVES THE NAME. 1. To be a gift it must be free. And so it is
free and unmerited. The sinner has no resources. You cannot offer to God as
purchase money what is His own. 2. That itis a gift appears in the eternity of
its plan. God’s generosity is shown in His eternal purpose. 3. The fulness of the
word appears when we consider how it is pressed on our acceptance. ‘The word
is nigh thee,” brought to our very door. 4. The truth of the title given to the living
water appears still more clearly when we learn how thoroughly it becomes ours in
accepting it. (1) It is absolutely bestowed. (2) It becomes part of ourselves

Our heart becomes not a cistern, but a spring (ver. 14). ‘* Christ in you.” Conclu-
sion: The inheritance of this gift brings responsibility. 1. Springs of water are
not for beauty, but for use and reproduction. 2. This reproduction is nota thing
of constraint, except so far as constrained by the love of Christ. 38. Therefore with
joy draw this water out of the well of salvation. (J.J. Black, LL.B.) The gift
of God :—Perhaps no ery in Cairo is more striking than that of the water carrier

“The gift of God,” he says, as he goes along with his water skin on his shoulder,
It is very likely that water, so invaluable, and so often scarce in hot countries, was


CaP. tv.) ST. JOHN. 325
—_— Si i hs
in Christ’s days spoken of, as now, as “the gift of God,” to denote its preciousness ;
if so the expression to the woman would be extremely forcible and full of meaning.
(Ragged Life in Egypt.) The gift of the Spirit :—The purifying, refreshing, and
fertilizing qualities of water aptly symbolize the operations of the Holy Spirit
(chap. vii. 38, 39; Zech. xiv.6; Isa. xliv.3). I, Tae Hony Guosr 18 “THE GIFT
or Gop,” and is so styled by way of pre-eminence. He is a gift—1. Which
virtually comprehends every other blessing. 2. Without it every other gift is un-
satisfying. 3. Its attainment not only compensated for the loss of Christ, but made
His departure expedient (chap. xvi. 7). 4. Without it even the unspeakable gift
of the Saviour is vouchsafed in vain (1 Pet.i. 2). II. The Holy Ghost is here repre-
sented as the eirr or Carist as well. ‘ He would have given thee.” 1. From first
to last the merits of Christ are the only procuring cause of our redemption. 2. As
Mediator He has obtained the disposal of this gift (Col. i. 19; Acts ii. 33; Eph. iv.
7). III. Prayer 1s THE APPOINTED MEANS FOR OBTAINING THIS GIFT, ‘ Thou wouldst
have asked.” 1. While Christ declares His readiness to bestow, He intimates the
necessity of application. So does the Scripture throughout (Ezek. xxxvi. 37). This
at once consults the honour of God and the infirmity of man; leaving to God the
glory of supplying our necessities, but constituting a test of our humility, faith, and
obedience. 2. The efficacy as well as the necessity of prayer is pointed out. ‘He
would have given ’’ (Luke xi. 13). IV. One causE WHY MEN NEGLECT THIS GIFT IS
THEIR IGNORANCE RESPECTING 1T. They know not its nature and value; nor their
own need of it; nor the manner of obtaining it ; nor Christ’s power and willingness
to impart it; therefore they make no inquiries about it. ‘If thou knewest.” 1.
Whence does this ignorance arise? not from want of opportunity, instruction, or
capacity, but want of attention to revealed truth. Whatever excuse may be urged
for the woman there is none for you. 2. This ignorance will not extenuate guilt
(Isa. v. 12, 13, xxvii. 11; Luke xix. 44). Ignorance and instruction :—I. Tu
WOMAN’S IGNORANCE. Knowledge is acquired by few; ignorance is inherited by all.
1. She was ignorant of the Messiah with whom she was conversing. She saw the
Jew, but not the Son of God; the weary man, but not the rest for weary souls; the
thirsty pilgrim, but not one who could quench the world’s thirst; one who sent for
provisions, not one whose meat and drink was His Father’s will; a lonely person,
but not one who had myriads of angels at His command. 2. She was ignorant of
spiritual things. She mistook living water for running water. She asks for
material and overlooks eternal things. Earth was all, and heaven nothing. 3. She
was ignorant of the gift of God. She valued the well, but could only trace it to
Jacob, not to God. God gives us all good gifts ; some of them through our fathers,
some through our own hands. All these must perish. One gift comes direct; that
abides, even the Holy Spirit. II. Curisr’s instructions. They were—l. Pro-
gressive. The first impression was that He was a Jew; next she wanted to com-
pare Him with Jacob ; next He is a prophet; lastly the Messiah. Such was Christ’s
gradual unfolding of Himself to her. 2. Effective. They had their desired effect


in spite of her efforts to thwart them. He touched her conscience, awakened her


thirst for God, and gave Himself for its satisfaction, after continuous evasions. 3.
Practical. III. Gop’s srzssine. 1. Christ was so blessed that He forgot His thirst.
2. The woman was so blessed that she forgot her pitcher. As heaven becomes
clear we lose sight of earth. (W. Griffith.) Saving knowledge :—One difficulty lay
in the way of this woman’s salvation—ignorance of Christ. She was not an unin-
structed woman. She was acquainted with portions of Bible history. She was
versed in sectarian peculiarities. She shared the hopes of the Jewish and Samaritan
people. In this age there are hundreds who know something about everything save
Christ. Our text speaks—I. Of a GIFT, AND OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF IT. 1, It informs
that the gift is Christ Himself. (1) In the eternal purpose ; (2) in promise; (3) in
history; (4) in experience; (5) the faith that receives Christ is a gift; and (6) the
eternal life in which it issues is a gift. 2. The definite article shows this to be God’s
gift beyond all others ; the gift which comprehends and sanctifies all others. (1) It
is an unrivalled gift. (2) It sweetens other gifts, and makes them effective. (3) A
most precious gift, because he who has it has, as the richest without it has not, the
favour of God. (4) If thou hast it, thou must prize it, because it is a token of thine
everlasting salvation. 3. Knowledge is put with the gift. (1) Till her eyes were
opened Hagar could not see the well, nor can you see this gift of God. (2) This
knowledge is the gift of God. ‘No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the
Holy Ghost. (3) This knowledge is personal, not second-hand, of a personal Christ.
II. Ir thou knowest the gift of God, wHar THEN? 1. It supposes that many have


~~


826 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [oHar. rv.


ee en


not this knowledge. 2. It suggests that all may know it, and that a great change
will come over them. (1) The unconverted would be much happier. (2) The scotfer
would become a sympathizer. (3) The trifler would make the present moment his
convenient season. (4) Darling sins would be renounced for the greater sweetness
of Christ. (5) The very worst would hope, believe, and find mercy. 3. Every point
in Christ’s character, if known, would work good for us. 4. If we take a walk
abroad, to how many could we apply the text, and its suggestions. If they knew the
gift of God—(1) The working classes would spend their sabbaths differently. (2)
The formal worshippers in churches and chapels would worship the Father in
spirit and in truth. (3) The Christless preacher would abandon his eloquent flights,
and declare the preciousness of Christ’s salvation. (4) The ritualist would lay aside
his robes, and confess the sinfulness of his priestly assumptions. (5) The sinner,
dying without hope, would depart in joy and peace. III. How pors Tux “ 1F”’ con-
CERN BELIEVERS? There are tens of thousands who know not this gift. Is this your
fault? 1. How shall they hear without a preacher? 2. Have you spoken so as to
be understood? 3. If not, resolve that for the future no man shall perish for lack
of knowledge through your fault. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The preaching of Christ :—
Our Lord found many a topic of discourse in the scenes around Him. Even the
humblest objects shine in His hands as I have seen a fragment of broken glass or
earthenware, as it caught the sunbeam, light up, flashing like a diamond. With
the stone of Jacob's well for a pulpit, and its water for a text, He preached salvation
to the Samaritan woman. A little child, which He takes ‘from its mother’s side,
and holds up blushing in His arms before the astonished audience, is the text for a
sermon on humility. A husbandman on a neighbouring height, between Him and
the sky, who strides with long and measured steps over the field he sows, supplies a
text from which He discourses on the Gospel and its effects on different classes of
hearers. In a woman baking ; in two women who sit by some cottage door grinding
at the mill; in an old, strong fortalice, perched on a rock, whence it looks across
the brawling torrent to the ruined and roofless gable of a house swept away by
mountain floods—Jesus found texts. From the birds that sung above His head, and
the lilies that blossomed at His feet, He discoursed on the care of God—these His
text, and providence His theme. (T. Guthrie,D.D.) Salvation must be accepted as a
free gift :—A Christian lady was visiting a poor, sickly woman, and after conversing
with her for a little she asked her if she had found salvation yet. ‘No,’ she re-
plied, ‘‘ but I am working hard for it.” ‘Ah, you will never get it that way,” the
lady said. ‘Christ did all the working when He suffered and died for us, and
made complete atonement for our sins. You must take salvation solely as a gift of
free unmerited grace, else you can never have it at all.” The poor woman was at
first amazed beyond measure, and felt for the moment as if all hope had been taken
from her; but very soon the enlightenment came, and she was enabled to rest joy-
ously on Jesus alone, Christ, a priceless blessing :—Charles, Duke of Burgundy,
being slain in battle by the Switzers at Nantz, anno 1476, had a jewel of very great
value, which, being found about him, was sold by a soldier to a priest for a crown
in money ; the priest sold it for two crowns; afterwards it was sold for seven hun-
dred florins, then for twelve thousand ducats, and last of all, for twenty thousand
ducats, and set into the Pope’s triple crown, where it is to be seen at this day. But
Christ Jesus is of far more value, better than rubies, saith Solomon; and all the
things that may be desired are not to be compared to Him. He is that pearl of
great price which the merchant purchased with all that ever he had. No man can
buy such gold too dear. Joseph, then a precious jewel of the world, was far more
precious, had the Ishmaelitish merchants known so much, than all the balms and
myrrhs that they transported; and so is Christ, as all will yield that know Him.
(J. Spencer.) Salvation is a free gift :—Mr. Miller spoke of dealing with a very
intelligent young man, an engineer, at one of the meetings in the Temperance
Institute. The sermon had been on the grace of God, and one of the illustrations
that Mr. Moody used was very helpful to the young man. It was that of a teacher
who offered his watch to various members of his class, who one after another
declined to receive it, thinking that the teacher was only joking with them. Pre-
sently, however, a very little boy reached out his hand and took it. This anecdote
threw light into the man’s mind; he had no idea that salvation was so free, or that
in fact, it was open to every man to receive or refuse it. Living water :—I. Wuat
ARE WE TO UNDERSTAND BY THE GIFT REPRESENTED BY LIVING WATER. 1. Christ, in an
especial manner, is the “ gift’ of God (John iii. 16; Rom. viii. 32; 2 Cor. ix. 15).
(1) He is the chief fountain of salvation, both as the gift of God and living water.


 tpile tet mmo


CHAP. Iv.] ST. JOHN. 821
(2) An application to Him for this water arises from a knowledge of Him in order
to which we must receive the spirit of wisdom and revelation (Eph.i.17). 2. But
the Holy Spirit is rather intended because He—(1) Cleanses the soul from the guilt
and pollution of sin (Ezek. xxxvi. 25). (2) Refreshes the thirsty (ver. 14; chap. vii.
37). (3) Is the only source of life to the dead in sins, and having quickened He
makes them fruitful in righteousness (Isa. xxxii. 15-18, xliv. 3, 4, li. 3; Eph. ii. 9).
Il. Tue necessity oF THIS WATER. 1. We are filthy, and necd to be cleansed. 2.
We are unhappy, and need to be refreshed. 3. We are dead, and need to be made
alive. 4. We are barren, and need to be made fruitful. III. Tur mxcuLLENncy or
THIS WATER (ver. 14). IV. WHERE THIS WATER IS TO BE HAD, BY WHOM, AND ON WHAT
reRMs. 1. It is to be had in Christ, not only as our God, but as our Brother. (1)
It is procured for us by His death (chap. xvi. 7), and received on our behalf, in con-
sequence of His resurrection and ascension (Psa. Ixviii. 18; Acts ii, 33). (2) Hence
He waits to bestow it on those who apply to Him (John vii. 37; Rev. xxi. 6); and
from this consideration we have great encouragement to ask Christ for it. 2. It
may be had—(1) by all that are poor, and need it (Isa. xli. 17) ; (2) by all who thirst
for it (John vii. 37; Rev. xxi. 6, xxii. 17); (3) by all who come to Christ, “If any
man thirst,’ said He, ‘let him come unto Me”; (4) and by all who ask, “ Thou
wouldest have asked of Me.” 8. Though it was purchased dear by Christ, He gave
a great price that He might have a right to impart it to sinners, and that He might
render them capable of receiving it, yet we may have it as a free gift, ‘‘ without
money and without price.” V. ‘HE REASON WHY MEN ARE INDIFFERENT ABOUT IT,
AND EITHER APPLY NOT TO CHRIST FOR IT, OR APPLY WITHOUT success, 1. They know
it not (chap. xiv. 17); neither its nature, value, nor necessity. 2. They know not
Christ in the dignity of His person—in His great condescension and love—in the
sufferings He endured that we might have this water—and as the fountain of it. 3.
They do not apply, confess their need, nor ask its communication, or, if they ask,
they do not ask aright, sincerely, earnestly, importunately, perseveringly, believingly,
consistently. Application: 1. Ignorance, arising from an aversion to saving know-
ledge, and the love of sin, is no excuse (Isa. v. 12, 13; Luke xix. 44). 2. The state
and danger of those who remain destitute of the sacred influence of the Spirit. 3.
The duty and advantage of immediate and fervent supplication for it (Prov. i. 22-28,
82). (J. Benson.) The living water :—Water is the emblem of the Holy Ghost.
All that is necessary to our life, and which has not died for us, is the emblem of the
Holy Ghost. Breath, Light, Fire, Water : these are the figures which set Him forth.
We need not dwell at any length upon the meaning of the words. Within us are
great needs and deep thirsts which God only can satisfy: a thirst which grows
within us by all else with which we seek to quench it. To know God; to rest in
His love; to be led by His wisdom ; to seek to please Him; to have His presence ;
to journey towards His house as our home—this is our rest, our peace, our satis-
faction. (Mark Guy Pearse.)


Vers. 11-12. Thou hast nothing to draw with, and the well is deep.—The woman's
first rejoinder :—I. It is the property of natural men to take up spiritual things in
a carnal way, and they are not able to discern grace till they have it; for, so doth
this woman understand Christ, as if He were speaking of elementary water. II.
We are naturally enemies to our own good, for she reasons against this living
water, as, in her judgment, impossible to be had or given. III. We-are also natu-
rally go addicted to our own carnal sense, that we will believe nothing revealed by
Christ further than we can see a reason or outward appearance for it; for she
judged it impossible He could have living water, seeing He could not draw it out
of that well, nor show a better. IV. A chief deceiving principle, making men care-
less of truth and grace, is their pretence of antiquity and succession unto it, and
their descent from religious progenitors; for she boasted Jacob was their father,
who gave the well, and therefore slighted the offer of a better, as being well enough
in her own conceit. V. None are so ready to boast of antiquity and of interest in
pious progenitors as those who have least cause so to do; for they were but heathens
who had come in the room of Jacob’s children, who had forfeited their right; and
they were far from Jacob’s spirit, who would satisfy their soul with that which only
supplied his bodily necessity, and served his cattle as well as him. VI. Itis a
notable injury done unto Christ to plead any antiquity or succession to it, in preju-
dice of Him or His truth, or to cry up any above Him; for it was her fault to ery
up Jacob, and her interest in him, that she might slight Him and His offer: ‘ Art
thou greater than our father Jacob?” &e. VII. Sobriety and a simple way of


bo ON oe


328 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {ctap. rv
i een Oo ee es eS ea
living. It is a notable ornament to grace in the godly ; when nature, which is con-
tent with little, is not overcharged with creatures, to the dishonour of God, abuse
of the creatures, and prejudice of men’s better state; and when men by their car-
riage declare that their bodies and flesh is not their best part, which they care most
for, so much doth Jacob’s practice teach us. (G. Hutcheson.) The source :—Our
Lord’s object was to bring the woman to seek salvation of Him. Our desire is the
immediate conversion of all now present. The Samaritan woman accepted the
Saviour upon the first asking. Many of you have been invited to Jesus many times
—will you not at last comply? Our Lord aimed at her heart by plain teaching and
home dealing—we will take the same course with our hearers. When His interest-
ing emblem failed to reach her, He fell to downright literalism, and unveiled her
life. Anything is better than allowing a soul to perish. I. WE WILL EXPOUND THE
PRECEDING TEACHING. The figure was that of living water in contrast to the water
collected in Jacob’s well, which was merely the gatherings of the surrounding hills—
land-water, not spring-water. 1. Christ meant that His grace is like water from a
springing well. (1) Of the best and most refreshing kind. (2) Living, and
ministers life. (3) Powerful, and finds its own way. (4) Abiding, and is never dried
up. (5) Abounding, and free to all comers. 2. Furthermore, He intimated to the
woman that—(1) He hadit. There was no need ofa bucket to draw with. (2) He had
it to give. (3) He would have given it for the asking. (4) He alone could give it.
It would be found in no earthly well. II. WE with ANSWER THE QUESTION OF THE
text. In ignorance the womarrinquired, ‘‘ Whence then hast Thou that living
water?” Wecan at this time give a fuller reply than could have been given when
our Lord sat on the well. He has now a boundless power to save, and that power
arises—1, From His Divine nature, allied with His perfect humanity. 2. From
the purpose and appointment of God. 3. From the anointing of the Holy Ghost.
4, From His redeeming work, which operated for good even before its actual
accomplishment, and which is in full operation now. 5. From the power of His
intercession at the Father’s right hand. 6. From His representative life in glory.
Now all power is delivered into His hand (Matt. xxviii. 18). II]. We wim. pRAw
CERTAIN INFERENCES FROM THE ANSWER, 1. Then He is still able to bless. Since
He has this living water only from His unchanging self, He therefore has it now as
fully as ever, 2, Then He needs nothing from us. He is Himself the one sole
Fountain, full and all-sufficient for ever. 3. Then we need not fear exhausting His
fulness. 4. Then at all times we may come to Him, and we need never fear that
He will deny us. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Ver. 11 may be affirmed—I. With regard
tO THE INSUFFICIENCY OF REASON APART FROM REVELATION IN FATHOMING THE DEEP
THINGS OF Gop. The name of Jehovah is “secret” or ‘* wonderful,” and so are all
the problems which concern the human spirit and its relationship to God. The
world, for 4,000 years deifying reason, strove to work out the solution. But ‘the
world by wisdom knew not God” or man. But when reason fails, revelation, like
rope and pitcher, fulcrum and lever, comes to our aid. In the Bible we have some-
thing to draw with, deep though the well may be. II. Wir REGARD TO THE mys-
VERY OF Gop’s PROVIDENTIAL DEALINGS, Many a sorrowing one has wailed out,
‘“« Thy judgments are a great deep,” and there is nothing io gauge them in this im-
perfect world. But the hour will come when you shall have the needed appliance—
‘In Thy light we shall see light.” III. With regard to THE UNVEILING OF THE FUTURE.
With all the pain of its mystery is it not a mercy that the well is deep, and that we
have nothing to draw with? But our greatest comfort is that it is not too deep for
Him, and He is drawing up what will work together for good to those who love
Him. (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) Nothing?—I. Do Nor aLL THE STREAMS OF LIFE
FLow FROM Him? II. Wuo FILLED THE OCEANS FROM THE HOLLOW oF His wanp? III.
WHO CAUSES THE CLOUDS AND MAKES THEM TREASURIES oF His rain? IV. Wuo
FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS HAS OPENED FOUNTAINS OF JOY IN MYRIADS OF HEARTS?
(Van Doren.) Art Thou greater than our father Jacob ?—Hero-worship :—I,
THIS IDOLATRY OF HEROES HAS BEEN MAN’S INFIRMITY FoR AGES. II, Tae rmuriniry
OF THE RELICS OF ALL THE SAINTED MARTYRS WHEN TREASURED BY SUPERSTITION.
TII, Samanza, THE DWELLING OF JACOB AND THE TOMB OF JOSEPH, WAS A LAND OF
DARKNESS. (Ibid.) The bucket :—The avtdyua, here *‘ bucket” of most of our
early versions, must not be confounded with the ddpia, or “ water-pot” (ver. 28). It
is the situla, generally made of skin, with three cross sticks tied round the mouth
to keep it open. It is let down by a rope of goat’s hair, and may be seen lying on
the curb-stones of almost every well in the land. We may suppose the woman to
have held this in her hand while she talked with the Lord, and reminded Him


CHAP, Iv.]} ST. JOHN. 829
that He had nothing of the kind. (Abp. Trench.) Conduits for the water
of life :—This well of the water of life is very deep, and we have nothing to
draw with; therefore we must have our pipes and conduits to convey the same
unto us; which are the Word of God preached, and the administration of the
sacraments (chap. v. 25, vi. 63). (W. Perkins.) Deep wells:—1. The well
was so deep that it had already lasted a thousand and a half years. It wag
so deep that after as many more centuries have passed away it still exists, The
neighbouring Sychar is no longer; but this spring rises as at the beginning
as if to—(1) Show the perpetuity of Nature’s simplest and purest gifts. (2) To
teach how much longer lived is a single word of benevolent utility than con-
quests and empires. (3) How much more deserving to live is the good deed that
hides itself, as it were, underground, and connects itself with an eternal source,
than all the monuments of pride that are piled up to perish. 2. More enduring
than that ancient fountain, and ever fresh as its drops, and deep as the wants of
man, Christ’s gospel gushed up among the fainting nations. And profound as it
was, that was no reason why all should not come empty-handed; no need of any-
thing to draw with but a sincere and earnest wish to be supplied. What had the
world done to deserve it? What had it brought to secure it? It had done evil and
brought nothing but its emptiness and insufficiency. This train of reflection may
be carried further. I. THe NATURE THAT WE SHARE I8 DEEP. It would seem, if we
were acquainted with anything it would be with this. We are perpetually observing
it and acting it. And yet it isscarcely less beyond our perfect penetration than its
Maker Himself. Whence we? What? Whither? Some navigator once struck
the bottom of the Atlantic midway between its opposite shores ; but who shall sound
the soul of man?—so mean, so noble; so weak and mighty; so good and evil.
What shall we draw with? With fellow-feeling and good-will. Enter with a
generous sympathy into the joy and sorrow of others, and you shall know ‘‘ what
spirit you are of.’’ II. Human tire is DEEP. Its successive ages as they move
along from infancy to decrepitude, its common concerns, sudden changes, in-
scrutable appointments, various fortunes, unavoidable accidents, bewilder us.
What shall we draw with? We must bring a spirit of submission, a religious
spirit. We may hang for ever over the abysses of our being, and only grow giddy.
We shall survey it best when we look above it to that Almighty One by whom its
whole mystic relations are combined—‘‘ Our life is hidden in God.” Through
Him it must receive its interpretations. III. Renierous rrutH 1s DEEP. Some have
said that it is impossible to understand in the least so immeasurable a subject.
I do not say how much we can absolutely know of God. But there is a capacity
in us to be fully satisfied. Faith removes the worst difficulties by taking away
every disposition of mistrust and resistance out of the heart. (N.L. Frothringham.)
The difficulty of arriving at truth:—I. WHENCE IT COMES TO PASS THAT TRUTH WHICH
SEEMS SO NECESSARY FOR EVERY MAN TO KNOW, SHOULD YET GENERALLY BE $0 DIFFICULT
FOR ANY MAN TO COME AT. 1, It has been an ancient complaint among philosophers
that truth hath lain in so deep a pit that they have never been able to discover
the bottom of it. The like complaint we meet with in Scripture (Job xxviii. ;
Eccles. iii. 11, xi. 5, viii. 16). 2. This is true—(1) Of the knowledge of the works
of God in the power of nature. (2) Of the works of God in the moral world (Psa.
Ixxii. 2, 15; Jer. xii. 1; Eccles. iv. 1). (83) Of practical duty itself. 3, This arises
from the following facts: (1) There is necessarily in the nature of things them-
selves some difficulty, and in our understandings much imperfection. Some things are
entirely above our capacities, and others we can only attain to by labour and study.
Some things we can only know as probable at best. And those things which are most
level to our understandings have at the bottom some subtle intricacies which limit
the degree of our knowledge. In theclearest prospect there is a distance no eye can
reach, and in the most intelligent parts of the works of God there is a depth which
no finite eye can penetrate. But then these secrets are no part of that truth which
it is necessary for us to know, and with care sufficient mey be known of truth as is
necessary: to salvation. (2) Men perplex themselves by aiming at things not
necessary to be known in regard to Christian practice, or at such degrees of know-
ledge as are not possible to be arrived at. Those persons are at a great distance
who, while they have lost themselves in the labyrinth of an imaginary secret will
of God, have neglected to obey His positive commands. Under this category come
the Jewish doctors and the speculative philosophers and divines, (3) Prejudice and
prepossession arising from custom of education and from men’s depending on the
opinion and authority of particular persons without examination. (4) The wicked.


=


330 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP. Iv.
eee
ness and perverseness of men, who for their own interests sometimes conceal it on
purpose. II. By wHaT MEANS EVERY SERIOUS AND SINCERE PERSON MAY YET CER-
TAINLY OBTAIN TO SUCH A DEGREE OF TRUTH AS IS NECESSARY FOR SALVATION. 1,
He must take care that he in the first place resolves to do the will of God, then he
shall know of the doctrine (Psa. xxv. 14). 2, He must be firmly resolved never to
be deluded into the persuasion of anything contrary to plain and evident reason,
which is the truth of God’s creation; contrary to the attributes of God, which are
the truth of the Divine nature; or contrary to the eternal differences of good and
evil, which are the truth and foundation of all religion in general. Had men kept
to this “‘ candle of the Lord,” men even of the meanest capacities could never have
believed—(1) Impossibilities such as transubstantiation, or contrary and unintelli-
gible explications of true doctrines such as the subtle and empty speculations of the
schoplmen, which are contrary to the truth of God’s creation. (2) Nor that God
absolutely decreed men to everlasting misery, which is contrary to the primary
truth of the Divine nature. (3) Nor that cruelty and persecution should be set up
for His sake, who came not to destroy but to save. Nor that any other wickedness
should be made part of religion, which are contrary to the very foundation of
religion. 3. He must diligently study Holy Scripture as the only authoritative
guide in religion, so as to obey its plain precepts and believe its plain doctrines, and
not be contentious or uncharitable about those he does not understand. (S. Clarke,
M.A.) What may be seenin the well :—There is a tradition regarding one of the
other sacred wells of Palestine—the Well of the Wise Men between Jerusalem and
Bethlehem—that when the Eastern Magi had at one time lost the guidance of the
mystic star, while stooping over this fountain they saw it once more reflected in its
waters ; forthwith it guided them to the place where the young child was—‘‘ When
they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.” True, at all events, is
this beautiful tradition regarding God’s providential dispensations. At times we
lose the guiding star; it is swept from our firmament; we travel on in darkness,
in our unpiloted way, led in our sorrowful musing to exclaim, ‘‘ Where is now my
God?” But when on our bended knees we stoop over the well—ay, often in our
very darkest night of mystery and sadness—lo! the heavenly light reappears; we
see the lost star of Providence mirrored in the fountain of salvation. The work
and the love of Christ explain what is otherwise often inexplicable. God our
Maker—God our Redeemer—giveth ‘songs in the night.” (J. R. Macduff, D.D.)
Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again. The contrast :—I. In
EVERY BREAST THERE IS A CRAVING AFTER HAPPINESS. ‘‘ Who will show us any
good?” There are many streams of human enjoyment; some lawful and having
the favour of God upon them; some mean and unworthy. But even the best,
apart from the infinite excellence, can give no permanent satisfaction. The finite
—philosophy, rank, conquest, gold—can never satisfy that which was born for the
infinite. II. WHar Is TO TAKE THE PLACE OF THIS WORLD’S BROKEN CISTERNS? You
cannot dislodge one object of earthly affection without the substitution of something
better. Nature abhors a vacuum, III. Curisr pors NoT CONDEMN MANY EARTHLY
STREAMS OR FORBID THEM. ‘The wants of our physical and social natures are co-
ordinate with our spiritual. Jesus recognizes both, but says, “If you restrict your
journeyings to the wells of human happiness you will not be satisfied. But I have
a well of living waters.” IV. TH BELIEVER HAS AN INNER WELL IN HIS SOUL which
makes him independent of earthly good. This source of lasting joy is ever full,
and having access to it he may say, “ Having nothing, yet possessing all things.”
Christ in us the hope of glory. (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) True religion :—I. Is
THE Girt or Curist. This fact is confirmed—l. By reason. The evidences sup-
plied by—(1) Nature, (2) the Bible, show that their origin is Divine. So does—
3) A holy life. 2. By the Bible. 38, By the song of the redeemed in heaven.

his fact shows that—(1) Christ’s excellence isimmense. (2) Christ’s compassion
is great. (3) Christ is worthy of all praise. II. Has irs RESIDENCE IN MAN’s
INNER NATURE. Therefore—l. It cannot be destroyed by outward circumstances,
In the cases of Job and Paul. 2. It will ever maintain its hold in man. Circum-
stances may take away every other gift, but not this. III. Transcenps In VALUE
THE BEST THINGS IN NATURE. 1. It gives permanent satisfaction to the soul in
this life—unlike the best other things. 2. It raises its possessor to perfect
happiness in the future. IV. Is To BE SECURED BY MAN’S OWN EXERTIONS. ‘‘ Who-
soever drinketh.” 1, This is natural. God gives food, but we must eat: so
God works in us what we have to work out. 2. This is reasonable. V. Pro-
DUCES THE SAME EFFECT IN EVERY HEART. Whoever he may be religion will give


a a a, a


CHAP, tv.] 8ST, JOHN. — 331


him satisfaction. This shows—1. That it demands the reception of man univer-
sally. (1) It is adapted to the world. (2) It is what the world wants. 2. That it
will one day secure universal order. (W. Griffiths.) The blessings of the gospel :—
I. In THEIR pHysican rypx. “ Water.” 1. The flow of water represents the spread of
the gospel (Isa. xxxv. 6, 7, xliii. 19, 20), 2. The influence of water on vegetation illus-
trates the power of reiigion on human life (Psa. i. 3; Jer. xvii. 8). 3. The pleasant
quietude of water represents the repose of soul which God affords (Psa. xxiii. 2),
4. The quickening energy of water typifies the vivifying power of God's Spirit
(Ezek. xxxvi. 25). (1) No physical life without water, no moral life without religion.
(a) Vegetable and animal life are absolutely dependent on water. (@) Water as
an obstacle to terrestrial radiation saves our world daily from death. (y) Soin
every way the life of the soul depends on Christ. (2) No physical cleanliness with-
out water; no moral purity apart from Christ. Il. IN THEIR CONDITION oF PROFIT.
**Drinketh.” They are—1. For all. 2. For all on one condition, 3. For all on
the same condition—personal appropriation. III. In ram MEDIUM OF THEIR COM:
MUNICATION. “Ishall give him.” We are indebted to the sun for all water fit for
use. ‘The sun lifts the water of the sea in the form of vapour, and by its unequal
heat in different sections of the air causes the vapour to descend in rain and dew.
All our fresh water owes its origin to this. The impure compound of the sea passes
through heaven’s laboratory and descends fit for use. All the energies of the Spirit’s
life are passed beneath Christ’s magic touch. IV. In raerm PRACTICAL INFLUENCE.
“In Him,” &c. As the mountain is to water, so is a heart full of Christian
sympathies to spiritual energies. 1. The water in dew and rain falls on the
mountain ; living things are refreshed, the land made fertile and beautiful; life
made joyous. 2, The hills absorb the excess of moisture, the water percolating
through the rock to inner caverns. 3. Thus when there is no rain or dew, and
the heat is great, the mountain pours forth the stream it has treasured up to satisfy
the wants of thirsty comers. So the child of God—1. Receives. 2. Is blessed.
3. Gives and blesses others. (Evan Lewis, B.A.) Life’s ever springing well :—
You have been busy all the week with external things, let us now turn to the
inner life. We make even our religion too much external—let us turn from
ecclesiastical ceremonies and questions to the life of the soul. Spiritual life is
—I. A Dive errr. 1. It is not a principle dwelling in man naturally, to be
brought out of obscurity. Man is dead in trespassesand sins. 2. It is not pro-
duced in men by their own efforts, through the imitation of good examples,
early instruction or gradual reform. 3. It is the gift—(1) Of the Father, for He
hath begotten us again into a lively hope. (2) Of the Son, through whose atoning
sacrifice we receive it. (3) Of the Holy Ghost who dwelleth in us. 4. What is
the practical lesson but that we must make our solemn appeal to the mercy of
God for it? Justice awards death; grace alone can bring life. II. Inwarp anp
PERSONAL. 1. “In Him.” Unconverted men find it too much trouble to look
after the inward life, but take an easier method and imitate its outward mani-
festation. In the churches are many Christians like the stuffed animals in a
museum : there is no difference between them and the living except in the vital
point. The invisible, but most real, indwelling of the Holy Spirit makes the
difference between the sinner and the saint. 2. “In Him.” It is a personal
matter. The presence of life in fifty relatives is of no service to the fifty-first
if he is dead. All religion that is not personal is void. All the virtue that
adorned your ancestors will not save you. The water which Jesus gives must be in
every one of us if we would be saved. 3. How fares it with thee ? Suppose there
were no chapels or churches or means of grace, wouldst thou still be a Christian ?
III. A vigorous AND ACTIVE PRINCIPLE. Nota stagnant pool, nor a stream gently
gliding on, but a spring forcing itself upwards. Springs are in perpetual motion,
and no known power can stop them. 1. If heaps of rubbish are piled upon them
they will force a course for themselves, So grace can well up—(1) Through a
mass of ignorance—as in very uninstructed but very beautiful Christians. (2)
Through a mass of error—as in devout Roman Catholics, 2. Surrounding circum-
stances do not operate upon them as might be supposed. In frosty weather when
the river is all ice the spring-head flows as ever. Soa Christian may be placed in
the worst circumstances, in an ungodly family, without the means of grace, but
the inner life will not freeze. 3. This life passes through the severest ordeals
and survives them—poverty, suffering, slander; over these the Christian triumphs.
4, Temptations threaten to destroy it; but let a man cast what rubbish he may
into a living spring, the spring will purify itself and eject the filth, and se will


a 7 J =.


332 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Iv.
poe
the true Christian. IV. A CONTINUAL AND EVERLASTING THING. Jesus might well
have reminded the woman how many had gathered round that well and passed
away, but there was the old well unchanged. So all the world may change, but
the inward principle in the Christian does not decay. Some wells are drained
dry by drought, or because some deeper well has taken away the supplies. But
the Christian’s spring never fails, because he has struck the main fountain. ;
His life is hid with ChristinGod. V. Pre-zMINENTLY AND CONSTANTLY SATISFACTORY. |
He who has Christ in him, the hope of glory, is perfectly satisfied. He could not
have been content with the whole world beside, 1. Learning would only have
revealed his ignorance. 2. Fame would only have made him more ambitious. 3.
Wealth would have bowed him down withavarice. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The spring of *
living water :—Suggests—I. THe conTINUAL FRESHNESS OF LIFE IN CHRIST’S DISCIPLES. :
The idea of a running brook is that of freshness, a cheerfulness that never grows :
dull, an unwearied energy. 1. We have not to go far before we see weary faces that
tell us that life has lost its freshness and has become a dreary thing, like a stream
whose course has been obstructed, when the water stagnates and cannot carry off
the foul and decaying things which have accumulated. 2. This has not been
because of evil intent, but because life has become so dull and wearisome that they
have not cared to keep it fresh and pure. 3. Once these lives were pure and glad-
some, but something has come down into them that has put a stop to itall. 4.
What is the cure? Not by removing the log or boulder, but by increasing the flow
so that the stream can pass over or by it, or sweepit away. So God deals not with
our circumstances, but with ourselves. He augments our spiritual life that in the
rush of the mighty torrent the obstruction is removed. II. ALL THE MUSIC AND
BRIGHTNESS OF THE BROOK ARISE FROM THINGS THAT WOULD PROVE OBSTACLES WERE
IT WEAKER. The pebbles or boulders would alike stop the music and flow of the
stream that was not large enough to pass them. So itis with us. If we have
within us that spring that leapeth up into eternal life it will make music out of the
very things that would otherwise have stopped our prayers. Out of the cares of life, the
sudden shocks of misfortune, there shall be nothing but joyoussong. (A. Poulton.)
Lhe springing fountain :—There are two kinds of wells, one a simple reservoir,
another containing the waters of a spring. It is the latter kind which is spoken
about here, as is clear not only from the meaning of the word in the Greek, but
also from the description of it as ‘ springing up.” That suggests at once the activity
of a fountain. A fountain is the emblem of motion, not of rest. Its motion is
derived from itself, not imparted to it from without. Its silver column rises ever
heavenward, though gravitation is too strong for it, and drags it back again. So
Christ promises to this ignorant, sinful Samaritan woman that if she chose He
would plant in her soul a gift which would thus well up, by its own inherent energy,
and fill her spirit with music, and refreshment, and satisfaction. I. First, Curist’s
GIFT IS REPRESENTED HERE AS A FOUNTAIN WITHIN. Most men draw their supplies
from without; they are rich, happy, strong, only when externals minister to them
strength, happiness, riches. For the most of us, what we have is that which de-
termines our felicity. Take the lowest type of life, for instance, the men of whom,
alas! the majority, I suppose, every time is composed, who live altogether on the low
plane of the world, and for the world alone, whether their worldliness take the form
of sensuous appetite, or of desire to acquire wealth and outward possessions. The
thirst of the body is the type of the experience of all such people. It is satisfied
and slaked for a moment, and then back comes the tyrannous appetite again. And,
alas! the things that you drink to satisfy the thirst of your souls are too often like
a publican’s adulterated beer, which has got salt in it, and chemicals, and all sorts
of things to stir up, instead of slaking and quenching the thirst. And even if we
rise up in a higher region and look at the experience of the men who have in some
measure learned that a man’s life ‘‘ consisteth not in the abundance of the things
that he possesses,” nor in the abundance of the gratification that his animal nature
gets, but that there must be an inward spring of satisfaction, if there is to be any
satisfaction at all; if we take men who live for thought, and truth, and mental
culture, and yield themselves up to the enthusiasm for some great cause, and are
proud of saying, ‘‘ My mind to me a kingdom is,” though that is a far higher style of
life than the former, yet even that higher typeof man has so many of his roots in the
external world that he is at the mercy of chances and changes, and he, too, has deep
in his heart a thirst that nothing, no truth, no wisdom, no culture, nothing that
addresses itself to one part of his nature, though it be the noblest and the loftiest,
can ever satisfy and slake. If you have Christ in your heart then life is possible,


ea i en


cHap. 1v.] ST. JOHN. 333


peace is possible, joy is possible, under all circumstances and in all places. Every-
thing which the soul can desire, it possesses. You will be like men that live in a
beleaguered castle, and in the courtyard a sparkling spring, fed from some source
high up in the mountains, and finding its way in there by underground channels
which no besiegers can ever touch. The world may be all wintry and white with
snow, but there will be a bright little fire burning on your own hearthstone. You
will carry within yourselves all the essentials to blessedness. If you have “ Christ
in the vessel” you can smile at the storm. II, Curist’s arr Is A SPRINGING FOUN-
tan. The emblem, of course, suggests motion by its own inherent impulse. Water
may be stagnant, or it may yield to the force of gravity and slide down a descending
river-bed, or may be pumped up and lifted by external force applied to it, or it may
roll as it does in the sea, drawn by the moon, driven by the winds, borne along by
currents that owe their origin to outward heat or cold. Buta fountain rises by
an energy implanted within itself, and is the very emblem of joyous, free, self-
dependent and self-regulated activity. ‘And so,” says Christ, ‘The water that I
shall give him shall be in him a springing fountain ;” it shall not lie there stagnant,
but leap like a living thing, up into the sunshine, and flash there, turned into dia-
monds, when the bright rays smile upon it. So here is the promise of two things ;
the promise of activity, and the thought of activity, which is its own law. 1. The
promise of activity. Some of us are fretting ourselves to pieces, or are sick of a
vague disease, and are morbid and miserable because the highest and noblest parts
of our nature have never been brought into exercise. Surely this promise of Christ’s
should come as a true gospel to such, offering as it does, if we will trust ourselves
to Him, a springing fountain of activity into our hearts that shall fill our whole
being with joyous energy, and make it a delight to live and to work. It will bring
to us new powers, new motives; it will set all the wheels of life going at double
speed. 2. And there is not only a promise of activity here, but of activity which is
its own law and impulse. There is a blessed promise in two ways. In the first
place, law will be changed into delight. We shall not be driven by a commandment
standing over us with whip and lash, or coming behind us with spur and goad, but
that which we ought to do we shall rejoice to do; andinclination and duty will coin-
cide in all our lives when our life is Christ’s life in us. And then, in the second
place, that same thought of an activity which is its own impulse and its own law
suggests another aspect of the blessedness, namely, that it sets us free from the
tyranny of external circumstances which absolutely shape the lives of so many of us,
III. The last point here is roar Curist’s GIFT 18 A FOUNTAIN, ‘ SPRINGING UP INTO
EVERLASTING LIFE.” The water of a fountain rises by its own impulse, but howso-
ever its silver column may climb it always falls back into its marble basin. But this
fountain rises higher, and at each successive jet higher, tending towards, ana
finally touching, its goal, which is at the same time its course. The water seeks its
own level, and the fountain climbs until it reaches Him from whom it comes, and
the eternal life in which He lives. We might put that thought in two ways. 1.
The gift is eternal in its duration. The Christian character is identical in both
worlds, and however the forms and details of pursuits may vary, the essential prin-
ciple remains one. So that the life of a Christian man on earth and his life in
heaven are but one stream, as it were, which may indeed, like some of those
American rivers, run for a time through a deep, dark canon, or in an underground
passage, but comes out at the further end into broader, brighter plains and summer
lands; where it flows with a quieter current and with the sunshine reflected on its
untroubled surface into the calm ocean, He has one gift and one life for earth and
heaven—Christ and His Spirit, and the life that is consequent upon both. 2. And
then the other side of this great thought is that the gift tends to, is directed towards,
or aims at and reaches, everlasting life. The whole of the Christian experience on
earth is a prophecy and an anticipation of heaven. Christ’s gift mocks no man, it
sets in motion no hopes that it does not fulfil; it stimulates to no work that it does
cot crown with success. If you want a life that reaches its goal, a life in which all
your desires are satisfied, a life that is full of joyous energy, that of a free man
emancipated from circumstances and from the tyranny of unwelcomed law, and
victorious over externals, open your hearts to the gift that Christ offers you; the gilt
of Himself, of His death and passion, of His sacrifice and atonement, of Ais
indwelling and sanctifying Spirit. (A. Maclaren, D.D.) Human expedients
and Divine provision:—I. Human Exprpients of happiness. _ Whosoever . . .
thirst again.” 1. Gross and dissipated pleasure brings disappointment and
remorse, 2. In refined and intellectual pursuits ‘“‘is much grief, and he that


oe


334 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Iv.


increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.” 38. Business brings gain, but “ they
that will be rich fall into a snare,” &c. 4. Leisure makes the hours hang heavily,
is attended with satiety, and becomes a burden. 5. The conscience-stricken seeks
a palliative in drowsy reflection or in resolutions and duties, but finds that he is
compassing himself about with sparks that yield no warmth. All “ broken
cisterns” and “ vanity and vexation of spirit.” II. Divmnz proviston. ‘ Whoso-
ever... shall never thirst,” &c. This water, the saving grace of Christ, is—
1. Excellent in its nature. The property of water is to cool, cleanse, fertilize, and
refresh; no element is so indispensable. The rich grace of Christ produces,
maintains, increases, completes life and makes it immortal. 2. Divine in its
origin. Seek it not in ordinances; they are only channels. Use them, but do not
rest in them. Look to Jesus, the author and fountain of life. 3. Free in its com-
munication. ‘ Give.” Nothing is more free than a gift. Why is the grace of
Christ so free? Because—(1) It is too precious to be bought. (2) It is already
procured by Christ. (3) He must have all the glory. 4. Satisfying in its effects.
‘Shall never thirst ”’—(1) Offer any other water, but he will ever thirst for this,
and the more he receives the more he will crave. (2) He shall be satisfied with the
kind of food he finds, though not with the degree. (3) These effects are not
produced by hearing, but by receiving. 5. Constant in its supplies—(1) Not only
near, but in him. ‘A good man is satisfied from himself.” (2) A well, not a
shallow draught, a scanty stream, or stagnant pool—denoting the plentiful effusion,
the large abundance, the continued freshness, the glorious sufficiency of the grace
of the Saviour. 6, Active in its operations. It is not given to be dormant, but to
operate. 7. Kternally glorious in its results. III, By way or imPROVEMENT INQUIRE
WHAT YOU THINK OF THIS. 1. Some are ignorant and careless. 2. In some there is
beginning of thirst. 8. Somehave drunk. Then—(1) Bethankful. (2) Remember
your constant need of Christ. (3) Seek the salvation of others. (T. Kidd.)
Holy water :—I. THE WAY OF OBTAINING TRUE RELIGION. 1. It must come to us as a
gift. There is no suggestion—(1) Of digging; it is freely handed to us. (2) Of
purchasing ; it is presented without price. (3) Of fitness. The woman was a
sinner. The Divine life is not in us by nature, cannot be produced by culture, nor
infused by ceremonies, nor propagated. Wisdom cannot impart it, nor power
fashion it, nor money buy it, nor merit procure it; grace alone can give it. 2. It is
a gift from Jesus. All its details are connected with Him: redemption, forgiveness,
deliverance from the power of sin, instruction, example. He is our all inall. 3.
It is a gift that must be received. When we drink water it enters into us and be-
comes part of us: even so must we receive Christ into our innermost self; not
professing to believe in Him or admiring Him; but so trusting Him, loving Him

living in Him that He becomes one with us. II, THe saTisryING POWER OF TRUE
RELIGION. 1, Grace relieves our soul thirst as soon as received. A man once
startled from sinful indifference finds an ‘aching void” withinhim. He tries riches,
but money cannot satisfy him; he seeks after knowledge, but study is a meanness ;
he dazzles his fancy with fame, charms his eye with beauty and his ear with music,
but ‘all is vanity.” But he who has received Christ has received at-one-ment with
God, and God delights in him, 2. Grace continues to quench our thirst—though it
strives to return it is always met by the well within. 3. This is a matchless
blessing and averts a thousand ills. What should we have been without it? III.
THE ABIDING CHARACTER OF TRUE RELIGION. 1.Itis “in Him.’ Here isaman trying
to write poetry, but it is not in him, and it cannot come out of him, so he rhymes
his nonsense, but a poet he never becomes; but if a man has it in him who can
take it away? So with art and education. Much more with religion. 2. It is in
him a well of living water, always there as an operative force as permanent as
Jacob’s well which was there in the patriarch’s day, and is there now. Truereligion
is like a well, because it is independent of surroundings and circumstances. In
summer and winter does it flow. The pond overflows because there has been a
shower of rain, but the deep well is full in the drought. So the believer is not
exalted by wealth nor crushed by poverty. 3. It is a well that is springing and
never ceases to flow. The great motives which set a believer working at first are as
forcible in old age. 4. It springs up into everlasting life. Grace blossoms into
glory. IV."Tum PRACTICAL OUTCOME oF ALL THIS. 1. Where did you get your
religion? From your Father, or is it of your own manufacture? 2. What has your
religion done for you? Has it quenched your thirst? 3. Does your religion abide
with you or do youremove it with your Sunday hat? 4. Does your religion spring up
within you by the energy of the Holy Spirit? (C. H. Spurgeon.) Living water:—


onaP. Iv.] ST, JOHN. 335


The incident shows—1. The equal right of womankind to spiritual privileges, 2.
The intellectual capacity of woman. ‘The topics discussed were no less abstract
than those talked over with Nicodemus. 3. Our Lord’s mode of inculeating religious
truth. (1) From homely facts. (2) Facts of which the hearers’ minds were full at
the time. I. Ruxicion Typmrizp BY waTER. Water. has three main uses. 1.
Fertilizing. There is an inspiring power in the truths, motives, and enjoyments of
religion, and tends to transform the man. 2. Purifying. Religion cleanses the
character, sanctifies the life, destroys sinful habits, fosters pure thoughts, kindles
holy feelings, and: stimulates to holy conduct. 3. Thirst quenching. Religion
meets the soul’s aspiration for life by the promise of life everlasting ; quenches its
thirstings for happiness by giving it fellowship with God; meets its dissatisfaction
with the world by opening before it heaven’s joy. II. THE cHARACTERISTICS OF
RELIGION AS TYPIFIED BY THE WELL-WATER, 1. Its activity is implied in its being a
spring well, not a pool. Religion is a never-ceasing stream of influence. When it
is still it stagnates and becomes foul, promotive of the worst qualities of human
nature. 2. This activity is elevating and progressive in its effects. Water springs
up into life in all it nourishes, In the tree it supplies the roots with sap, which is
water springing up into fruit and flower. The results of religion are growth in
those moral qualities which live for ever in happiness. III. THE apvANTAGES OF
RELIGION AS TYPIFIED BY THE WELL IN THE MAN. 1. Where it is within the man it
exercises its power over his life apart from external influences and in spite of them.
Men’s moral characters must be moulded from within. External motives
demoralize. 2. The comforts of religion, seeing they are within the man, are ever
sure and uninterrupted. In ancient times when cities were liable to be besieged and
all outside sources cut off, it was a matter of no small moment to have wells within
the walls. This rendered the inhabitants more defiant of the enemy, seeing they
were thus scarce of the necessaries of life. (A.J. Parry.) Living water :—1.
It is characteristic of John that this metaphor omitted in the other Gospels should
be preserved by him, 2. This emblem of spiritual vitality was not new (Isa. xii. 3,
xli. 17,18; Jer. ii. 13), 3. The prophetic Scriptures, however, were unknown to the
woman, for the Samaritans only received'the Pentateuch, and had she known them
it is not likely that she would have caught their inner sense. 4. Christ is the true
well of life. In Him all fulness dwells. What a claim to be made by the carpenter
of Nazareth; either an unpardonable exaggeration or a witness to His Divinity. 5.
The water drawn from Christ as the well is the Spirit of life He imparts. 6. The
points of analogy are obvious. (1) As the well was free to all comers, so is Christ
free and accessible to all (Isa. lv. 1). (2) As water is a necessary of life and has
power to enliven the faint and refresh the weary, s0 the Holy Spirit is necessary to
the interior life and able to restore the discouraged and revive thelanguid. 7. The
point of contrast was that water from Jacob’s well would give but temporary relief,
because water imbibed is soon worked off or consumed in the waste of the system.
But the living water is not spent or exhausted in the operation of the spiritual life.
The Holy Ghost abides. 8. See how we have to do with the Christ without and the
Christ within. As the woman had to go beyond the town to reach the well, so
every one must go beyond himself and his whole social environment and come to
Jesus. Then Christ enters the heart that has asked of Him and dwells there. 9.
There ought to be increase of spiritual life. The inward well may be deepened and
the stream have a more copious flow. Alas! how often is it choked and all but
dried up with worldliness! 10, The career of Jesus is an example of life in the
Spirit. “How strong its current was is shown by His forgetfulness of His physical
want when the opportunity came of opening spiritual things. (Donald Fraser,
D.D.) Living water:—I. THE NATURE OF THE GIFT. Spring water, t.e., Christ
Himself the Life is His 6wn gift. II. Irs caaracrenistics: 1. Always fresh. (1)
History is a storehouse of buried memories, some of which are galvanized into
momentary life by antiquarians, but which soon die away since they belong to a
past age and do not answer to our wants or correspond to our sympathies. But
Christ’s words spoken 1800 years ago have the same force and attraction as though
they were novelties of yesterday. His actions, His life as a whole speak to the
nineteenth century as to the first, provoking the same hostility, winning the
wame empire. (2) As He is in history, so He is in the soul. In that treasure
house of the dead, amid all that is stagnant, all that belongs to the irrevocable past,
all that bears the mark of change and corruption, there is for Christians one thought
that is for ever fresh, one memory for ever invigorating, one tide of pure passion—
Jesus. 2. Aspring of water isin perpetual motion; so—(1) Christ, in history and in


336 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. Iv.
a aan anEnNTa
the soul, is ever different and yet the same. The sky presents the same outline of
clouds on no two days; the sea, visit it when we may, never looks quite as it looked
before. Yet they are the same. So Christ is to us what He was to our forefathers,
and yet displays to each successive generation new aspects of His power and per-
fection: at the same time stability and progress. (2) He is the source of movement
in the soul. He has set it moving, and keeps it moving—even the very intelligence
that would drive Him from His throne; for His truths have moved the depths of
our being, so that whether a man accepts them or not he cannot rest as though he
had never heard them. Faculties dormant for years are stirred to meet Him, and
He keeps them in motion by fresh aspects of His power and beauty. (3) In Christian
theology. The Christian creed is said to be the stagnation of active thought.
Undoubtedly it gives a fixed form to our ideas, so as to render superfluous the
discussion of matters on which the light of Divine certainty has been thrown. But
fixed thought is no more the antagonist of active thought than the rim of the well
was hostile to the springing water. 38. Springing water fertilizes. (1) Christ is the
great fertilizer of the soul of man—of (a) The intellect; for He made it capable of
the productions of genius. (b) The affections. Family life in Europe is His work.
His authority reflected in the Christian father, His tenderness in the Christian
mother, His obedience in the Christian child. (c) The will; making it capable of
new measures of sacrifice and heroism. (2) Christ is the fertilizer of nations, and
without Him the civilization of Europe would be exchanged for the civilization of
China or Japan. III. Tue scene on seat oF THE Girt. “In Him.” 1. Others
have done great works—(1) Effecting vast changes on the surface of human life in
founding empires, changing customs, laws, and languages. (2) Some have gone
deeper—founding empires of ideas. 2. Christ has done more—more than the
founding of a kingdom or of a philosophy; for a government may be hated while
obeyed, a philosophy accepted without love. But Christ reigns and teaches in
human hearts asa friend. 3. Hence Christians know the secret of man’s dignity.
Before Christ came the dignity of man as man was unknown. When He came He
placed within the reach of emperor and slave the only ennobling gift—His presence
and power within. 4, This gift is also the secret of the Christian’s spiritual inde-
pendence. If Christians were dependent on the things of sense, the world might
crush it out. The world prescribed Christian worship, destroyed the Scriptures,
but was powerless against the presence of the Divine Redeemer. IV. Ivs nrrect.
‘“‘ Hiverlasting life.’ Without it man would not be happy in heaven. (Canon
Liddon.) Living water, or vital religion :—I. In its source. 1. It is a gift.
Human nature is an arid desert, unproductive of a single drop of water. 2. It is
a free gift. Water is one of the freest gifts of nature. You charge for milk, you
give water. Christ gives liberally, and upbraids not. He is too rich to sell, we too
poor to buy. 3. It is a free gift, which only Himself can give—not His apostles or
their successors. 4. A free giff to whomsoever desires it. He has enough to
quench the thirst of all mankind. ITI. Inits narurz. 1. It is personal. Christian
nations do not make Christian individuals, but vice vers@. The former one a great
blessing, the latter a greater. 2. It is inward. (1) ‘Our life is hid with Christ in
God ’’; that is, our objective or justification life. (2) God’s life is hid with Christ
in us; that is, our subjective or regenerate life, 38. It is Divine—the same in kind
asin God. ‘All my springs are in Thee.” III. In its oprration. 1. It is active.
It varies in feeling; but let us not forget that it is first principle—a well of water

not necessarily hot water. You may adopt means to make it hot, but hot or cold
it is water all the same. 2. It is cleansing. (1) Hercules turned a river through
the filthy Augean stables; Christ turns the river of Divine grace into the sinner’s
heart. Springs in soft soils carry up particles of sand in order to carry them away.
So grace, as it bubbles up in the heart, disturbs the sands of defilement. (2) It
cleanses society, and has washed away unnameable sins, and will go on with the
work of refinement till the face of the earth is made like the face of heaven. 3.
Itis satisfying (Psa.xxxvi.8), IV. Inits pestmvation. 1. Itis aspiring. Christianity
is aspiring, but not satiating, not inconsistent with hope and effort. ‘The believer
wants nothing but God, but more of Him. 2. It will at last reach everlasting life.
The life implanted in regeneration will continue for ever. (J. Cynddylan Jones

D.D.) _ The water of life:—I. Irs ponorn. Yonder poor man who asks for refresh.
ment—1l. Professes to have this water. 2. Is able to supply it. 3. Was appointed
to give it. 4. Has the disposition to do so, 5, Has never denied it. II, Irs
RESIDENCE. ‘In Him.” 1, The internal principle of religion is not to be opposed
to external practice: works must evidence experience, 2, Yet Divine things mu3t


CHAP. IV.] a ST. JOHN. 837


be known and felt before they can govern us. God begins with the heart. 3. The
religion of some people is all external. (1) That of some depends on external
occurrences, like a stream produced by a storm instead of being supplied by a
spring. Sickness, poverty, &c., make some men religious for a time, (2) That of
others consists in external performances. Obedience is not enjoyed as their meat,
but as their medicine. (3) The religion of a third is found in their connections.
They leave it to their ministers or parents to think for them. (4) The religior of a
fourth is all in Christ. They ridicule the very notion of a work of grace in us. III.
Irs activity. 1. Real Christians are everywhere represented as active—husband-
men, reapers, warriors, racers. 2. The design of the gospel is to produce a people
zealous for good works. 3. The graces of the Holy Spirit are not dormant, but
active, 4, All the images of the gospel imply the same thing—leaven, fire, force
of vegetation. IV. Its renpENncy. 1. It weans us from the world. 2. It sets our
affections on things above. 3. It promotes the heavenly life below. (W. Jay.)
Lhe longing for unknown happiness :—‘* We. have an idea of happiness,” says a great
French writer, who has bequeathed, as a legacy, the stray but profound imaginings
of his mind about God—‘* we have an idea of happiness, and yet we cannot grasp
it ; we are conscious of an image of the true, yet we possess only the false. There
is an ignorance; yet not absolute. There is a knowledge; yet not certainty.”
Yes. We are always haunted by a memory or stimulated by a hope. We are always
looking after something; we hardly know what it is. (Knox Little.) Riches
unsatisfying :—Very few men acquire wealth in such a manner as to receive
pleasure from it. Just as long as there is the enthusiasm of the chase they enjoy
it; but when they begin to look around, and think of settling down, they find that
that part by which joy enters is dead in them. They have spent their lives in
heaping up colossal piles of treasure, which stand, at the end, like the pyramids in
the desert sands, holding only the dust of kings. (H.W. Beecher. The unsatis-
fying nature of worldly things :—As a cup of pleasant wine offered to a condemned
man on the way to his execution ; as the feast of him who sat under a naked sword
hanging perpendicularly over his head by a slender thread ; as Adam’s forbidden
fruit, seconded by a flaming sword; as Belshazzar’s dainties overlooked by a hand-
writing against the wall: such are all the empty delights of the world—in their
matter and expectation, earthly ; in their acquisition, painful; in their fruition,
nauseous and cloying; in their duration, dying and perishing; in their operation,
hardening, effeminating, leavening, puffing up, estranging the heart from God; in
their consequences seconded with anxiety, solitude, fear, sorrow, despair, dis-
appointment. (J. Spencer.) Worldly things unsatisfying :—He that seeks to
satisfy his lusts goes about an endless business. ‘ Give, give!” is the horse-leech’s
language. The worldling hath enough to sink him but not to satisfy him. (J.
Trapp.) Worldly things unsatisfying :—I have read a story of a man whom
Chrysostom did feign to be in prison. ‘Oh,’ saith he, ‘if I had but liberty, I
would desire no more!” He had it ; and then cried, ‘‘ If I had enough for neces-
sity, I would desire no more.” He had it; and then cried, “Had I a little for
variety, I would desire no more.” He had it; and then cried, ‘‘ Had I any office,
were it the meanest, I would desire no more.’? He had it; and cried again, ‘‘ Had
I but a magistracy, though over one town only, I would desire no more.” He had
it; and then sighed, ‘‘ Were I but a prince, I would desire no more.”’ He had it;
and then sighed, “* Were I but a king, I would desire no more.’”” He had it; and
then cried, ‘‘ Were I but an emperor, I would desire no more.” He had it; and
then exclaimed, ‘‘ Were I but emperor of the whole world, I would then desire no
more.’”?’ Hehadit; and then he sat down with Alexander, and wept that there were
no more worlds for him to possess. Now, did any man come to enjoy what he is
said to desire, it would be but a very mean portion compared with God. (Thomas
Brooks. ) The worth of the water of life:—I. WuaT I8 MEANT BY THE WATER
Crist civeta. The gifts and graces of the Spirit (chap. vii. 38, 39). 1. The gift
of regeneration to become God’s child. 2. The gift of faith to believe God’s pro-
mises. 3. The gift of obedience to do God’s will. 4. The gift of prayer to seek
God’s presence. 5. The gift of comfort to endure God’s trials, 6. The gift of
strength to hold out and continue God’s servant, II. CHrisT 18 ABLE AND WILLING
TO GIVE THIS wATER. 1, Able (Psa. xxxvi. 9; Zech. xiii. 1; Col. i, 19, ii, 3). 2.
Willing (Matt. xi. 28; John vii. 37; Rev. xxii. 17; Isa. lv. 1). UI. How Curisr
BESTOWS THIS WATER. 1. By the preaching of the Word. 2. By the sacraments. 3.
By prayer. IV. Tue PaRTIEs TO wHoM CHRIST WILL Give THIS WATER. Those
who thirst (Isa. lv. 1; Matt. v. 6; John vii. 27; Rev. xxii. 18). If there be no


™,


~~


338 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. crap. Iv.


thirsting, there shall be no refreshing. V. THm BENEFIT OF ENJOYING THE WATER.
Never thirst, because the fountain is never dry. VI. THz siGNs OF HAVING THIS
water. 1. A clear sight of thine own soul's estate. 2, Purity of heart. 3.
Satisfaction in Christ. (S. Hieron.) The deceptive character of this world’s
good :—Many years ago, when the Egyptian troops conquered Nubia, a regiment
was destroyed by thirst in crossing this desert. The men, being upon a limited
supply of water, suffered from extreme thirst, and deceived by the appearance of a
mirage that exactly resembled a beautiful lake, they insisted on being taken to its
banks by the Arab guide. It was in vain that the guide assured them that the lake
was unreal, and he refused to lose the precious time by wandering from his course.
Words led to blows, and he was killed by the soldiers whose lives depended on his
guidance. The whole regiment turned from the track and rushed towards the
welcome waters. Thirsty and faint, over the burning sands they hurried ; heavier
and heavier their: footsteps became, hotter and hotter their breath, as deeper they
pushed into the desert, farther and farther from tbe lost track where the pilot lay
in his blood; and still the mocking spirits of the desert, the afreets of the mirage,
led them on, and the lake, glistening in the sunshine, tempted them to bathe in its
cool waters, close to their eyes, but never at their lips. At length the delusion
vanished ; the fatal lake had turned to burning sand. Raging thirst and horrible
despair! the pathless desert and the murdered guide! lost! lost! alllost! Nota
man ever left the desert, but they were subsequently discovered, parched and withered
corpses, by the Arabs sent in search. (Sir S. Baker.) Unsatisfactory nature of
this world’s good :—A striking proof we have of this is the example of Solomon, who,
with every advantage, made the experiment what earth and earthly things could do
to satisfy the soul of man. Whichever way he turned, and in whatever quarter he
inquired, he found that all is vanity and vexation of spirit. If he thought to prove
his heart with mirth, and to enjoy pleasure, this also was vanity; so that he was
forced to say of laughter, ‘‘It is mad,” and of mirth, ‘‘ What doeth it?” If he
increased his goods, and gathered silver and gold, he found what the experience of
all ages has confirmed, that he who loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver,
nor he that loveth abundance with increase—this also was vanity. (J. Fawcett, M.A.)
The most renowned of earthly conquerors seated himself by that well. He brought
the monarchs of the world to be his drawers of water ; each with his massive goblet
going down for the draught, and laying the tribute at the victor’s feet. But the
tears of the proud recipient have passed into a proverb; and if we could ask him
to translate these dumb tears into words, his reply would be, ‘‘ Whosoever drinketh
of this water shall thirst again.” (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) Perennial supplies :—
There is an Eastern legend which says that there was a fair fountain hy which an
angel once rested, and in a favoured hour he infused into it a mysterious power,
so that if only some drops of its water were scattered in a barren plain a fountain
would spring up; and thenceforth any traveller who came to the spring might, after
refreshing himself, take some water from it, and carry with him on his journey the
secret of unfailing springs, and might suffer no fear of thirst. And is not the water
which Christ gives like that, only it is given. by the Lord of angels? (Donald Fraser

D.D.) —‘Life-streams :—The Son of God gives living water—first, by giving Himself
to redeem the world which was pining away in death; and secondly, by making the
life which is in Him for the redeemed, to be, through the Holy Ghost (Rom. viii. 2)

a happy, blessed lifein them. In the beginning life was in Him (chap. i. 4); and
this life-stream of the eternal Word, which forth from Paradise flowed through this
world’s dark valley of death, until its whole fulness was collected in the flesh of the
Son of Man—this life-stream will never dry up, but will ever become deeper and
broader (Hizek. xlvii.); in the kingdom of grace, imparting grace for grace to all
who drink thereof for their healing from sin and death, and in the paradise of the
new, glorified earth, refreshing the perfected saints with rapture for ever and ever
(Rey. xxii. 1-17). (R. Berser.) Lhe freeness of salvation and the cost of the
means :—Dr. Adam Clarke once preached on the words, ‘“‘ Let him that is athirst
come. And whosoever will, Jef him take of the water of life freely.”’ At the con-
clusion of the discourse he announced a collection. ‘‘ How can you, Doctor,” asked
a lady afterwards, ‘reconcile the freeness of the water of life with the collection
at the close”? ‘‘Oh, madame,” answered the learned and venerable divine, “God
gives the water without money and without price; but you must pay for the water-
works, for the pipes, and the pitchers which convey the water to your neighbour-
hood.” Remember, you pay nothing to God; you are charged nothing for the
water; but you cannot have convenient chapels to sit in without paying for them,


ona. 1v.] OF eats  8T. JOHN. 889


nor a regular ministry to urge the water on your acceptance, without making a
suitable provision for its support. (J. C. Jones, D.D.) | Whe satisfaction within :—
I visited two lakes not far apart in a mountainous district of North Wales, namely,
Bala and Arenig. Having noticed that one was somewhat muddy and discoloured
whilst the other was beautiful and clear, quite transparent down to its bed, where
the eye could distinctly see the fishes flitting to and fro, I asked my companion
what might be the reason for this difference. He replied, Bala Lake, whose waters
are discoloured, is replenished by streams which flow into it, and which bring with
them the soil and débris they gather up in their course down the hill-side and
through the alluvial earth. But the Arenig, whose water is so beautifully trans-
parent and placid, is supplied by springs bubbling up within its own bosom ; hence
they bring with them no defiling elements. Herein I found a parable. The motives
which are supplied by the world—its pride, its wealth, its fashion, and fame—are
corrupt, and as they enter the mind they pollute it. But those supplied by religion,
which is a well-spring within, are pure in themselves and purify the whole man.
(A. J. Parry.) The best happiness within:—Here the fountain is within, the
streams of happiness have their source in the heart itself, they do not flow to a man
from without, but spring up in his own happy breast. A good man, it is written,
shall be satisfied from himself; he is not happy because his corn and wine and oil
are increased; but because God lifts up upon him the light of His countenance, and
fills him with joy and peace in believing, so that he abounds in hope through the
power of the Holy Ghost. He despises not the earthly comforts which God gives
him, nor does he turn austerely from them. Nay, he enjoys them with double relish
as the gifts of a reconciled Father, and eats his meat with gladness and singleness
of heart, praising God. The joys of friendship and social intercourse, and the
charities of domestic life, he can taste too as well as others, and has them of a
purer and more exalted kind. But still his best happiness is from within, a
peaceful conscience, a pure heart, a firm trust in God, a freedom from anxious care
and covetous desire, love of the brethren, the delight of doing good, patience in
adversity, and the hope of eternal glory. (J. Fawcett, M A.) Man’s longings
satisfied by Christ :—If you look over the dreamy aspirations of the Ancient and
Middle Ages, you will find that they resolve themselves into two—a thirst for the
elixir of immortality, and a longing for the philosopher’s stone. The elixir was
believed to possess the power to impart immortality to man, and the stone to possess
the power to convert all baser metals into pure gold. The elixir was to set me right,
the stone to set my circumstances right. But I need not remind you that the
alchemists could neither concoct the one nor discover the other. Notwithstanding
all their efforts, man remained both mortal and indigent. But these, like all other
deep longings of our nature, are met and satisfied in Christianity. Christ gives to
man “‘the white stone with the new name ”—this is -the real Philosopher’s Stone,
and it will set our circumstances right by and by. He also gives us the Water of
Life, which is the genuine Elixir of Immortality, and will render our persons really
and truly immortal. (J. C. Jones, D.D.) “ Springing up into everlasting life 7s
Water, by a well-known law of hydrostatics, never rises above its own level; and so
the best of earthly joys and rills of pleasure can rise no higher than earth: they
begin and terminate here. But the living water with which Christ fills the soul,
springing from heaven, conducts to heaven again. Flowing from the Infinite—
flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb; from the’ city of the crystal
sea—it elevates to the Infinite. It finds its level in the river of the water of life
which flows in the midst of the celestial Paradise. And just as on earth, so long as
our mighty lake-reservoirs are full of water and the channel unimpeded, the marble
fountain in street or garden, sends up, on the gravitation principle, its crystal jets
in unfailing constancy ; so (with reverence we say it) never shall these fountains of
peace and joy and reconciliation and hope cease in the heart of the believer until
the mighty reservoirs of Deity are exhausted; in other words, until God Himself
ceases to be God. Hiverlasting life is their source, and everlasting life is their
magnificent duration. We have witnessed the memorable and interesting spot at
the roots of Mount Hermon, familiarly known as “ the sources of the Jordan.”
There, the river of Palestine is seen bubbling out of a dark cave, and thence hastens
on through its long tortuous course to lose its waters in the Sea of Death. That ig
the picture and illustration of every stream of earthly happiness. They terminate
with the grave. But this inner fountain in the hidden man of the believer’s heart
flows onward to the Sea of Life; and the hour which terminates the worldling’s
happiness only truly begins his. (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) Jesus a spring :--A


ba ? ie ers bk
340 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fae OP


little girl who had been instructed in a Sunday School in the country was very fond
of her Bible. ‘There was a spring at a small distance from her cottage, from which
the family supplied themselves with water. Her father had noticed that she was
sometimes longer than necessary in going to the spring. One day he followed her
unperceived, and observed her set down the pitcher and kneel to pray. He waited
till she aroge, and then, coming forward, said, ‘‘ Well, my dear, was the water
sweet?” ‘Yes, father,” said she; ‘‘and if you were but to taste one drop of the
water I have been tasting, you would never drink of the waters of this world any
more.” ‘Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him,” says Jesus,
‘“‘ shall never thirst.” Religion a spring :—When you were children, as you went
along through the park, has your eye been attracted by a tiny jet of water spring-
ing up among the green grass? You said, “It is a spring!” And then, because
you had nothing to do in those happy days, you said, ‘‘I will cover it up, and keep
the spring down.” You have gathered leaves and earth and stones, and built a
compact house, and said, ‘No more water from that poor spring will ever get out
of that prison.” By and by the earth loosened and fell and crumbled away before
the irresistible stream of gentle water. (J. Watson, M.A.) Salvation to be
received as a free gift :—A great many people are looking at their feelings; a great
many people are looking at themselves. Do not be looking at your feelings, but
look at heaven. Suppose a man who had been in the habit of meeting in the
street one whom he had known for years as a beggar, and were to see him to-night
with a nice suit of clothes on, and were to accost him with, ‘‘ Hullo, beggar,’’ and
he were to answer, ‘‘ Don’t call me a beggar; Iam no beggar.” ‘‘ But are you not
a beggar?”? “No, sir, I am not a beggar.” ‘* What is the reason you are not a
beggar?” ‘* Why, I was sitting there to-day, and I put out my hand and asked a
man to givemesomething. A gentleman came along, and put five thousand dollars
right into my hand.” ‘‘ How do you knowit is good money?” ‘‘I took it to the bank.”
‘How did you get it?” ‘I put my hand out, and he just put it in my hand.” “How
do you know it is the right kind of a hand?”’ ‘Oh, pooh, what do I care what kind
of a hand it was?” (D.L. Moody.) Christian character forceful :—A gentleman
relates that he was one morning riding along a new road, where he saw the road-
makers hard at work blocking up a little spring which kept gushing out in the road
they were making. They put in earth and stones, and beat them down, to choke
the fountain, and then rolled the roller up and down to make the road solid.
So they worked and worked away, and contrived to keep the spring under during
the day. But at night, when the traveller returned, the little spring, which had
been hindered, but not destroyed, was at work again, dislodging the stones, throw-
ing out the dirt, and scooping for itself a channel. So it is often with God’s
children. (G. Litting, LL.B.) Earthly and spiritual blessings :—His lips water
not after homely provision that hath lately tasted of delicate sustenance. (Trapp.)
The activity of grace :—I tell you the living spring cannot be stayed in its action.
If you have a cistern-full of water it will be quiet enough, but if it be a spring it is
for ever seething, bubbling, gushing. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The inward spring :—
The Christian has a fons perennis within him. He is satisfied from himself. The
men of the world borrow all their joy from without, and, like gathered flowers,
though fair and sweet for a season, it must soon wither and become offensive, Joy
from within is like smelling the rose on the tree—it is more sweet and fair, and, [
must add, itis immortal. (G@. H. Salter.)


Ver. 15. Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not.—The thirst of life and its
satisfaction in Christ :—I. The poor sinful heart—astray and deceived—unsaTISFIED,
II. The soul led aright and brought to itself by repentance —BEGINNING TO BE SATIS-
FieD. III. The soul transformed into purity and blessed life by grace—PARTIALLY
saTisrinp. IV, The soul in glory rejoicing in the beatific vision—FuLLY SATISFIED,
The water of life :—I. I am To TRY TO EXCITE YOUR DESIRE BY A DESCRIPTION OF THIS
waTER, Spiritual things must be described by natural analogies. You must have
water or you die. So must you have grace. Water is—1. Thirst removing. 2.
Life preserving. 3. Filth purging. 4. Softening. The hardest heart yields before
the power of the love of God. 5. Fire quenching. The fire of lust, envy, malice,
anger, and unholy desire. 6. Spring creating. Wherever the water of life falls it
makes a new spring, and never gets flat, dull, or dead. 7, Fruit producing in pro-
portion to the quantity we drink. 8, Heaven ascending. Water rises to its level.
If we have grace that began with us it will never get higher than ourselves. It
grace which the priest gave, no higher than the priest. But the true grace of God


ee


cHaP. 1Vv.] ST. JOHN. 341


comes down from heaven, and will carry us whence it came. II. To cHEER your
HEARTS WITH SOME REFLECTIONS UPON THE LIKELIHOOD OF YOUR GETTING THIS LIVING
WATER. Supposing that you want it. 1. No ordinary man would deny another
water. The giving of grace by the Saviour no more than the giving of water by
you. 2. If you would refuse water to some, you would not refuse it to the thirsty ;
and Jesus never refused a thirsty sinner yet. 3. There is plenty of it, and it is free.
John speaks of a river. Who fears to exhaust the Thames? The source may be
private, but as soon as it gets a considerable stream it becomes a public highway
and water supply. 4. It flows on purpose for the thirsty. What could Christ have
made an atonement for but for sinners? 5. No one has been refused yet. 6. Itis
to Christ’s glory to give it, and therefore be sure that He will not withhold it. The
more a physician cures the greater his fame ; the more Christ saves the higher His
honour. III. To urGE you To PRAY THIS PRAYER. A desire is like seed in the
sack, but prayer sows it in the furrow: like water in the bottle, but prayer drinks
thereof. 1. Begin, then, by honouring Christ. The woman gave Him the highest
title she knew. You call Him “‘ Lord”; forif you reject His divinity you shut
yourself out from His kingdom. 2. Confess your undeservingness. ‘‘ Give,” not
‘“‘sell.”” Mercy must be given. 3. Make this a personal prayer. ‘Give it me.”
Never mind your neighbours or your children just now. Look after their salvation
when you are saved. 4. Offer it in the present tense. The worst of most men is
that they would serve the devil all their lives and then cheat him of their souls at
last. If God be God serve Him now. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Spiritual laziness :—
The spirit of the second reason for this request animates men to this day. The
prevalent disposition is to seek religious benefit in some way which does not involve
endeavour and responsibility. I. MEN po NoT EXPECT PHYSICAL RESULTS EXCEPT BY
APPROPRIATE EFFORT. Parents do not pray that God would inspire their boys with
a useful trade. They apprentice them and pray God that they may attend to their
business and take proper steps to learn. Skill of hand is to be developed by training
and not by praying. There are those who still speak of luck, but the number
decreases with intelligence and enterprise. II. MEN Do NOT LOOK FOR INTELLECTUAL
RESULTS EXCEPT BY THE APPLICATION OF MEANS TOENDS. 1. We never pray for general
knowledge, nor teach our children to do so; but to use their eyes and ears, to keep
company with intelligent persons. And this is not inconsistent with the prayer
that God will sustain us in the exertion of our natural faculties. So no one prays
for books, or the results of professional skill without the drill which leads to them.
2. There is one apparent exception, that of genius. But genius is only what belongs
to one whose organization is so fine and large that it acts by its own stimulus. If
on the art side, we havean art genius. A man is a genius in the direction in which
his faculties are highly organized. Such work more easily than others, but they
have to work much. The eagle moves faster and easier than the ant, but both move
by the same (muscular) power. And the greatest geniuses in poetry (Milton), in
music (Handel), in war (Frederick and Napoleon), have been the hardest workers.
III. Bur MEN DO LOOK FOR RELIGIOUS RESULTS WITHOUT PERSONAL EFFORT. 1, There
is an impression that God works irresistibly by His Spirit, and that the distinguish-
ing qualities of Christian life fall down upon us of their own accord like dewdrops
on the flowers. Now we must pray for everything that it is proper for us to have,
for the highest as well as for the lowest ; but there is no more reason that we should
pray for morality than for corn, for meekness than for flowers. 2, Religiousness
is rightmindedness towards God and man. To be religious is to act in accordance
with the laws of the mind from the highest to the lowest of its endowments, I
should have, of course, no hope as a minister without a belief in the all-prevalent
vitalizing Spirit, and should as soon attempt to raise flowers where there was no
atmosphere, and fruits without light and heat, as to regenerate men without the
Holy Ghost. Nevertheless this Divine influence is not irresistible in such a sense
as to relieve men from the responsibility of developing every one of the spiritual
elements. God wakes up the soul and then says, “‘ Work out what I work in”
(Phil, ii. 12, 13). 3. Conversion is not a completed work. Hereis a lazy vagabond,
depending on his relations, and he is taken to the West and put upon 150 acres of
ground and told to work out his own living. The ground is not converted yet; but
he goes to work and brings it under cultivation. He has been converted from a
street beggar into a man of means and respectability ; but his own conversion is no
more complete than that of his farm. When a man is converted he has a new
start and has to go forward. If a man, therefore, expects there is any labour-
gaving conversion he is greatly mistaken. 4. Conyersion makes a man a disciple,


=, *

342 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHap. Iv.
eee
and places him in Christ’s school, where he has to learn and place himself under
discipline. And the experiences of Christ’s school are not to be had by prayer only.
If an intemperate man wants to be temperate, a passionate man meek, a proud
man humble, he must not only pray, but tame himself. (H. W. Beecher.)
Carnal pleasures tire :—Hilly, ways are wearisome ways, and tire the ambitious
man. Carnal pleasures are dirty ways, and tire the licentious man. Desires
of gain are thorny ways, and tire the covetous man. Emulations of higher men
are dark and blind ways, and tire the envious man. Every way that is out of the
way wearies us. Lassati sumus, et lassis non datur requies ; we labour, and have
no rest when we have done; we are wearied with our sins, and have no satisfac-
tion in them; we go to bed to-night, weary of our sinful labours, and we will rise
freshly to-morrow to the same sinful labours again (Lam. v. 5; Isa. v.18). (Dr.
Donne.) The heaventy and the earthly mind :—Never was there such a contrast
in a conversation as that presented in the conversation between Christ and the
woman of Samaria. Christ speaking from the top of all spiritual apprehension,
the woman from the bottom of sensuous knowledge. (H. W. Beecher.) Spiritual
thirst prepares us to receive the living water :—They say that the water of the Nile
is very sweet. We have heard some of our fellow-countrymen assert that a very
little of it was too much for them, and that they never wished to drink of it again.
There is no use in disputing about tastes, but surely people might agree upon the
quality of the water. Yet some praise this Nile water to the skies, and others call
it muddy stuff. The reason why the water of the Nile is so sweet to Egyptians
is that their climate is dry, and the people are thirsty, and other water is scarce.
Under a burning sun a drink of water is very refreshing. To the soul that is
thirsty after mercy and reconciliation and eternal life, every promise of the Lord is
delightful. Nothing puts such a savour and flavour into the gospel as that work of
the Holy Spirit, by which we are made to feel our great need of it. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
Mercy a free gift :—It is not ‘ Sell me this water,” but ‘*‘ Give me this water.” Con-
fess that it is a gift: thou shalt never have it otherwise. Mercy must be given, or
thou shalt never have it. ‘Sir, give me, give me, give me of Thy free mercy, give it
me, Lord. I come empty-handed, naked, poor and miserable, Give it me. I have
nought to buy it with.’? Friend, does your pride kick at this? Be wise, I pray thee,
and bow thy neck to the yoke of grace. (Ibid.) Salvation must be realized by the
soul :—You go to the throne of grace; to a fountain deeper than Jacob’s well; you
draw water, living water, from it; but, instead of drinking the water, as youshould,
you are satisfied with having raised the bucket to the ground, and you retire. The
end of drawing water is to drink it: the meaning of praying is to reach something
beyond it. Prayer is not a religious duty, but the means of attaining spiritual
blessings. (J. Cumming, D.D.)


_ Vers, 16-18. Go, call thy husband, and come hither.—Whence learn—1. As grace
is little known or esteemed of so long as we know not our misery, so, where the
offer of mercy doth not persuade, Christ will discover their misery to make them
either come quickly to Him, or else resolve on hell; for, therefore, after the former
offers had no success, doth He rip up her bosom. 2. Christ is very meek and
tender, even in discovering of misery to men, so long as they are not incorrigible
and is willing that they should judge and accuse themselves, that He may deal
tenderly with them; therefore doth He so mildly bid her, ‘‘ Go, call thy husband,”
that He might draw a confession out of her own mouth. 3. It is not every sin
whereof natural men are guilty for which they can at first be capable of conviction
for every sin will not be odious to every one in every condition, but there are some
sins which only grace, and much grace, and grace in exercise, will see to be sinful :
therefore, though she was guilty of many other sins, yet Christ pitcheth only on
this sin of gross filthiness as that which would be seen best by her. 4. It is not
every sight of sin that will convince the sinner, but Christ must put it home upon
the conscience, and discover sin to be marked by His all-searching eye, before it
work upon him ; for she knew her own condition (and therefore saith “T have no
husband,” as shifting the matter whereof she supposed Him to be ignorant) but
without any sense, till He rip up her bosom and let her say He knew her. is
Christ will commend a small good under much dross, and particularly He accounts
of a true acknowledgment, even of a heinous crime, as a commendable duty
Therefore doth He make so much of her confession, ‘* Thou hast well said thou
saidst truly.” 6, Christ hath particular knowledge of what sins men are lyin

in, how hid goever, and particularly He hath an eye upon secret uncleanness ; and


how loath soever sinners be to be discovered by Christ, yet, where He pleaseth and
hath a purpose of mercy, no shiftings will hide them. So much doth this large
discovery, after her shifting confession, teach, ‘“‘ Thou hast had five husbands, and
he whom thou hast is not thy husband.” 7. Such is the pollution of our nature,
that lust will be insatiable unless grace curb it. So much appeareth in this woman
who, after so many marriages. doth live in uncleanness. (G. Hutcheson.) The
woman answered, ... no husband.—These words were an honest and truthful
confession, 80 far as they went. The way in which our Lord received her declara-
tion makes it probable that she did not profess to be a widow, and very likely her
dress showed that she was not. In this point of view the honesty of her confession
is noteworthy. There is always more hope of one who honestly and bluntly con-
fesses sin than of a smooth-tongued hypocrite. Our Lord’s commendation of the
woman’s honest confession deserves notice. It teaches us that we should make the
best of an ignorant sinner’s words. An unskilful physician of souls would probably
have rebuked the woman sharply for her wickedness, if her words led him to
suspect it. Our Lord, on the contrary, says, ‘Thou hast well said.” (Bp. Ryle.)
The power of private reproof :—John Wesley, having to travel some distance in a
stage coach, fell in with a pleasant-tempered, well-informed officer, whose conver-
sation was sprightly and entertaining, but frequently mingled with oaths. When
they were about to take the next stage, Mr. Wesley took the officer aside, and, after
expressing the pleasure he had enjoyed in his company, told him that he was
thereby encouraged to ask from him a very great favour. ‘I would take a pleasure
in obliging you,” said the officer, ‘and am sure that you will not prefer an un-
reasonable request.” ‘Then,” said Mr, Wesley, ‘‘ as we have to travel together
some time, I beg that, if I should so far forget myself as to swear, you will kindly
reprove me.” The officer immediately saw the motive, and, feeling the force of
the request, said with a smile, ‘None but Mr. Wesley could have conceived a
reproof in such a mauner.” (J. Gill.) Preparation for blessing needful :—She
has asked for this living water. She knows not that the well must first be dug.
In the depth of her spirit there is a power of life; but like the source of a spring,
itis hidden. Many a hard rock of impenitence was there, and many a layer of
every-day transgression, and many & habit once formable as clay, now hard as
adamant, and many a deposit of carnal thought which had left nothing but its
dregs behind. All this must be dug through before she can have the living water,
and this well, too, must be deep. The command, “ Go, call thy husband,” is the
first stroke breaking up the surface of that fair appearance, and revealing the foul-
ness of the life beneath it. (H. W. Watkins, D.D.) Sin must be confessed before
salvation can be obtained :—There is no salvation till you confess your sin. There
was a man in India who, one evening having nothing else to do, went to play at
religion with the parson—as some of you have come here this afternoon. ‘‘ Religion
is all very well,” began the officer, ‘“ but you must admit that there are difficulties
—about the miracles, for instance.’ The chaplain knew his man, and quietly
answered him, “ Yes, there are some things in the Bible not very plain, I admit ;
but the seventh commandment is very plain.” The man’s temper rose, and he
swung himself out of the tent; but a little later he came back, no longer to raise
false difficulties, but to ask how a poor adulterous British officer might be saved.
There are men and women here kept from salvation by what kept back this
Samaritan woman. Give up that man, give up that woman, if you would be saved.
The pitcher must be emptied before it can be filled. (John McNeill.) Conscience
must be aroused :—Here He comes home to her conscience ; so must all that will do
good, striving not so much to please as to profit. The eagle, though she love her
young ones dearly, yet she pricketh and beateth them out of their nest; so must
preachers drive men out of their nest of pleasure. (J. Trapp.) A plain word
spoken in season :—A lad in his teens had his home for a time with a good woman,
who made him very comfortable; and when he was leaving her, he asked if there
were anything he could do in return for the motherly care she had shown him.
Her reply was, ‘‘ Yes, ‘ Let the wicked forsake his way,’ &e.” (Isa. lv, 7).
The young man’s life had not been at all strikingly vicious; but the above
passage of Scripture, thus unexpectedly presented to him, was blessed by the
Holy Spirit, and took such hold on his mind that he could not rest till he
had sought and found the Lord Jesus Christ as his Saviour. Christ’s
skill in dealing with the conscience -—No mariner is more prompt to mark
and utilize every breeze, no plant more sensitive to sun and rain, or more
skilful to convert the one into colour and the other into sap, than Jesus to observe


ce ee


344 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar.r,


and adapt Himself to the changes of the hearts of men for their salvation.
(G. A. Chadwick, D.D.) Christ looks into the inner life :—The eye of Jesus, which
from the throne saw a sinful and saddened world; which saw Nathanael under the
fig tree and Zacchaeus up in the sycamore tree ; the eye which from the hill-top
gazed on doomed Jerusalem, and which now follows both saint and sinner through
all their ways; that bright, beautifal, expressive, sleepless, all-seeing eye pierced
the veil of deceit which this sinner thought impenetrable, discerned her ways, read
her thoughts, and dissected all her motives with more than microscopic distinct-
ness. Then, with the master skill of more than a prophet, Jesus exposed her
whole wanton career as by a lightning flash; and fastening upon her existing and
current offence “as the crown and consummation of all her sins,” He seized her
conscience. (J. H. Hitchens, D.D.) We must faithfully apply the truth:—A
minister was spending a few days in a town, and while there a young man was
thrown much in his society. The young man was not a Christian, but learning
that the minister intended to preach in the city gaol, asked to be allowed to
accompany him. The minister preached to the audience with so much earnestness
as to deeply irapress the friend who had accompanied him. On their return hcme
the young man said, “The men to whom you preached to-day must have been i
moved. Such preaching cannot fail to influence.” ‘‘ Friend,” answered the y
minister, ‘‘ were you influenced?” ‘* You were not preaching to me, but to your
convicts,” was quickly answered. ‘I was preaching to you as much as to them.

You need the same Saviour as they.” The word so faithfully spoken God blessed

in bringing this wanderer home to Himself.


Ver. 19. Sir, I perceive that Thou art a prophet.—Personal preaching :—General
discourses are like the beams of the sun dispersed in the air; they may warm usa
little, but that is all. Conviction is like a burning glass, that gathers all the beams
into one point or centre, and fastens them upon the soul, and so kindles and
inflames it, ... It is not the flourishing or brandishing of a sword in the air
that will wound or pierce, but the stroke of the weapon must be brought home to
the body, or no wound will be given. . . . While Nathan kept aloof in a general
discourse and told him a parable, David was never troubled with the sense of his
sin, never suspected it concerned him; but when he closed with him and told him,
“Thou art the man,” then David’s heart smote him; he cries out of his sin, and
sues for mercy. . .. This is the preaching that Solomon commends, ‘‘ The words
of the wise are like goads,” that must be run into the flesh, as nails driven up to
the head, fastened and riveted into the soul of a sinner (Eccles. xii. 10, 11; Acts ii.
37; Col. i. 28; Heb. iv. 12). (Bp. Brownrig.) Sinners avoid the truth:—I
could not help smiling as I read the next passage. She is making a wild attempt
to get away, to get off the hook. She tries to draw a red-herring across the scent
by bringing up that old religious squabble. Just like you: you will go home,
some of you, and take me to dinner, while I call God and your conscience to
witness that I have struck you between the eyes. Yes, you will talk about me, not
about your sin ; you will come near to calling me coarse, thou coarsest sinner out
of hell, that lovest thy sin! Have a care, my friend. (John McNeill.)


Vers. 20-29. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain—The advent of Christ
in relation to the heathen :—This is the first mission to the heathen. I. Our
Lerd’s misstonaRY METHOD. He tries to excite in the woman a longing for some-
thing higher than the life she was living. In order to do this He touches her
conscience and lays His finger on her sin. She, seeing that she is in the presence
of a prophet, embraces the opportunity of getting settled a long-standing con-
troversy. In His reply, our Lord does not pretend that there is no difference when
there is, but teaches that the difference is to pass away in the light of a higher truth
which embraces both sides. The Jews knew what they worshipped, as the Samaritan
and the heathen do not, Salvation was of the Jews, and not of the Samaritan or
heathen. II. Our Lord’s misstonary pocrrinz. The offering of a man’s whole
self to God, and not the substitution of anything in its place. But man can only
offer himself, ¢.e., worship in spirit, by being re-born of the Holy Spirit ; can only
worship in truth by being united to Him who is the Truth. Man can therefore
worship the Father in spirit and in truth by the offering of his whole self in union
with the Eternal Son and by being filled with the Eternal Spirit. IIL. Our Lord’s
AUDIENCE REPRESENTS THE HEATHEN WORLD. 1. In her separation. She is outside
the kingdom of God and the chosen race. 2. In her unconscious thirst for God—


eS ha eee


CHAP. Iv.] ST. JOHN. 845


the living water. 3. In her sin. 4. In her blind worship of the unknown God.
IV. The REVELATION OF WEAK POINTS IN MODERN missions. 1. There is too much
vagueness in modern Christianity as to whom and what we worship—no clear
grasp of the incarnation and regeneration by the Holy Spirit. Our Lord’s ‘“‘ We
know what we worship” much wanted. 2. There is too much feeling that
Christianity is a thing of European civilization, and not universal. 3. It was the
despised Samaritans, and not the favoured Jews, nor even the apostles, who were
the first to find out that Christ was the Saviour of the world. V. Our Lord’s
VINDICATION OF CHRISTIAN Missions in the declaration that the Father seeketh
worship. He knew that man cannot find satisfaction save in Him. (Canon Vernon
Hutton.) Human curiosity and Divine mystery :—1. According to the Grecian
sage, all knowledge commences with wonder or curiosity. Without this knowledge
would never have taken the strides it has. But it is not always those objects which
most excite our curiosity that we are most capable of becoming acquainted with.
This is true with the objects of nature, the sun, e.g., but much more with that
sublimest of all objects, the unseen God. And because He shrouds Himself round
with a veil of mystery, all the more our hearts desire to know something about
Him. And yet “who can by searching find out God?” And then we have to
reflect upon the errors into which men have fallen in their attempt to make the
discovery, their attempt to satisfy their desire by a substitute of their own imagina-
tion, which ended in leaving the desire unsatisfied and the object still unknown.
2. But just as the art of optics was required to enable men of science to make
progress in their knowledge of the sun, so it was necessary, before men could be
acquainted with God, that He should be brought within the region of human obser-
vation. “Lord, show us the Father!” wasthe cry of humanity. ‘‘ He that hath seen
Me hath seen the Father” was the response. 3. This woman was a subject of spiritual
curiosity, and desired to know something of God. She identified herself with a religion
which, however, instead of leading her to God, only supplied a substitute for Him.
‘© Ye worship ye know not what.” She knew what many a man of the nineteenth
century knows tv his cost, that this was true. As at Athens so at Gerizim there
was an altar to the unknown God. 4. What was wanting at Gerizim? Two
elements conspicuous in the creed of the Jew—a system of ritual in the temple
worship, with all its symbolic teaching, and the utterances of the prophets. These
two elements were closely connected with the promise as to the ‘‘seed of the
woman,” with the person and work of the Messiah, with God’s attitude towards
guilt in laying the iniquity of us all on the head of His guiltless Son. Thus tha
Jew was able to form such an ideal of the character of God as was impossible to
the Samaritans. So the former ‘‘ knew what He worshipped.”’ Is not agnosticism
the inevitable result of not receiving or of rejecting the revelation of God through
Christ in the present day? 5. This agnosticism is not to be wondered at even with
our clearer light. God is defined as an infinite Spirit—two splendid negations.
When the woman heard Christ’s declaration of the nature of God, she immediately
fell back on another thought—the Messiah. Trace the progress of this spiritual
growth—the awakening of a vague thirst; the definite conviction of sin; the desire
to worship truly ; the conviction of the coming of a perfect teacher; Christ’s dis-
closure of His Messiahship ; His glad communication ; the conviction on her word
and by personal experience, of the Samaritans that Christ was the Saviour of the
world. (W. M. H. Aitken, M.A.) The Church of the future :—I. This Church
is to be looked for NoT IN THE PREVALENCE OF ANY SINGLE FORM OF WORSHIP OR IN
ANY PHILOSOPHICAL CREED, though both of these will go along subordinately as
working forces, BUT IN THE CONDITION OF THE HUMAN RACE. There will never be a
time in which it will not be necessary to compass education by definite institutions.
But these are only instruments. So in the course of religion this or that sect is
only a kitchen where the loaf is prepared; and the loaf is mankind. And yet we
have just the same exclusive and conceited views of our particular sect as the, J ews
had of theirs. But local churches are but streams flowing into the ocean until the
‘earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.”
The smallest rill is of use; the navigable river is invaluable; but none of them,
not even the Amazon, is the ocean. And when the whole human family are
gathered into one substantial brotherhood, living as sons of God, the Divine
influence circling the whole, that will be the Church of the future. II. In that
great Church MEN WILL EMPLOY EDUCATING INSTITUTIONS AND DOCTRINAL FoRMS; but
such things will fall out of their present idolatrous position, and become merely
relative and subordinate, Of course it will have a creed. What is a man who hag


ae
346 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHar. Iv


no beliefs? But the form of creeds will be changed while the substance will remain.
Belief, existence, and authority of a personal God will never die out, but will come
forth in clearer light. So with the moral government of God, the influence of the
Holy Spirit, the sinful) ess, yet salvability, and destiny of man, and the vicarious
suffering of Jesus. IIL. In rais Caurca ORDINANCES WILL BE HINTS, HELPS, BUT
NEVER AUTHORITIES. They are like child’s.clothes which are necessary for the child,
but are not the child; like school books, useful helps but not yokes. Men make
idols and middle walls of ordinances: whereas their only use is to produce good
fruit. IV. In this Church Not ONLY MAY WE EXPECT GREAT LIGHT ON SCRIPTURE,
BUT A RECONCILIATION BETWEEN BEVEALED AND SCIENTIFIC TRUTH 80 THAT THEY WILL
CO-OPERATE AS PARTS OF A COMMON REVELATION. The distinction between secular
and religious, revealed and natural, will be much narrowed if not entirely done
away. All truth will be sacred. Nature and religion will stand upon a common
level, not by lowering religion, but by lifting up our conceptions of nature. (H.W.
Beecher.) The old worship and the new:—I. Consider How THE DESCRIPTION OF
CHRISTIAN WORSHIP HERE GIVEN SHOULD AFFECT THE EXTERNAL CIRCUMSTANCES OF
our worsHip. 1, Nothing can be more unphilosophical than to appeal to any
Jewish precedent without inquiring whether the ancient institutions rested on
permanent principles or were merely temporary. 2. When God commanded His
people to construct a sanctuary that He might dwell among them it was to impress
the truth that He was a God nigh at hand and not afar off, and by restricting
ceremonial worship to that spot to emphasize the fact of the Divine unity. 3.
Great then as were the gains of such a sanctuary yet the arrangement was not
without its perils. (1) Good men away from the temple felt as though banished
from God. (2) The tendency was to regard Jehovah as a God of the Jews, not of
the Gentiles. Thus the spirituality and infinity of God was obscured by His special
presence in the temple. As, therefore, it was expedient for Christ bodily to go
away to manifest an universal spiritual presence ; soit eventually became expedient
that God should be no more thought of as dwelling in a temple made with hands.
4, It is contrary to the whole genius of Christianity to suppose that God is nearer
to us in one spot than another, or that He confers special sanctity on material
structures. The temple was a sign of God’s willingness to listen to human worship,
and was the visible embodiment of the Divine promise; a Church is the visible
embodiment of human faith. The two ideas essentially differ. 5. The design of
the temple structure was symbolical throughout. There was a local manifestation
of God, and therefore a most holy place. God was approached by a ritual which
only priests could perform. And if we believed in Christ’s presence in the conse-
crated bread there ought to be an altar; and if ministers are priests a chancel
devoted to their use. But Christ, on the contrary, is in regenerated souls. If any
part of a church is sacred every part is so. Every part is altar, for Christians are
the body of Christ; every part is chancel, for Christians are a royal priesthood;
every part is holy of holies, because “ the glory Thou hast given Me I have given
them.” 6. But should not the structure of our buildings indicate their sacred
purpose? Yes. I may be led to the choice of a certain order of architecture to
indicate what it is; but in the interior I should be guided by the fact that Christians
are to assemble there to be instructed and to worship. If it is convenient to have
transepts, have them, but not to symbolize the Cross; and to diminish the con-
venience of the building by placing the chancel out of line with the nave to indicate
the inclination of Christ’s crucified body is to ignore the chief end for which it was
erected, Have a tower and side aisles, if convenient, but not to remind us of the
Trinity. 7. The same principles should determine the order of service. Every-
thing should be made subordinate to the spirituality, intelligence, and reality of
worship. The Jewish service was instructive and symbolic rather than esthetic;
and in discussing the questions of a liturgy versus free prayer, we have to ask not
what is most imposing, but what is most useful to devotion. The same with
Psalmody. II. THE SPECIAL PROVISION FOR A TRUE AND SPIRITUAL WORSHIP IN THE
DISPENSATION UNDER WHICH WE Livz. 1. God is revealed to us in His moral and
spiritual attributes as He never was before Christ. We preserve the whole wealth
of previous revelations ; but the moral perfections have been revealed in a new and
higher way, in the life of Christ, which renders possible a higher form of spiritua)
worship. 2. The Holy Ghost has a more intimate union with those who serve God
and exerts a mightier power over their spiritual life. He was indeed operant in
Old Testament times—but nowhere do we meet with such disclosures as in tha
Hipistles, There is possible, therefore, to us an energy and depth of spiritual life


- » Seaigrye


OHAP. Iv. ] ST. JOHN. 847
to which they could not attain. It follows, then, that we may have a more spiritual
worship because all our spiritual affections may be inspired with a fuller life and
nobler vigour. 3. A nearer and truer approach to God is granted under the new
dispensation than under theold. ‘ Thetruth” liberated from all merely symbolical
circumstances. At the Ascension these passed away and the realities were revealed.
We stand in the real Holy of Holies, of which that of the Temple was a shadow.
In conclusion, notice the greatness of the obligation which our Lord’s words impose
on the Church. That Church exists for a threefold purpose: 1. To make known
to man the love of God in Christ. 2. To increase the knowledge of God’s character
and will among those who know Him, and to train them, body, soul, and spirit, to
the keeping of His commandments. 3. To maintain from age to age a true and
spiritual worship. ‘To fulfil the last in this restless age is no easy task, but one of
the most solemn obligation. (R. W. Dale, LL.D.) Christian worship :—I.
NEGATIVELY CONSIDERED. 1. It is not sectarian. Sectarianism is not denomina-
tionalism, but spiritual monopoly. The former may be justifiable, but never the
latter. Party distinctions as such are of no importance in the sight of God. God
is no respecter of persons, and all persons have a right to worship Him according
to their conscience. 2. It is notlocal. Here both Jews and Samaritans were in
error. In the former case Deut. xii. 5, 7 was perverted, and the command to
sacrifice at a given place interpreted to invest that place with a special sanctity
apart from the character of the worshipper. The same feeling prevails amongst
Hindoos and Mohammedans; how passing strange that it should ever have prevailed
among Christians. 3, It is not external. Music, vestments, and ceremonies may,
and often do, excite the emotions which will be produced by any other pageant,
and which are totally disconnected with devotion. II. PosiriveLy consipEREp. 1,
It is spiritual. Lip homage is offensive to man much more to God. When local
and external worship was in full operation something more was necessary to accep-
tance (1 Kings viii. 27). In one respect this worship was independent of the moral
character of the worshipper. But no typical character belongs to Christian worship,
and without devout feelings it is worse than useless. 2. It is filial. Terror is the
predominating spirit of idolatry. Its ceremonies are therefore deprecatory and
often cruel. Awe was the predominating spirit of Jewish worship. Christianity
merges the sterner attributes of the Divine character into those more attractive.
God is a Father, and to worship Him truly is to offer the affection of sons. 3. It
is universal. Non-restricted—(1) To buildings—upper rooms, prisons, barns,
as well as cathedrals, &c. (2) Persons—‘‘rich and poor meet together.” Con-
clusion: In the exercises of God’s house avoid—(1) a superstitious spirit
either as regards the special sanctity of the place or the magical efficacy
of ordinances. (2) A formal spirit. ‘Bodily exercise profitest little.” (3) A
bigoted spirit. A church is God’s house, and all its privileges should be open to all
His people, due care being taken to exclude only the ungodly. (4) A slavish spirit.
“‘ The joy of the Lord is your strength” for worship. (R. Brodie, M.A.) Spiri-
tual worship :—I. ERRORS WHICH HAVE INTERFERED WITH THE PURITY OF RELIGIOUS
worsHir. 1, That which arises from a tendency to localize God. ‘*‘ Where?”
asked the woman. ‘‘ Nowhere in particular—everywhere,” said Christ. We see this
tendency among—(i) The heathen, who confine a god to a district. (2) The un-
educated in their notion of a cemetery. (3) The more refined, in the mystery which
they attach to church, altar, sacrament. What is sanctity of place? It belongs to
the law of association. Worship, e.g., in a festive room would suggest notions un-
congenial with devotion. Hence the use of consecration, sitting apart. This view
said to be dangerous.and unsettling. But—(a) Consider the shock this woman re-
ceived ; all her little religion had clung to Gerizim and was shattered at a blow. (?)
We are only concerned with the truth, and God’s truth cannot be dangerous. The
fact is, the Church is holy if a holy congregation be in it; if not, it is bricks and
mortar. The holiest place is not where architecture and music yield their spell, but
perhaps a wretched pallet on which one of Christ’s humblest ones is dying. 2.
That which arises from theideathat forms are immutable—* Ourfatbers worshipped,”
&c. A form is the shape in which an age expresses a feeling. The spirit of religion
remains but the expression alters. 3. That which arises from ignorance, “ Ye
worship ye know not what.” The feeling of ‘devoutness is inherent. But the ques-
tion is, what we worship. To many there are three deities—(1) The heathen bent
before power—God in the whirlwind, é&e. This is ignorance. (2) The philosopher
is above this. He bows before wisdom. Science tells him of electricity, &e. He
looks down on warm devoutness, and admires mind in nature. He calls it rational


348 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (CHAP. 1%


religion. Ignorance also. (3) The spiritual man bows before goodness. ‘‘ The true
worshippers worship the Father.’ We know what we worship. 4, That which
mistakes the nature of reverence. ‘The woman had reverence; veneration for
antiquity—the mountain, the prophet. But what was her life? Reverence, &., are
a class of feelings which belong to the imagination and are neither good nor bad.
Some men are constitutionally so framed that they do not thrill at painted windows,
but adore God, and love Christ, and admire goodness and hate evil. They have
bowed their souls before justice, mercy, truth, and therefore stand erect before every-
thing else that the world calls sublime. II. True CHARACTER OF SPIRITUAL WORSHIP.
1, A right appreciation of God’s character—(1) asa Spirit. The mind and pervading
life of the universe. In this, however, only a God for the intellect, not for the
heart, (2) As a father—a word uniting—(1) Tenderness with reverence. (2)
Discipline with kindness. 2. Spiritual character. ‘‘In Spirit and in truth. Holy }
character a kind of worship.” Before a material God a material knee would
have to bow; before a spiritual God nothing but prostration of spirit acceptable.
Application; 1. Christ came to sweep away everything that prevented immediate
contact with God. 2. Scripture insists on truth of character. (Ff. W. Robertson, M.A.)
The true worship of God :—I. Is Nor RESTRICTED To LocaLITIES. 1, Before the Advent
it was. The Pentateuch, to which Jews and Samaritans appealed, decided this
without naming the locality (Exod. xxx, 24; Deut. xii. 5,11, xvi. 6, xxvi. 2, xxxi. 11).
In selecting Jerusalem the Jews believed themselves to be under Divine guidance
(Psa. cxxxil, 13 ; 2 Chron. vii. 17; Isaiah lvi. 7; Zech. xiv. 17).. The Samaritans
finding no mention of Jerusalem, but observing the prominence given to Gerizim
(Deut. xi. 29, xxvii. 12; Josh. viii. 33), built a Temple there. Christ, however,
waived the controversy, and announced a new era emancipating the spirit of wor-
ship from place and form. 2. Since Pentecost it cannot be so restricted. (1) Men,
like the Jews, still cling to localities, notwithstanding the clear lesson of destruction
of the Temple. (2) Isaiah had a glimpse of this truth (Ixvi.1). (8) Christ for-
mally established it (Matt. xviii. 20, xxviii. 20). It became possible (Acts ii. 17).
II. Lis IN THE LINE OF GOD’S GRACIOUS REVELATIONS (ver 22). 1. It had been so
with the Jews. Accepting the prophets, they had a more accurate idea of God.
God’s gracious purposes had developed along the line of Jewish history. 2. It must
continue to be so with the Christian, Having manifested himself in Christ, any
worship that ignores this must be unacceptable (Col. ii. 23). It must also accept the
subsequent revelations of the Spirit. III. Accorps with THE BEING AND ESSENCE OF
Gop Himsetr (vers. 23,24). 1. Spiritual, since God is Spirit. Not a@ Spirit, one
among many, nor impersonal because the article is wanting, but absolute Being;
hence worship must ascend from the innermost personality. 2. True, since God is
this Truth. 3. Filial, since God is the Father (Matt. v. 45, vi. 9; Rom. vii. 15;
Gal. iv. 6). Lessons: 1, Controversies mostly settle themselves when left to time.
2. Questions about the externals of worship do not belong to its essence. 3.
Christian freedom is not the same thing as will worship. 4. The characteristics
of Christian worship fit it to be universal. 5, In these lie the prophecy of its triumph.
6. The Founder of such worship requires no surer witness to His supreme Divinity,
(T. Whitelaw, D.D.) Our fathers worshipped in this mountain.— Not where, but how
is the main thing :—Dr. Guthrie tells of a poor woman who dwelt in one of the darkest
and most wretched quarters of Edinburgh. Away from her native home, and with-
out one earthly friend, she had floated there, a stranger in a strange land, to sink into
the most abject poverty ; her condition but one degree better than our Saviour’s—in
common with the fox, she had a hole to lay her head in. Yet, although poor and
outwardly wretched, she was a child of God, one of the jewels which, if sought for
we should sometimes find in dust-heaps. With a bashfulness not unnatural she
had shrunk from exposing her poverty to the stare of well-robed congregations re-
sorting on Sabbath-days to the well—appropiate place—where a pious man was wont
to preach to ragged outcasts, crying in the name of Jesus, “If any man thirst, let
him come unto Me and drink.”’ In ignorance of this, and supposing that she was
living, like the mass around her, in careless neglect of her soul, Dr. Guthrie begun
to warn her ; but she interrupted him, and, drawing herself up with an air of
humble dignity, and half offended, said, ‘‘ Sir, I worship at the well, and am sure
that if we are true believers in Jesus, and love him, and try to follow Him, we shall
never be asked at the Judgment-day, ‘Where did you worship?’” ‘(Clerical
Library.) | How to worship God:—1. Is He a Saviour? Then we should come to
Him as sinners; for sinners only need a Saviour. All others will be rejected. There
can be no acceptable wership until we are convinced of sin, and humbled on account


OraP, Iv.) ST. JOHN. 349


of it. 2. 1s GodaFather? Then we should worship Him as children. 3.IsHea
Spirit? Then, “We must worship Him in spirit and in truth.” Whether asa
Saviour, a Father, or the Great God, He will accept only the worship of the mind,
the heart, the understanding. An idol god might be satisfied with the bended
knee and uplifted hand, but our God looks on the heart. (Dean Close.) This
mountain :—The Samaritans now believe what in all likelihood they believed
in our Saviour’s time, about mount Gerizim. It is for them the holy moun-
tain of the world; on its summit was the seat of Paradise; from its dust
Adam was formed; and the spot is still pointed out where he reared his first
altar; the place, too, where Seth did the same. Gerizim is the Ararat of
Scripture, on which the ark rested (Gen. viii. 4); which the waters of the flood
never overflowed; and which thus no dead thing borne by those waters had defiled.
They point out, further, the exact spot on which Noah reared an altar when the
flood had subsided (Gen. viii. 20); and its seven stepg on each of which he offered
a burnt-offering. The altar, too, is to this day standing on which Abraham had
bound his son, and the spot known where the ram was caught. At the summit
is Bethel (Gen. xxviii. 12, 19). There is a good deal more in the same fashion. That
poor woman, who may have accepted all this with implicit faith, would
have had warrant for more than her boast if only a small part of it had been true.
(Archbishop Trench.) Mount Gerizim :—The Patriarch Jacob had offered sacrifice
at Sychar, or Shechem (Gen. xxxiii. 20). From Mount Gerizim the six tribes had
solemnly pronounced the blessings that should be on those who kept the Ten
Commandments (Deut. xxvii. 12). At Shechem, Joshua before his death, had
recounted tothe assembled Israelites God’s merciful dealings with them (Josh.
xxiv). A temple, if not then standing, had formerly stood on Mount Gerizim. All
this might seem to convey a kind of right, and legality to the worship offered there.
But God had chosen one place for His worship, one place only for sacrifices to be
offered to Him (Deut, xii, 13). This place was Jerusalem. Neither length of time,
nor the eminence of the worshippers, could invest any other place with the right,
which God had given to Jerusalem alone. (F. H. Dunwell, B.A.) Veneration
for places of ancient worship :—The reverence of this woman for the place where
her father worshipped is common to men of every country and every creed. When
surrounded by revered walls consecrated by the confessions and thanksgivings of
many generations, a solemn awe steals over the heart, which the most gorgeous
cathedral, fresh from the hands of the architect, fails to inspire. Nor is this
impression produced merely by the-pathetic beauty which clings to noble and
stately structures in their decay. We are affected, not because the broken columns
and the crumbling tracery, grey with long exposure and covered with the kindly
growth of ivy, have a loveliness to the eye far surpassing that which the ancient
builders looked upon; the rudest, meanest building, the open moor, the mountain
side, if our fathers worshipped there, stir the deepest and most sacred emotions of
human nature. To this day the miserable remnant of the Samaritans cling with
indestructible affection to their ancient mountain ; and among the Jewish people
the passion has not been exhausted by the centuries of suffering, shame, and
despair. Week by week men and women and little children sit down in the dust
outside the walls of the Mosque, which stands where the Temple once stood, and
utter loud and grievous wailings over the fall of their beautiful sanctuary, and pray
for its restoration. (R. W. Dale, D.D.) Traditional religion :—Custom, as
it is commonly said, is a second nature; and men cannot easily leave that
which they have long used themselves to; and they will not easily leave that
which they have seen and known to be used by their predecessors. The
Ephraimites, in the Book of Judges, that had been brought up to say Sibboleth all
their life, cannot say Shibboleth to save their life; but they perish, two-and-forty
thousand. . . . This, the more is the pity, is the religion of too many thousands
in this land and time ; men and women are too commonly and generally pinned in
religion, and in practice of religious things, upon the customs and usages of ancient
days, and they are loth to be parted from them. The woman of Sychar was zealous
for the temple upon mount Gerizim; but the best reason she can give for that is
that her fathers worshipped there. (J. HUB Lge D.D.) The breadth of Spiritual
religion :—The more spiritual is a man’s religion the more expansive and broad it
always is, A stream may leave its deposits in the pool it flows through, but the
stream itself hurries on to other pools in the thick woods. And so God’s gifts a
soul may selfishly appropriate. But God Himself the more truly a soul possess
Him, the more truly it will long and try to share Him, (Philliys Brooks, D.D.)


—;


~


350 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [citaP. 1%


nn nnn nnn EEE StdUs ssn EnE SESS SSEE SSIES


The vanity of religious controversy :—What was it to her, living in sin, whether
Jerusalem or Samaria was the more acceptable place for worship? She could not
worship acceptably in either of them, How easily every one sees, in her case, that
she had no business with these curious questions; that the one thing for her to do
was, as Christ had told her her sin, to desire Him to tell her how she might escape
the punishment due to it. And yet her fault is far from being uncommon. There
are many who are living in the known breach of God's plainest commandments,
who yet will pay some attention to religion; but then it must not be a personal
thing ; it must not be admitted into their conscience, and allowed to interfere with
their vices. These it is not convenient for them to part with. They will lie and
defraud, or drink to excess, or live in the lust of uncleanness, or in a covetous and
worldly spirit ; these things they do, and will do. They ask not therefore any
religious questions which come close to their conscience; but they inquire what
form of worship is most scpiptural, what mode of preaching to be preferred ; whether
churchmen or dissenters come nearest to the primitive standard of church govern-
ment; or what denomination is best. What is it to you which denomination of
Christians is the best 2? Let which will be best, you are wrong, and in the road to
hell, even though you should belong to the purest society in the world. There is
one question only which concerns you at present ; and this it behoves every one of
you to put with all earnestness, and without delay—‘‘ What shall I do to be
saved?” (J. Fawcett, M.A.) Ye say.—Religion is not a hear-say, a presump-
tion, a supposition ; it is not a customary pretension and profession ; it is not an
affection of any mode ; it is not a piety of. any particular fancy, consisting in some
pathetic devotions, vehement expressions, bodily severities, affected anomalies, and
aversions from the innocent usage of others; but it consisteth in a profound
humility and an universal charity (Matt. v. 1-11). (Dr. Whichcote.) Christi-
anity non-centralized :—In the days of the apostles, the Church Catholic had no
local centre. Jerusalem was destroyed for this, I believe, among other special
reasons, that it might not become such. Christianity was designed for every land
alike ; it was gifted with power to make every city a Jerusalem, a habitation of
peace, a city of God; and every man, of every tribe, a citizen of the Zion above
(Deut. xxxiv. 6). (J. Boyd.)


Vers. 22, 23. Ye worship ye know not what.—The true worship :—I. Tue
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE SAMARITANS AND THE JEWS. 1, Samaritan worship was
offered in ignorance. They were little better qualified than the Athenians. Reject-
ing the prophets, their faith rested on tradition, and was given up to superstition.
As they were ignorant of the object so they were of the form of worship which God
had appointed. ‘Will worship,” however costly and apparently honouring, is
rejected. So the Saviour brought home to the woman the sad fact that she had
never wérshipped. This is just the case of those who only repeat the words of
prayer taught them in childhood, 2. The true worshipper’s worship with know-
ledge. (1) The Spiritual Israel. Christ was a worshipper of God not only as
Mediator but as man. As High Priest He gives to His people His informing Spirit,
through whom they have an intelligent knowledge of God’s character and will, and
the form by which to approach Him. (2) The literal Israel to whom were committed
the oracles of God, and such worshippers as Zacharias and Elizabeth, Simeon and
Anna. 3. A special relation existed between the Jews and the great Salvation.
(1) Its author was a Jew. (2) Its first messengers were Jews. (3) And as Salvation
so the true worship was of the Jews. To that all the Old Testament worship
pointed. Il. Tux rruz worsuir. 1. Who are the true worshippers? Those—
(1) Who have Spiritual knowledge of God; (2) Who worship with grace in the
appointed way; (3) Who are opposed to all false worship ; (4) Who apprehend the
true medium of worship and so have admission into the holiest. 2. What is it to
worship the Father? (1) Not as the judge and avenger. (2) With the fellowship
of children, not the penance of bond servants. 3. What is worship in Spirit?
(1) Not mere outward worship. (2) Not mere intellectual worship. (3) But
‘praying in the Holy Ghost” in that new nature He has given and with the help He
has promised. 4, What is worship in truth? (1) That which corresponds with
the nature of the God of truth. (2) Through Him who is full of grace and truth, by
whom alone we have access to God. 5. What is “ the hour? ”—(1) As coming it is
the object of Divine appointment, (2) As come, the era foretold, the dispensation
of the Spirit had actually arrived. (3) Is there not a personal hint of that supreme
moment which the woman made the crisis of her spiritual history! Only then can


ee


HAP. 1v.] ST. JOHN. 851


true and Spiritual worship begin. III. Onny THE TRUE WoRSHIP IS PLEASING To Gop.
The Father has a right to determine this and has done so. (A. Beith, D.D.)
Christ’s revelation of God :—I. Tuts REVELATION INCLUDES THREE THINGS. 1. God
is real—not a dream or picture, a thought or an abstraction. The living God 1s.
Thou art born of Him, and thy power to think of Him is proof of His existence.
2. God is Spiritual—not a material substance or a physical force. These cannot
create thought, feeling, and free will. I am greater than mountains, rivers, gravita-
tion, electricity ; I reason, love, hope, will. The object of my worship must be like
me and far above me. 3. God is personal—(1) Positivism tells us that He is
abstract and general. ‘A Being immense and eternal—Humanity” (Comte).
But adoration fixes itself on a single person. (2) Pantheism tell us that He is
everything, the Eternal substance which appears as. conscious in our thought and
unconscious in nature (Hegel). But we can no more worship this than a leaf can
a tree, or awave the ocean. (3) Agnosticism tells us that He is unknowable, ‘‘ the
Power not ourselves which makes for righteousness” (M. Arnold). But behind the
power we seek the Will, behind the law the Giver. (4) From these vague abstractions
the soul flies to God the Father with an eye to pity and anarmtosave. Il. Tux
{NFERENCE is swift and inevitable. 1. Our worship must correspond to the reality
of God’s nature. 2. The text does not condemn outward forms. Christ used and
instituted them. But all forms are dead and meaningless without reality. 3. In
the temple there must be a spiritual altar; on the altar a living fire—the
motion of the heart towards God. As fire is manifest in light and heat so is
worship in praise and prayer. Without the intercourse of the two spirits it is only a
painted fire. Lessons: 1. When you are bewildered in your religion remember that
the most adorable attributes are not metaphysical but spiritual, Our Father
brings Him near to us. 2. True worship is no light thing. It is not found in a
careless sleepy hour; not possible to a divided frivolous mind. 3, This text does
not unconsecrate the Church; it consecrates the world. (H. J. Van Dyke, D.D.)
We know what we worship.— Can we be sure of God?—I. Curist speaks oF Gop,
the Father, the God of salvation, God the Spirit, Iv A TONE OF INTENSE AND UNFALTER-
ING convictron. ‘ We know ”—not guess, dream, desire. He knows Him notas an
empty name, or a key to interpret creation, or as a central sun of the philosophy of
Providence. At least, then, Jesus is not an agnostic, but knew God as God knew
Him. Christ is our example as thinker and knower. Can we then climb to the
height of His full assurance of understanding? II. THIS QUESTION, ALWAYS
INTERESTING, IS JUST NOW CHARGED WITH EXTRAORDINARY URGENCY. These are days
of the revision and reconstruction of religious knowledge. 1. The word God is so
overwhelming and vast that some thoughtful souls shrink from declaring their
belief in Him. Atheism has done us this service: that it has forced on us whata
great thing it is to maintain the existence of God. 2. Others occupying a different
standpoint infer that we have not the faculties requisite for grasping this revelation.
3. It is essential to manhood, conduct and character that we do not trifle with this
question. Hither God can be known or He cannot, and we ought to settle what the
facts really are and be sure that there is no chance of knowing God, or else search
for Him with all the heart; for what a man knows and is sure of is the measure of
His peace, power and growth. For the world’s regeneration God must be more
than an enigma, He must be known. IJ. THE ANswER TO THIS INQUIRY I8 NOT SO
DIFFICULT AS IT SEEMS. It is not dependent upon the range of our information, but
upon the use of the right organs and methods of verification, Though we know
little we need not be less positive and assured about it, We may rejoice in the
boundless expanse and be sure of the patch of blue above us, and of the ray of truth
that shines through it: though we cannot embrace its illimitable sketches of beauty
and glory. A real agnosticism is for ever being married to a practical and life-
enriching positivism. Though we cannot be sure of anything, it does not follow
that we can be sure of nothing. ‘ We cannot by searching find out God.” Hven
Moses could only catch a glimpse of the glory of His goodness. Who of us knows
his friend in his totality, much less God. Christ’s knowledge was limited and yet
He knew the Father so well that He took the plan of His life from Him as a boy of
twelve, and never lost it till He said, “ Father, into Thy hands I commend my
Spirit.” This is the secret of human progress. Men built in certitute have been
creators of new epochs and saviours of men. Paul’s “I know ” was the inspiration
of His “ One thing I do.” IV. If God then cannot be fully known, WHAT IS THE
KNOWLEDGE WE MAY HAVE, HOW MAY WE GET IT AND TEST ITS VALIDITY? Christ gives
the answer, “ for salvation is of the Jews.” We Jews know God because we are the


352 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omar tv,


depositaries of salvation for ourselves and for all men. Salvation is life, character,
ethical stability, enthusiasm for righteousness, God. We are gloriously and
divinely saved, and therefore divinely and surely taught. 1. This tells us that
nothing assures like life and fortifies like experience. Truth is set in the clear
radiance of our deliverance from false thoughts, base passions, wrong aims, anc
mean deeds. 2. The case cited by Christ proves His principle. From the Jews
salvation has gone forth. They were a people saved of the Lord and knew Him
through their salvations. (1) Where will you find a people so completely freed
from mental perplexity about God? (2) To what people will you go for evidence of
a more persistent ethical stability? (3) Nor is there a literature of hope so rich as
the Old Testament. 3. It follows that our assurance of God does not depend upon
our speculative faculties, but on our practical powers which every man can and
must use, (1) Intuition, the direct gaze of the soul on creation and life, compelling
the recognition of a presence and power as the clearest and most real of all facts.
Life sees life, and in life sees law, order, mind and heart. (2) Science shows that
this idea of God is the deepest and most essential of all that get a place in human
thought. The total results of human inquiry is to prove—(a) The existence of an
energy, infinite and omnipresent, underlying and comprehending all the phenomena
of the universe. (b) That it works for righteousness. (c) That it is personal, a
living and holy will. (3) History is a revelation of God. ‘Salvation of the Jews”
is only part of God’s redeeming work. Redemption is the pivot on which the entire
human story turns. (4) Life. You will derive your largest aids from personal
devotion to Christ, acceptance of His discipline, and effort to do all His will. (J.
Clifford, D.D.) How we may know God :—The writer asked an aged negress if
she had known Washington. She answered by asking, ‘Do you know God?” “I
hope I know something of Him, ma’am.” ‘How, then, may one know God, sir?”
‘«‘ We may learn something about His goodness and handiwork from what we see in
yonder garden, and in these beautiful trees.” ‘‘ You are right, massa; but is there
no other way of knowing him?’ ‘“ Yes, ma’am, we may also learn something of
Him from His dealings with the sons of men, the history of nations, and the lives
of individuals.” ‘‘Can we? But in no other way?” ‘‘ From the Bible we gain
more knowledge of God than from all the other sources put together.” ‘ Yes,
indeed! and is there no other way?” ‘‘By experience.” Laying her hand upon
her heart, and lifting her bleared eyes to heaven, she exclaimed, ‘‘ Ah, now you
have it, massa!” (New Cyclopedia.) Ignorant worshippers:—The Dowager-
Duchess of Richmond went one Sunday with her daughter to the Chapel-Royal, at
St. James’s, but being Jate, they could find no places. After looking about some
time, and seeing the case was hopeless, she said to her daughter, ‘‘Come away,
Louisa; at any rate, we have done the civil thing.” (Raikes’ Diary.) Ignorant
worship affects the life for evil :—A Thug at Meirut, who had been guilty of many
murders, was arrested, and cast, heavily ironed, into prison. There a missionary
visited him, and preached Christ to him with such success, that he professed con-
version, As he was brought before the judge, and confronted by many witnesses,
he said, pointing to them, ‘“‘No need of these ; I am ready to avow the crimes of my
dreadful life.” He then proceeded to declare, that, having been brought up among
the Thugs, he fully believed, that, by the shedding of the blood of each victim, he
had not only pleased the dreadful goddess Kali, but procured her favour for himself.
And he recounted murder after murder in which he had been engaged, some of them
attended with such cruelty, that those present who had begun to feel some pity for
nim again shrunk back; the judge himself lifting up his bands, and exclaiming

‘‘How could you be guilty of enormities like these!” The only reply the poor
man made to the judge was to place his hand in the bosom of his linen vest to take
forth a little book; then, holding it up in his hand, he said, '‘ Had I but received
this book sooner, the book of Jesus, my Saviour and my God, I should not have
done it.”” God may be worshipped anywhere :—Isaac’s closet was a field. He went
out to meditate in the field at the eventide. David’s closet was his bedchamber.
‘*Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still.” Our Lord’s closet
was a mountain, ‘When he had sent the multitude away, He went up into a
mountain apart to pray, and when the evening was come, He was there alone.”
Peter’s closet was upon the house-top. Peter ‘‘ went upon the house-top to pray
about the sixth hour.” Hezekiah’s closet was turning his face towards the wall,
and praying unto the Lord. (H. Bickersteth.) Salvation is of the Jews.—One
nation and all nations :—I. THE WHOLE PRIDE OF MODERN WISDOM IS THIS: ‘*SALVATION
QF MAN I8 FRom MAN.” This has been differently understood. 1. Human nature


a?


OHAP. Iv.} ST. JOHN. $53


formerly was each individual man. 2. Latterly human nature has been considered
one person or society. 8. However, at no time could man have regarded himself
merely as an individual being, for society is to man what the soil is to the plant.
4. Between the two man found a resting place in nationality, a beneficent idea
when we place it in the line where individuality and humanity meet. But so far
from this individuality lost its finest character. Personal religion, by being made
national property, was merged in the community and humanity was almost entirely
effaced. II, Hisrory Is FROM ONE POINT OF VIEW THE CHRONOLOGY OF NATIONALITIES,
AND GoD HAS RECTIFIED AND CONSECRATED THE IDEA OF NATIONALITY TO THE TRIUMPH OF
THE PRINCIPLES OF INDIVIDUALITY AND HUMANITY. 1, Thus the Christian can accept
Christ’s statement that Christianity is of the Jews. Non-Christians, however,
object. (1) One would not deny that salvation in a sense is of, say, the French.
(2) Others refuse to allow a particular people to be the dispenser of common felicity.
But none but a Christian wishes it to come from the Jews. 2. About the term
salvation there is no dispute. It is the welfare of human nature and the fulfilment
of its destinies. Christ came to save humanity as wellas man. 3. In what sense,
then, can it come from the Jews? No one will, of course, mistake the channel for
the source (Rev. vii. 10). In its ignorance ancient poetry represented certain
countries as the abode of the sun. ‘This is false in physics but true in morals. In
the world of grace the rising sun has a home. Salvation is of the Jews. How?
Not because Christ was born and lived in Palestine, spoke its language, chose Jews
as disciples, or was crucified by Jews. Salvation is of the Jews as the water of a
stream comes from the basin in the rock at the top of the mountain. There the
water is collected and from thence it flows, but the water is from heaven. 4. This
being established, let us avail ourselves of the doctrine that each people is the
bearer and representative of an idea, and that each idea in order to fix itself in the
world has need of a people. This truth is invariably cultivated at the expense of
other truths, and thus becomes exaggerated, and is never more than part.of the
truth. Now if this be the case, might not a whole people in conformity with this
great law be the apostle of the truth which contains all truth! Now God has dealt
with a certain people in a manner favourable to the discharge of this function.
The Jews were a Theocracy, a people amongst whom God lived, whom God
governed, to whom He spake, and whose law was His worship, a people elected for
this very purpose. 5. But why confine this truth to the Jews? Was it the whole
truth 2 How is this national deposit reconciliable with the doctrine that salvation
is personal acceptance of Christ? Let us see. Christ and your soul have met!
But at what cost? You are dying with thirst; a drop of water from the river
revives you. It was only a drop, not the river, but the whole volume of water was
necessary to carry along the drop. The river therefore saved you. In the same
way the Church saved you because it gave you the knowledge of Christ whom you
savingly received. The Church by its volume and might carries forward that
element by which you are renewed. How has that current been formed? Look
well at those waves red with human blood and dark with martyr ashes. Your
Christianity, however individual it may be, is extracted from the Christianity of
sixty generations. 6. Why, then, since each of us proceeds from the Church, should
not the Church proceed from the Jews. As everything ends with the individual, so
everything begins. The Church was within the Jewish nation, this whole nation
was in the loins of Abraham the father of us all. So the ancient posterity of Jacob
find a place in the work of individual salvation. ILI. Our PROPOSITION WCULD BE
00 EASILY DEFENDED IF WE COULD SaY THAT CHRIST IS ONLY THE LAST DEVELOPMENT OF THE
wIsboM oF THE Jews. It is not because He is a Jew, but because He is God manifest
in the flesh, that He is our salvation, Yet—1l. The Jewish race from which He
came fulfilled an important function in preparing for His advent. The Old
Testament is a progressive instruction that leads us gradually up to Him. The
Jaw in the letter is succeeded by the law in the Spirit, a ritual worship by the
worship of the heart, legislation by prophecy, Abraham by Moses, Moses by Isaiah,
go that when the King arrives there ig a people ready to receive Him. 2. This
people, which will be the first fruits of a universal Father, could only be drawn from
the Jewish people. 3. But apart from the spiritual Israel, the Jewish people as &
whole received from God the education necessary to be the forerunner of Christ
among the nations, and when Christianity, after having collected in Judma all that


belonged to it, finds Jewish colonies which Divine Providence had scattered which


became the first Christian churches. 4. The Jews also carried their history with


them which became an immortal lesson for the human race, viz., the manner in


—,


i


354 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cap. Iv.


a ee


which God interposes in human affairs, just as a specimen of a plant explains the
whole species. 5. Here we must turn to Rom. xi. 12. As a political society and
race, the Jews had to fall away, because the new economy appealed to individuals.
But the falling away is not to be for ever. It must, is, and will be gathered anew
according to the principle of individuality and the law of liberty. The world will
yet see its fulness, and what will that fulness be? (Isa. xlix. 16-19). (A. Vinet,
D.D.) The spiritual ignorance of the Samaritans :—The assertion of this, as the
great calamity of the Samaritan—that he knew not what he worshipped—i
abundantly borne out by history. It was in all times a country of superstition, the
early home of Baal worshippers, the later home of enchanters and fanatics, and of
sects putting forward pretensions to all kind of spiritual powers. The Jew, on the
contrary, clung to a distinct object of adoration. He was a protestant against the
worship of spiritual fantasies. This poor shadow showed what the substance was
which the Jew had inherited, and which was his distinction among all nations.
Salvation was to go forth from his land. And salvation, so our Lord teaches ug,
consists in knowing what we worship; for that knowledge saves men from slavery
to the world’s idols, and to the idols of their own hearts, which is their great curse
and misery. (Ff. D. Maurice, M.A.) The straightforwardness of Jesus :—In
speaking here to a Samaritan, He indicates some points in which the Jews were
superior, and in which her nation might well follow them: while to the Jews, on
the other hand (as in the case of the parable of the good Samaritan, and in His
remark after the miracle of healing ten lepers), He takes occasion to notice some
superiority in the conduct of Samaritans, wherein their nation might well follow
them. Thus He corrects the failings of each by pointing out some superiority in
the other: reproving each to their own face, but commending them to others:
exactly the converse of that conduct which is too common among those who profess
to be His disciples, who, on the contrary, are often in the unchristian habit of flatter-
ing people in their presence and slandering them behind their back: keeping their
faults from themselves, but making them known to others. (G. J. Brown, M.A.)
Aptness of Christ:—Our Saviour always had in view the posture of mind of the
persons whom He addressed. He did not entertain the Pharisees with invectives
against the open impiety of their Sadducean rivals; nor, on the other hand, did He
soothe the Sadducee’s ear with descriptions of Pharisaical pomp and folly. In the
presence of the Pharisees, He preached against hypocrisy; to the Sadducees
He proved the resurrection of the dead. In like manner, of that known
enmity, which subsisted between the Jews and Samaritans, this faithful Teacher
took no undue advantage to make friends or proselytes of either. Upon the
Jews He inculcated a more comprehensive benevolence; with the Samaritan He
defended the orthodoxy of the Jewish creed. (Archdeacon Paley.)


Ver. 23, 24. The hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers.—
Worship :—I. Irs aRounDs oR REasoNs. 1, The perfection of the Divine character.
‘God is a Spirit.””. These words are—(1) A mystery, because spirit, like matter, is
unknown to us in its essence. We are acquainted with some of the sensible pro-
perties of matter, such as extension, figure, colour, &c. ; but what the substance is
which underlies these we do not understand. So also of spirit; we see its manifold
manifestations ; we feel, and therefore know, that it does exist; but what it is in
itself is a profound and inexplicable mystery. (2) A revelation. By them our
Saviour declared the personality of God. What is in the effect must have been
first in the cause. The Creator of persons must be a person. (3) As possessing
all possible perfections, 2. The nature of man. Intellectual ability, genius, and
learning, which are the possessions of the few, call forth our admiration, but there
is that in us all which is greater than these, namely, the power to worship our
Creator. All men have this; but in many it exists only in a latent state.
Thousands of human souls are nothing better than the burial-places of their
own faculties. It seems as if some malignant spiritual magician had waved his
terrible wand over human nature, causing a deep sleep to fall upon its noblest
instincts, and thus preventing its development. One of the greatest dangers of
the present time is the weakening of this power in men. The heathen worship
senseless idols; the ancient Greeks worshipped beauty; in the days of chivalry
men worshipped physical strength, military dignity, valour, and courage; but the
tendency of many in our own age is to worship nothing. Even in the Church the
idea of worship does not occupy the place it did in other times. The leading con-
ception appears to be preaching. II. Irs constirvnnr ELEMENTS. 1. Meditation


OHAP. IV.] ST. JOHN. 855


apon God. Holy and thoughtful Hebrews contemplated His character in the
works of creation, the goodness of His providence, and the words He had spoken
by His prophets. These are the three mirrors in which they beheld “ the beauty
of the Lord.” A greater and clearer manifestation has been given to us ‘in the
face of Jesus Christ.” It follows that He should be set most prominently before
the mind in all our acts of worship. 2. Devout contemplation produces reverence,
without which there is no true worship. (1) The science that has in it no reve-
rence is ‘‘blind, and cannot see afar off.’”? Philosophy without reverence is wanting
in the first element of wisdom, and when art has lost reverence its greatest beauty
isgone. There can be no great literature without reverence ; piety without reverence
will not soar above the earth, and a life without reverence is not worthy of the name.
Would you paint science, philosophy, art, poetry, and literature in a becoming
manner? Then you should represent them as a sisterhood of angels in the attitude
of worship. (2) This spirit, which ought to characterize our whole life, should
become intense in our direct acts of worship, for we enter then in a special manner
into the Divine presence. ‘‘ Our God is a consuming fire,” and we should therefore
approach His throne ‘‘ with reverence and godly fear.” What the fragrance of
flowers is to the atmosphere of the summer garden, this feeling of reverence should
be to our public worship. 38. Worship is transcendent wonder. ‘ Oh, the depth
of the riches,” &. ‘‘ Great and marvellous are Thy works,” &c. ‘ Who shall not
fear Thee ?’’ 4. Worship is communion with God. ‘Our fellowship is with the
Father.” 5. A profound sense of humility and self-abasement. The angels hide
their faces in His presence. Contemplate His holiness, and sin will appear hate-
ful. Behold His greatness, and you will feel how humble you ought to be. (T,.
Jones, D.D.) God seeks worshippers :—Oh, how should this fire up our hearts to
spiritual worship, that God seeks for such, with “Let me see Thy face, hear Thy
voice!” (Cant. ii. 14). He soliciteth suitors. (J. Trapp.) Living worshippers
the only true worshippers:—The magistrates (among the New England Puritans)
insisted on the presence of every man at public worship, Roger Williams repro-
bated the law; the worst statute in the English code was that which did but enforce
attendance upon the parish church. ‘ An unbelieving soul is dead in sin’’; such
was his argument; and to force the indifferent from one worship to another ‘ was
like shifting a dead man into several changes of apparel.” (Little’s ‘* Historical
Lights.”) True worship binds together all human souls :—An officer from one of
the ships in port—a serious young man—spent the interval between the English
and native services with me at the mission-house. As the congregation began to
assemble he accompanied me to the door of the chapel, intending to take leave
when the exercises should begin, as he was unacquainted with the language, and
had been already longer from his ship than he designed; but after standing a few
minutes, and seeing hundreds of natives assembling quietly and seriously from
various directions, he suddenly exclaimed, while tears glistened in his eye, “‘ No!—
this is tco much; I cannot go till I worship with these heathen!” (Stewart.) A
true worshipper :—‘ I have in my congregation,” said a minister of the gospel, ‘‘a
worthy aged woman, who has for many years been so deaf as not to distinguish the
loudest sound ; and yet she is always one of the first in the meeting. On asking the
reason of her constant attendance, as it was impossible for her to hear my voice,
she answered, ‘‘ Though I cannot hear you, I come to God’s house because T love it,
and would be found in His ways; and He gives me many a sweet thought upon the
text when it is pointed out to me. Another reason 1s, because I am in the best
company, in the most immediate presence of God, and among His saints, the
honourable of the earth.” | Worship (Church Dedication) :—I. WE oUGHT TO ENTER
THIS HOUSE WITH JOY, FOR IT IS DEDICATED TO worsHIP. 1. Worship is man’s highest
end, for it is the employment of his highest faculties in the sublimest object
2. Worship has been disparaged by representing it as a priestly contrivance for
selfish ends. 3. But how came the priest into being, and who gave him power ?
Religion was earlier than government. 4, In the earliest ages men recognized an
immediate interference of the Deity in what powerfully struck the senses, These
rude notions have been dispelled by science, which reveals fixed laws. (1) But in
these the religious principle finds confirmations of God more numerous and
powerful still. (2) The progress of the arts, teaching us the beneficent uses to
which God’s works may be applied, has furnished new testimonies to God's good-
ness. (3) The progress of society has made Gods creation more attractive. (4)
Human improvement has created new capacities and demands for religion. 5)
The soul, in proportion as it enlarges its capacities and refines its affections,


356 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, — [onar. rv,


discerns within itself a more glorious type of the Divinity. 5. All other wants are
superficial and transcient: the profoundest of all is the want of God. 6. Let us
rejoice, then, in His house. Heaven has no higher joy, the universe no higher
work, than worship. II. When we consider THE PARTICULAR WORSHIP TO BE HERE
OFFERED, If OUGHT TO AWAKEN Pious Joy. 1. Worship is of different forms—some
unworthy. The idea of God has been selfishly seized and so obscured that little of
its purifying power has remained, and men have, by pompous machinery and
obsequious adulation, endeavoured to bend the Almighty to their particular
interests. 2. This house is not reared to perpetuate the superstitions of past or
present. Here are none of the idols which degraded ancient temples, none of the
forms which in a rude age Providence allowed to the Jews; none of the cumber-
some ceremonies with which Christ has been overlaid. III. Tu1s HOUSE IS REARED
TO ASSIST THE WORSHIP OF THE FATHER IN SPIRIT AND IN TRUTH. For the worship—
1. Of one Infinite Person. 2, The Father. God has not always been so worshipped,
but Christ has for ever revealed Him as such. What a privilege! What does the
term import? Not merely that He is Creator—He made the mountain and the
insect—but that He communicates an existence like His own. He made us in His
image and likeness, and makes us partakers of the Divine nature. God is a Spirit,
and we are spirits. In calling God Father I understand—(1) That He loves His
offspring with unbounded affection. Love is the fundamental attribute of a father.
(2) That it is His chief purpose in creating and governing the universe to train and
ennoble the rational and moral being to whom He has given birth. Education is
the great work of aparent. (3) That He exercises authority over His child, (4)
That He communicates Himself. It belongs to a parent to breathe into the child
whatever is loftiest in his own soul. (5) That He destines His rational moral
creature to immortality. How ardently does a parent desire to prolong the life of
his child! 3. Of the Infinite Father in spirit and in truth. (1) Intelligently, with
just and honourable conceptions of Him. (2) With the heart as well as the
intellect. (3) With faith in a higher presence. (4) With a filial, not a fearful,
spirit. IV. THe GREAT END OF WORSHIPPING HERE IS THAT YOU MAY WORSHIP EVERY-
WHERE, that your houses and places of business may be consecrated to God. Adore
Him—1. As He is revealed in the universe, 2. As He is revealed in His rational
and moral offspring by fulfilling His purposes in regard to Him. MReverence the
human soul as His chosen sauctuary, in yourselves and in others, and labour to
carry it forward to perfection. Mercy is most acceptable worship. He who rears
one child in Christian virtue or recovers one fellow-creature to God builds a temple
more precious and enduring than Solomon’s or St. Peter’s. (W. E. Channing,
D.D.) The spirituality of worship :—I. TH GREAT PECULIARITY OF CHRISTIANITY
and proof of its Divinity 1s THAT IT IS FITTED TO BE THE RELIGION OF EVERY AGE AND
country. There is nothing in its institutions which confines it to one place rather
than another; and nothing in its requirements which makes its exercise easier at
this time or that. The heathen attached special sacredness to some shrine; the
Jews could perform the most solemn acts of their worship nowhere but at Jeru-
salem. This was enough to prove that Judaism was not designed to be permanent

because it could not be universal. Christianity takes the whole world for its
Jerusalem, and attaches no sacredness to certain lands and temples. A kind of
sanctity must be attached to the scenes of Christ’s life, of course. But it is not a
religious sacredness, A church built on Calvary would be no holier than anywhere
else. II, EveRYwHERE THE FATHER SEEKS TO BE WORSHIPPED IN SPIRIT AND IN
truTH. Why? Because of His nature. Composed as we are of body and soul,
men have formed improper notions of the Godhead, because we are unable to form
ideas of a purely Spiritual Being. The Deity differing immeasurably from our-
selves, to invest Him with our imperfections is to destroy reverence, Were He not
a Spirit He could not possess the properties which belong to the Divine Being—
omnipresence, ¢.g.—a body cannot be present in different places at the same time;
infinitude—a body cannot fill the universe. But in His spiritual nature He must
be immeasurably removed from the highest ranks of created intelligence. We want
to stretch beyond spirit, because we cannot but believe that God is infinitely beyond
angels ; and it is our duty to maintain the thought that God is far above all created
excellence, III, AccEPTABLE WORSHIP, THEN, MUST TAKE ITS CHARACTER FROM THE
NATURE OF Gop. It follows, therefore, that carnal and ceremonial worship will not
be acceptable. Prayer must be based on God’s perfections. It were useless to pray
unless persuaded of His omnipresence—who could worship a being who was not
within hearing ?—and equally useless unless convinced of His unchangeableness.


*
1
s
;


CHAP. Iv.] ST. JOHN. 857


Who could pray unless God’s promises and precepts were immutable? This worship
is not optional, but obligatory. IV. SprrirvaL woRsHIP DOES NOT EXCLUDE BODILY.
1, The body as well as the soul is to be sanctified and glorified; with both, there-
fore, God is to be honoured. 2. Where there is inward worship there will not be
outward irreverence. 3. But it is indifferent except as the index and accom-
paniment of the soul. V. Bur THIS WoRSHIP IS PRIMARILY sPIRITUAL. 1. It
is an act of the understanding. Not ‘‘ What ye know not,” but ‘ What
we know.” God as known by the light of nature and revelation. 2. It
is an act of the will—surrender and submission to God. 3. An act of
the affections—delighting in and sympathizing with God. 4. An act of faith—
5. An act of reverence. (H. Melvill, B.D.) Spiritual worship :—I. Tue NATURE
or Gop. ‘God isa Spirit.’ 1. How little we know about spirit. We can only
contrast it with matter. ‘‘ The Egyptians are men,” &c. ‘A spirit hath not flesh
and bones as ye see Me have.” 2. The heathen entertained sensual views of God,
and ‘*changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image like to corruptible
man,” &c. 3. But God is a Spirit, and therefore—(1) Omnipotent. A body can
only occupy a certain space. (2) Unchangeable and eternal. Bodies are finite and
mutable. 4, As we can understand so little about God as a Spirit, we are grateful
for His revelation. (1) In nature. (2) In His Word. (3) In His Son, through
whom God’s Spirit is brought near in our own nature, that we may the better
understand, love, and serve Him. II. Tur sEervice He requires. 1. Sincere.
However fair the impression and imposing the ceremonial, formality is abhorent to
Him. We scorn insincere professions and friendships, and an earthly monarch
would repel the adulation of a traitor. 2. Spiritual: the homage of the heart.
God’s complaint of His ancient people was that they drew nigh with their lips
only. To this a spiritual state is necessary, for ‘‘the carnal mind.is enmity against
God’’; and also renewal of the Holy Spirit, ‘praying in the Holy Ghost.”” 3. Eleva-
tion and enlargement in contrast to the Samaritan worship ‘‘in the mountain” and
to that of the Jews at Jerusalem. No creature was allowed to be offered to God,
“except such as could run and fly.” 4. God will not reject the tremulous and
broken utterances of a contrite heart. III. His wiLLINcNEss TO RECEIVE THIS WOR-
suip. IY. THE BLESSINGS IT WILL CONFER ON OURSELVES. 1. Deepened gratitude.
2. Elevated affections. 3. Relief from care. 4. Preparation for heaven. (7. Bar-
rass. Spiritual worship :—Note—1. The difference between interest in theology
and interest in religion. Here was a woman living in sin, and yet deeply interested
in theological controversy. Controversy sharpens our disputative faculties and
wakes our speculative ones. Religion is love to God and man. The woman’s con-
duct is typical. The moment Christ appears, she examines His views, not on
righteousness, but was He sound on the Temple. 2. All that was worth noticing in
the question had disappeared. Wrong as the Samaritan was, he was not so wrong
as the Jew for excommunicating him, or half so wrong as he himself was for hating
the Jew. Just as worship disappeared in this miserable controversy, so is Chris-
tianity going down in ours. Which was worse—to worship on a wrong hill, or to
mistake the very essence of worship? Consider—I. THE FOUNDATION ON WHICH
THE NEW RELIGION RESTS is the revelation made by Christ concerning—1. The
Fatherhood of God. This is the emphatic word. Men had worshipped the Father
before. The Greeks and Romans spoke of a “Father of gods and men”; the
Jewish prophet said, ‘‘ Have we not all one Father?” But universality was want-
ing. Therefore the old question was all in all—Where is He to be worshipped ?
The real question hidden under that was, Who are His children? The appearance
of God was the answer: God is the Father of the family of man. 2. The spirituality
of God. The definition is not theological, but practical. It is chiefly negative.
It says what God is not—not Matter. He is Mind, which has no place. Of love,
generosity, thought, can you say, Where? 3. The personality of God—* seeketh.”
(1) Two erroneous notions are compatible with the idea of Spirit—God as an idea
elaborated out of our own minds, and that God is the soul of nature: but both are
impersonal. (2) This is redemption. “God is a Spirit; He seeketh.” Here is
the value of belief ina Person. Not that we seek God; but that He seeks us.
II. Tun Narune oF sPrRiTuaL worsHip. (1) It is not what a man professes that
constitutes worship. A Trinitarian may call Christ “God,” and worship mammon.
(2) A man cannot decide whether he will or will not worship—he must, The only
question is, What? That before which he bows as greater than himself. An
infidel may worship Reason. The new worship of God is to be—1. Universal as
against Samaritan or Jewish exclusiveness. The ‘‘where” is unimportant. 2. ‘‘In


are


858 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaAP. Iv.


ec ee


spirit.” This the better Jews had gradually seen. ‘‘ What doth the Lord require
of thee,” &c. All true life is worship. 3. “In truth.” The correspondence
between acts and laws. God dwells in the humble heart. To be humble, to love
God, is His spiritual worship. (F. W. Robertson, M.A.) Spiritual worship :—In
this there is—I. APPREHENSION OF THE OBJECT, AND ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF ITS PER-
recTion. II. UNIoN WITH THE OBJECT, AND AFFECTION To IT. III. SENSE OF
INFIRMITY, AND DEPENDENCE ON THE oBJECT. IV. THESE ARE THINGS IN WORSHIP, OF
WHICH NOTHING CAN BE DONE BUT BY THE Spirit (Acts xvii. 23). (Dr. Whichcote.)
Spiritual worship:—I. Som GENERAL Propositions. Spiritual worship—l. Is
founded upon and riseth from the spirituality of God, 2. Is manifest by the light
of nature to be due to Him; not the outward means, which depended on a law, but
the inward manner. ‘Sacrifice to the gods, not so much clothed with purple gar-
ments as with a pure heart” (Menander), This could not but result—(1) From a
knowledge of ourselves. Psa. c. 1, 2, is a natural principle. Man must know that
his faculties were given him to glorify God. (2) From the knowledge of God (Rom.
i. 21). 3. Spiritual worship, therefore, was always required by God, and always
offered Him. His spirituality fails not, and spirituality must run through all the
rights of worship, and did (Deut. xxx. 10). 4. It is, consequently, every man’s
duty to worship God in spirit as to worship Him at all. He that denies worship to
be due to God denies His Deity; he that waives spiritual worship, denies His
spirituality. 5. The ceremonial law was abolished to promote spirituality of wor-
ship. (1) The legal service is called “ flesh,” in opposition to the gospel, which is
called ‘ spirit” (Heb. vii. 16; ix. 10; 2 Cor. iii. 8; Gal. iii. 3; 1 Cor. x. 18; Rom.
ii, 29). (2) The legal ceremonies were not a fit means to bring the heart into a
spiritual frame. They had a spiritual intent, but did not work spiritual affections
in the soul (Gal. iv. 9; Heb. ix. 9, x.1). (3) Neither are they hindered spiritual
affections ; because the people sunk down to the things themselves, and refused to
perceive their spiritual intent. (4) Upon these accounts, therefore, God never
testified Himself well pleased with that kind of worship ; not as they were His own
institution, but as they were practised (Hos, vi. 6; Isa. i. 11-14). (5) God, there-
fore, never intended their permanence, and often mentioned a coming spiritual
change (Heb, vii. 18; Gal. iv. 2; Mal. i. 11). 6. The gospel service is spiritual.
Spirituality is the genius of the gospel (Rom. xii.1), Its matter—love of, and faith
in, God—its motives (John i. 17), its manner, its assistances, are all spiritual.
7. Yet the worship of our bodies is not to be rejected. (1) Bodily worship is due
to God (1 Cor, vi. 20). Both body and spirit are from God, and should be for God.
(2) Social worship is due to God, but this cannot be without some bodily expres-
sions. (3) Christ worshipped with His body (Luke xxii. 41, 42), IL. Waar sprrirvan
worsHiP 1s. 1. From a spiritual nature (Eph. ii. 10). 2. By the influence of the
Spirit of God (Rom, viii. 13, 26; Eph. vi. 18). 3. Done in sincerity—from the
heart (Rom, i. 9; Prov. xxiii. 26; Exod. xxv. 7; Psa. cxix. 108). This is the salt
which seasons every sacrifice, and without the heart worship is a stage play (Rom. x.
10). 4, Performed with unitedness of heart (Psa. lxxxvi. 11; Ezek. xxxiii, 31; Matt.
vi. 6; Psa. cxix. 10). 5. Discharged with spiritual activity (Psa. lvii. 8), and acting
spiritual habits (Psa. ciii, 1). Hence the necessity of—(1) Faith (Heb. ix. 6).
(2) Love (Rom. viii, 15). (3) A spiritual sensibility of our own weakness. (4)
Spiritual desires after God (Psa. lxiii. 2,8; xlii. 2), (5) Thankfulness and admira-
tion (Isa. vi. 3; Rev. iv. 11; v. 13, 14). 6. Offered with delight (Psa. xliii. 4;
Eph.v.18, 19). 7. Paid with deep reverence (Isa. vi. 2; Heb. xii. 28), and humility
(Hab, ii. 4; Isa. vi. 5; 1 Chron, xxix. 14). God commanded not the fiercer crea-
tures to be sacrificed, but the meek ; none that had stings in their tails or venom in
their tongues. 8. Performed with holiness (Psa. xciii. 5; Heb. ix. 14; Rey. iv. 8).
9. Performed with spiritual ends and raised aims at God’s glory (Heb. xi.6; Rev. iv.
11). Some worship as poor men offer a present to rich—not to honour them, but to
gain a richer reward (Mal. iii. 14), 10, Offered in the name of Christ (1 Pet. ii. 5;
Rev. viii. 3). III. Wuy a sprriruaL WorRsHIP 18 DUE To Gop, and to be offered to
Him. 1. The best we have is to be presented in worship, on the grounds—(1) Of
God’s excellency (Mal. i.13, 14). (2) God’s command (Exod. xxix, 13). (8) Heathen
precedent, who offered their males and their children. (4) All creatures serve man
by the Providential order, with their best. (5) God has served man with His best.
2. We cannot else act towards God according to the nature of rational creatures.
Spiritual worship is due to God because of His nature, and from us because of ours.
To withhold our spiritual faculties is to deny them the end and use for which they
were given, 3. Without the engagement of our spirits, no act is an act of worship,


cuap. tv.) ST. JOHN. 359


The posture of the body is best to testify the affection of the mind. 4. There is in
worship an approach of God toman. Ought not our spirits to be prepared to receive
Him? (Exod. xix. 10, 11; Ezek. xlviii. 35). 5. To have this worship is God’s end
in redemption and sanctification (Mal, iii. 3; 1 Pet. ili. 18; ii. 5),. 6. Other wor-
ship cannot be acceptable, God being a Spirit (1 Pet. ii. 5). IV. To MAKE USE OF
rus. It serves—1l. For information. I{ spiritual worship be required—(1) How
gad their state who, so far from giving it, render no worship at all. Worship is
founded on creation (Psa. c. 2, 3), and man in no state can be exempted. Where
there is no acknowledgment of God, the gate is open for all sin (Hos, iv. 1,2; Gen.
iv. 16). Worship to a false God, or in a false way, is better than none at all.
(2) Diligence in outward worship is not to be rested in (Rev. iii, 1). 2. For
examination. (1) How are our hearts prepared to worship? Do we quicken our
spirits? (Psa. xxvii. 8.) Are our hearts fixed? (2) How do we act our graces in
worship? (3) How do we find our hearts after worship? How as to inward
strength, humility, delight? 3. Forcomfort. 4. For exhortation. .(S. Charneck,


B.D.) The spirituality of worship is distinct from—I. Formauism and ritualism.
IL. Inrecrecruatism. If]. Fanaric sprerruauism. (P. Schaff,D.D.) The spirituality
and simplicity of Christian worship: its grandeur and glory: —If we compare


the worship of God under the New Testament economy with that under the Old,
or that of false gods, the latter is far more impressive and imposing; and,
naturally, men do despise the simplicity of the former, for ‘almost from the
first an effort has been made to carnalize and embellish it, I. Cristian
WORSHIP IS PRE-EMINENTLY NOT MADE TO DEPEND ON SYMBOL, BECAUSE MORE
ELEVATED. The Jewish dispensation was typical and prophetic, the Christian
memorial. In foreshadowing more minuteness is required than in calling
to mind. A traveller needs very little to recall the scenes he has witnessed, but
the non-traveller requires much explanation. We have a full revelation, and
do not therefore require scenic representation. Il. To OLD WORSHIP WAS LARGELY
DEFEATED, The people were constantly being entangled, worshipped God with their
lips, their emotions were wrought upon, their devotions were dead. III. Tux op
ECONOMY WAS STEREOTYPED, severe, uniform. We do not allow children liberty of
action, and so in these old times, God prescribed to the child at school everything
strictly ; when Christ came a measure of liberty was granted from ceremonies. IV.
OUR SIMPLE WORSHIP BRINGS BEFORE US THE THINGS OF GoD IN THE LIGHT OF Gop’s
TRUTH AND IN DEPENDENCE ON THE POWER OF Gop’s Sprrrr, When men are acted
on by their senses they are apt to forget the end of all. A telescope is made to see
the stars with, but if the astronomer’s mind is occupied with the beauty of his
instrument, its end is lost. So we need to be on the watch lest amusement and
gratification shut out the true purpose of prayer. V. THe RULES FoR CHRISTIAN
WORSHIP are—1. Let all things be done in decency and order. 2. Unto edifying.
(Canon H. Stowell, M.A.) The axe at the root:—1. The worship Christ
here established involved a change—‘‘ The hour cometh.” 2. It was a dis-
tinguishing kind of worship, separating the true worshippers from the false,
3. It was directed towards the Father as its object. 4, It originates in a work
of grace—‘ seeketh.” 5. Its nature is Spirit and Truth. I. Tue History oF
worsHir. 1, Before the Flood it was of the simple form; the outward ordinances
were few, the chief of which were the offering of animal sacrifices. Connected with
this, no doubt, was the meeting of gracious hearts for prayer, and also the minis-
tration of truth since Enoch prophesied. But this worship was too spiritual. Cain
commenced a schism, and set up taste and self as a guide in religious worship.
The result was a general neglect of religion. 2. The patriarchal method. The
head of the family offered sacrifice, and, as in the case of Job, household religion
was maintained. But very early, although he could not forget God after the
Deluge, man began to interpose visible objects between himself and God. The use
of Teraphim became common even among those who had some knowledge of God.
The nations being dispersed, soon lost the idea of the invisible, and worshipped
idols. 3. The ceremonial form was instituted after the spiritual had broken down.
This was suitable to the infancy of the Church, but is as unsuitable now as
swaddling clothes would be to fall grown men. But even while it existed it was
spoken of as soon to be superseded, was frequently broken through by Divine
authority, and had no visible thing to worship. In spite of it all, however, idolatry
was the common sin of Israel, from which they had to be purged by the Captivity.
4. Since that day God has been treated in one of three ways—(1) Adored by out-
ward symbols, as among Brahmins, Romanists, &c; (2) Worshipped through


360 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. — four.


I


ritualism or unbending forms; (3) Or neglected altogether for superstition.
The lesson of all which is, that men will, if they can, find a substitute for
God. 5. Christ comes to tell us now that His worship is wholly spiritual.
II. AccouNT FOR THE RARITY OF SPIRITUAL worsHip. 1. Because man has fallen,
that as his body wants clothing so he is always dressing up his religion. 2.
It is more difficult to worship God in spirit than in form. 3. To worship
God spiritually men must part with their sins. 4. Men cannot traffic in spiritual
religion. III. WHy 18 SUCH WORSHIP TO BE RENDERED? Why not with wind-
mills, as in Thibet? 1, God seeks spiritual worship. To set up our own forms,
therefore, is to insult God. 2. God is a spirit, otherwise it might be right to
worship Him with material substances or something congenial to humanity. IV.
Wuat tHen? 1. Let us be particularly jealous of anything which looks like
going back to ceremonialism. 2. Let us make it matter of heart searching as to
whether this service has been ours, (C. H. Spurgeon.) I. In spirit, as regards
the inward power. II. In rruru, the outward form; the first strikes at hypocrisy,
the last at idolatry. (Cary/.) Where to pray :—We had gone out cf doors, and
are sent within. Go entirely within—and if perchance you seek some lofty place,
some holy place, show yourself within a temple of God. For the temple of God is
holy ; which temple are ye? If you wish to pray in a temple, pray in yourself. But
first be a temple of God, because He will hear the one who prays in His temple.
(Augustine.) Appropriate worship :—He that shall serve God, as a Spirit, in spirit
and in truth; he that shall serve God, as Holy, with probity of manners; as
Omniscient, with reverence of thought; as everywhere present, with composure of
actions; as bountiful, with willingness of heart; as merciful, with imitating that
mercy we hope for—such a one shows what Christianity is, and that it is the only
standard of a ‘* reasonable service ’’ (Micah vi. 6-8; Eph. v. 1, 2). (Dean Young.)
Seeketh.—The expression is peculiar.. There is something like it in the sentence,
‘““The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which is lost” (Luke xix. 10).
It seems to show the exceeding compassion of the Father, and His infinite willing-
ness to save souls. He does not merely “wait” for men to come to Him. He
‘‘seeks”? for them. It also shows the wide opening of God the Father’s mercy
under the gospel. He no longer confines His grace to the Jews. He now seeks
and desires to gather in everywhere true worshippers out of every nation. (Bp. Ryle.)


Ver. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship Hii1 must worship Him in spirit
and in truth.—God is a Spirit:—There are two ways of knowing and describing
God—Affirmatively, which ascribes to Him whatever is excellent; Negatively, which
separates from Him whatever is imperfect. The first is like a painting, which adds
one colour to another to make a lovely picture ; the other like a carving, which cuts
away what is superfluous. The latter is the easier, When we say that God is
infinite, immense, immutable, they are negatives. Spirit, too, isa negation—not a
body. We transfer the term to God because spirit is the highest excellence in our
nature. It is signified in the Divine Name (Exod. iii. 14), and expressly declared
in text and Heb, xii. 9. I. Tue pocrring. God is a pure spiritual being. Other-
wise—1, He could not be the Creator. Every artificer has his model first in his
mind, 2. He could not be One. If He had a body He would becapable of division.
Where there is the greatest unity there is the greatest simplicity (Deut. vi. 4). 3.
He could not be invisible (1 Tim. i. 17; John v. 37). Sometimes a representation
is made to the inward sense (1 Kings xx. 19; Isa. vi. 1), but not of the Essence.
Sometimes men are said to see Him face to face (Gen. xxxii. 30; Deut. xxxiv. 10)
but only in the sense of fuller manifestation. 4. He could not be infinite (2 Chron.
ii, 6). The very heavens have their limits. 5. He could not be independent
What is compounded of parts depends on those parts, and is after them; as the
parts of a watch are in time before it. But God is not so (Isa. xliy. 6). 6. He
would not be immutable (Mal. iii. 6). 7% He could not be omnipresent (Deut. iv
39; Jer, xxiii, 24), since a body can not be in two places at the same time. 8. He
could not be the most perfect Being. The most perfect is the most spiritual and
simple, as gold among metals is most free from alloy (1 John. i. 5). II. Tur
opsecTioN. How can God bea spirit when bodily members are ascribed to Him?
1, This is in condescension to our weakness. We are not able to conceive a spirit
but by some physical attribute. 2. These signify the acts of God as they bear some
likeness to ours. His wisdom is called His eye; His efficiency, His hand and arm;
by His face, we understand the manifestation of His favour; by His mouth the
revelation of His will; by His heart, the sincerity of His affections, &. 3. Truly


—_— a


CHAP. tv.] | ST. JOHN. 361


those members which are the instruments of the highest actions are thus employed.
4. These may be figuratively understood with respect to the Incarnation. 5. We
must conceive of them, therefore, not according to the letter but the intent. When
Christ calls Himself a Vine, Bread, Light, who understands Him literally? III. Tuz
use. If God be a pure spiritual Being, then—1. Man is not the image of God
according to his external form, but in the spiritual faculties (Eph. iv. 24; Col. iii.
10). It is unreasonable to form any image of Him. This was forbidden by
Pythagoras, undreamt of by the Romans for 170 years, and deemed wicked by the
Germans, God has absolutely prohibited it (Exod. xx. 5; Deut. v. 8-9; Isa, xi.
18). (1) We cannot fashion His image. Can we that of our own souls? (2) To
do so would be unworthy of God (Jer. x. 8,14; Rom. i. 23-25 : Exod. xxxii. 31).
(3) Yet is natural to man, 2. Our conceptions must be directed towards God as a
pure, perfect spirit, than which nothing can be conceived more perfect, pure, and
spiritual. Conceive of Him as excellent without any imperfection ; a spirit without
parts; great without quantity; perfect without quality ; everywhere without place ;
powerful without members; understanding without ignorance; and when you have
risen to the highest, consider Him as infinitely beyond. 3. No corporeal thing can
defile Him, no more than the quagmire can tame the sunbeam. 4. He is active and
communicative. The more anything approaches the nature of spirit, the more
diffusive it is—air, e.g. Asa spirit God is—(1) Possessed with all spiritual bless-
ings (Eph. i. 8) ; (2) Indefatigable in acting. If we be like God, the more spiritual we
are, the more active we shall be. 5. He is immortal (1 Tim.i. 17). 6. Wesee how
to communicate with Him; by our spirits. We can only know and embrace a
spirit with our spirits (Psa. xi. 17; Eph. iv. 23). 7%. He only can be the true satis-
faction of our spirits. 8. We must take most care of that wherein we are most like
God. 9. We must take heed of those sins which are spiritual (2 Cor. vii. 1). (S.
(Charnock, B.D.) The spirituality of God :—I. Gop 1s InvisiBLE. We can only
see what has form. It is no imperfection in our vision that it cannot see what it
was never made to see, A spirit can only be known by its operations through a
material body. God manifests Himself not to eense, but to experience. II. Gop
CANNOT ASSUME A MATERIAL Form, for it would confine Him, whereas He is every-
where. Whoever imagined the form of God. The most rapt prophet has only
seen light unapproachable as His symbol. III. Gop Has AssUMED FORMS BY WHICH
Hx HAS MANIFESTED Himset¥r, 1. The pillar of cloud. 2. The burning bush. 3.
The elements, as at Sinai. 4. A more definite form in Isa. vi. 5. In the fiery
furnace asa man. 6. As the angel of the covenant. IV. Gop mas rEvEALED Him-
SELF IN THE HUMANITY oF Curist. ‘The image of the invisible God.” (J. T.
Duryea, D.D.) Of God and His natural perfections:—I. THERE 18 BUT ONE
Gop. Weare led to this—1. By the light of nature. There can be but one infinite
and supreme ; it is a contradiction to suppose otherwise. The wiser of the heathen
philosophers had their one supreme god. 2. By revelation (Deut. xxxii. 39; Isa,
xliii, 10; Mark xii. 29), II. Turis Gop 1s a Spirir. 1. He is incorporeal and in-
visible (Col. i. 15; 1 Tim. vi. 16; John v. 37). 2. He lives and acts (John v. 26;
Psa. xxxvi. 9). 8. He has understanding and will (Psa. civ. 24; Eph. i. 11; Isa.
xxviii. 29; Dan. iv. 35). III, Ta1s Gop Is aN INFINITELY PERFECT Sprrit, and is
distinguished in a transcendent manner from other spirits, 1. An infinite Spirit
(Isa. xl, 15-17), 2. A self-sufficient and independent Spirit (Exod. iii. 14; Isa.
xliv, 24; Job xxii. 2,3; Rev. iv. 11). 3. An eterna! Spirit (Ps. xe. 2, ix. 7, cil.
27). 4. An unchangeable Spirit (James i.17). (1) In His being and perfection.
(2) In His glory. (3) In His blessedness, (4) In His decrees (Job xxiii, 13; Psa.
xxxii. 11; Isa. xlvi. 10,11). (5) In His promises (Isa. liv. 10; Mal. ii, 6). 5. An
omnipresent Spirit (Jer. xxiii. 24; Acts xvii. 27, 28; Psa. exxxix. 7-10), 6. An
all-knowing Spirit (Psa. exlvii. 5 ; Heb. iv. 13; Job xxxiv. 21,22). On this ground
He challenges the heathen (Isa, xli. 22,23), All this He knows of Himself without
any external medium (Isa. xl. 14; Psa. xciv. 10). 7 An Almighty Spirit (Psa.
xxxiii. 6; Eph. iii, 20). Application—1. How absurd and abominable are all
images of God (Jer. x. 8,14; Rom. i. 23-25). 2. What awful sentiments should
we entertain of Him. 3. What a dreadful enemy and what a comfortable friend
He must be. 4. How thankfully should we embrace a gospel revelation which
makes Him accessible. (J. Guyse, D.D.) The nature and worship of God :—I.
Gop 1s a Sprrtr. All the substances with which we are acquainted are resolvable
into material and spiritual. Between them there is this essential difference, that
no matter, however refined, can be so organized as to be capable of originating
a single feeling. Where, therefore, there is a judgment, will, affections,


PS


862 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. . fcuap. t¥.


ae


there is the subsistence which we call epirit. Of this kind is the spirit of
man. But human and angelic spirits are finite; God is infinite. Because God
is an infinite Spirit—l. He is present in every place, and therefore His wor-
shippers may in every place find Him. ‘ Whithershall I go from ThySpirit?” 2.
From this property arises the perfection of His knowledge, His omniscience. How-
ever matter may be extended, it would possess no consciousness of any object with
which it might come in contact. But when we conceive of spiritual presence we
conceive of consciousness and knowledge too. Wherever we are present we know.
Apply this to God. He is present to mark the risings of desire, Let this admonish
the sinner. Butitis at the same time most encouraging to the real worshipper,
who is conscious of his own sincerity, to know that God searcheth the heart. 3.
Hence arises the consideration of His ceaseless activity. We feel conscious of
something of this in ourselves. We find no weariness in the operations even of a
finite spirit; the power of the soul is now far too mighty for the feebleness of the
body. But ‘“ My Father worketh hitherto,” &c. Every faithful worshipper is
absolutely sure, not only of the notice of His eye, but of the unwearied operation of
His hand. 4. We thence infer the unchangeableness of His nature. An
infinite Spirit must, of necessity, be immutable. Even we, imperfect and
changeable as we are, yet, in some degree, partake of this property. The body
grows and increases in strength, and then it weakens and decays. Not so the
spirit ; that remains essentially the same. There are two kinds of change of which
created spirits are capable, and which strongly mark their natural imperfection:
they may change from good to bad; and from good to better. But God fills the
whole orb of perfection at once. II, Gop ovGHT TO BE WORSHIPPED because—l. He
ought to be acknowledged ; and publicly worshipped, because publicly acknowledged.
2. It is in acts of religious worship that we acquire just views of ourselves. If we
do not regularly draw nigh to God, there will spring up within us a principle
fatal to our peace and destructive of our salvation. The acts of solemn worship
always prevent our thinking of ourselves more highly than we ought to think. 3.
We have no reason to expect the slightest blessing except through the medium of
His worship. God will be inquired of by us, 4. The exalted pleasure which the
soul receives from religious worship. ‘‘ How amiable are Thy tabernacles,” &. 5.
It is one direct means of preparing us for heaven. A great part of the happiness
of heaven will consist in worship. III. Wr must worsHre Him IN SPIRIT AND IN
trurH. 1. ‘*In truth.” (1) In opposition to the shadowy dispensation of the law.
(2) Ina true manner: that is, in the way which He has Himself appointed through
the mediation of Christ, 2. ‘In spirit.” It is possible to worship Him in truth,
and notin spirit. Orthodoxy does not necessarily produce piety. What is implied
in this. Itisto worship Him—(1) Asa known, and not as an unknown, God. The
understanding is thus called in. (2) With a submissive will. Where the will is
in rebellion, God cannot be worshipped. (3) With the affections. (a) Desire.
(b) Faith or trust. (c) Gratitude. (R. Watson.) Christian worship a necessity :
—When Felix, the youthful martyr of Abitina, having confessed himself a Chris-
tian, was asked whether he had attended meetings, he replied, with an explosion of
scorn, ‘‘ As if a Christian could live without the Lord’s ordinance.” (Rendall)
True worship is spontaneous :—A little girl went out to pray in the fresh snow.
When she came in she said, ‘‘ Mamma, I couldn’t help praying when I was out at
play.” ‘ Whatdid you pray, my dear?” ‘I prayed the snow-prayer, mamma, that
I once learned at the Sunday School: ‘ Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow,’ ”
‘ “What a beautiful prayer! And here is a sweet promise to go with it: ‘Though

your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow.’” And what can wash them
white, clean from every stain of sin? The Bible answers, ‘They have washed
their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.” (R.A. Bertram.)
God is a Spirit :—God is a Spirit, as man is aspirit. There is no difference as to
what may be termed the popular characters of spirit, between the spirit of man,
and God, considered as a Spirit; for God made man in His own image. But there
is one great and radical difference. Human and angelic spirits are finite; God,
whom we worship, is infinite. (R, Watson.) Spiritual worship essential :—We
cannot be truly said to worship God if we want sincerity; a statue upon a tomb,
with eyes and hands lifted up, offers as good and as true a service—nay, it is better
it represents all that it can be framed to, but for us to worship without our spirits
is a presenting God with a picture, an echo, voice, and nothing else, a complement;
a mere lie, “ acompassing Him about with lies.” (S. Charnock.) Whatis spiritual
worship :—Our worship is spiritual when the door of the heart is shut against all


CHAP. Iv.} ST. JOHN. 863


intruders, as our Saviour commands in closet-duties. It was not His meaning to
command the shutting of the closet door, and leaving the heart door open for every
thought that would be apt to haunt us. (Ibid.) God’s spirituality a necessity:
—If God were an infinite body, He could not fill heaven and earth, but with the ex-
elusion of all creatures. Two bodies cannot be in the same space; they may be
near one another, but not in any of the same points together. A body bounded He
hath not, for that would destroy His immensity; He could not then fill heaven and
earth, because a body cannot be at one and the same time in two different spaces;
but God doth not fill heaven at one time, and the earth at another, but both at the
same time. Besides, a limited body cannot be said to fill the whole earth, but one
particular space in the earth at a time. A body may fill the earth with its
virtue, as the sun, but not with its substance. Nothing can be everywhere with
@ corporeal weight and mass; but God, being infinite, is not tied to any part of
the world, but penetrates all, and equally act, by His infinite power in all. (Ibid.)
The spirituality of God:—The knowledge of God is the foundation of all true
religion. I. Gop 1s a Sprrmit. In proportion as we are able to subject objects to
the process of analysis and combination, we ascertain their true properties. Hence,
the material world is more known than the immaterial. 1. We learn, that the
spiritual mode of existence attributed to the Deity is essentially different from any
sensible or material mode. When our Lord, therefore, said, that God was a Spirit,
He asserted there was an infinite difference in all the essential properties of His
nature from matter in any of its possible modifications, 2. The vast superiority of
a spiritual over a material or compound nature. Mind is universally esteemed more
valuable than matter in its most beautiful forms. But the superiority of spirit is
not only apparent over matter, but over a nature compounded of matter and spirit.
Once more; this compound nature is inferior to the spiritual, inasmuch as it is
necessarily liable to change: it has an inherent tendency to dissolution. Again,
spirituality of essence appears to be the condition of infinite perfection. It is that
alone in which infinite perfection can inhere. We have already seen that mind is
the test of power, wisdom, intelligence; and that none of the moral perfections of
Jehovah can be predicated of simple matter. Justice, goodness, love, and compas-
sion, are principles that belong exclusively to spirit. But we cannot infer, from the
possession of these moral excellences, that God is simply spirit ; for these qualities
may attach to a complex nature, as they sometimes do in man. It is the infinity of
His perfections that indicates the exclusive character of His essence. II. Draw
SOME PRACTICAL DEDUCTIONS. ‘The first is suggested by the context. ‘ They that
worship Him.” The construction of the sentence denotes the necessary connection
that subsists between acceptable worship, and the nature of the object wor-
shipped. If God is a Spirit, then we must worship Him with our spirits. 2. The
spirituality of the Divine essence is the foundation of an intimate union between
God and His intelligent creation, and should encourage our approach to Him.
It forms a union of nature which could not subsist were He mere matter, and
which cannot be with regard to substances that are exclusively material. 3. The
spirituality of the Divine nature constitutes God an inexhaustible source of blessed-
ness. Weare conversant in the present world with material objects; they are the
occasion of a great portion of our pleasures. But we are all conscious that they
are an unsatisfying portion. To conclude: What a character of condescension
and mercy does our subject give to the gospel of Jesus Christ: that economy
of grace which makes God known in the Person of His Son. (8. Summers.)
The nature of acceptable worship :—I. Ler US OFFER SOME GENERAL REMARES ON
PUBLIC worsHIP. 1, All places are alike acceptable with God. 2. Public worship
should be conducted according to the Word of God. 38. Public worship is the duty
and privilege of all believers. 4. Public worship requires due preparation, and
right feelings in entering upon it. 5. Public worship should be constant and regu-
lar. 6. Public worship should be followed by reflection and prayer. II. Tux
NATURE AND IMPORTANCE OF THE DIRECTIONS CONTAINED IN THE TEXT. ‘God is a
Spirit,” &c. Thatis, He is not a corporeal being, therefore not confined to any
locality, &c. 1. God is a Spirit, therefore He requires the worship of the mind. 2.
God is an invisible Spirit, and therefore He must be worshipped in the spirit of
faith. 3. God is a greatand glorious Spirit, and therefore we must worship Him in
the spirit of reverence and fear. 4, God is a holy Spirit, therefore we must wor-
ship Him with contrition and prayer. 5. God is a merciful and gracious Spirit, and
therefore we should worship Him in the spirit of confidence and hope. 6. God is
a Spirit of infinite benevolence and love, and therefore we should worship Him in


* | X, y gal
Ty

864 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHar. Iv.
a : i
the spirit of affection and delight. 7. God is an omniscient Spirit, and therefore
we must worship Him in sincerity and truth. Application: 1. Remember your
constant unworthiness and need. 2. Christ’s preciousness and merit. 3. And the
Spirit’s willingness to aid you, if you seek His influences. (Jabez Burns, D.D.)
Christian worship :—The spirit of adoration is as old as the records of humanity.
Adam heard the voice of God in the garden. Abel offered sacrifice to an unseen
power ; and the guilty Cain bowed with his gift, though it wasnot accepted. From
the border line of light, where authentie history fails us, we feel our way back
towards the birth of man by the ruins of temples and the fragments of solemn
tradition. Of early races and nations that have perished, we know, in many in-
stances, nothing more than this—they worshipped. The disposition to worship
belongs to the structure of the human soul. Religious ideas are changed by the
progress and diffusion of knowledge. Forms and theories of worship are shattered
and left behind by the enlargement and march of the intellect. Is it probable that
worship itself will be outgrown? Sometimes we hear of fears that it may be so—
that the advance of science will yet eradicate the tendency to prayer and homage.
The answer is this: “Is it likely that the progress of science will degrade human
nature and extinguish one of the deepest elements of human nobleness?”
With the gain of knowledge we instinctively associate the advance of our race.
Think, for a moment, of this globe filled with inhabitants, and no spire or dome of
praise on it, no pulse or throb of adoration in all its millions! Think of this globe
simply in its physical aspect, ‘‘ a crust of fossils and a core of fire,” spinning in the
bleak immensity, and bearing myriads on myriads of intelligent creatures yearly
around the sun, without wonder, without awe, without any cry from brain or heart
into the surrounding mystery! Suppose that the minds of these multitudes shall
be cultured far beyond the average of even the most favoured classes now, would you
account it an advance of human nature, if all this knowledge was gained at the
cost of the sense of a vast, incomprehensible power, within whose sweep the world
and all its interests is bound? Worship will cease when wonder dies in the heart
of man, and when the sense of the infinite is expunged from his soul. Is the pro-
gress of knowledge likely to produce either of these results? Howcan all the light
we can collect and concentrate from finite facts release us from the conception of the
infinite, or help us to enclose it within the tiny measure of our thought ? And when
has science so explained anything as to banish wonder from the mind that appre-
ciates the explanation? Ah! against what folly are we arguing thus? Our know-
ledge in this universe to dry up the springs of awe, and deliver us from the weakness
of adoration! Let the man come forward who is ready to say, under the starry arch
of night, ‘‘I know so much of nature that I blow as a bubble from me the thought
of God, and count it childish to entertain the thought of a Sovereign Mind!” Did
Newton feel like saying that? Would Herschel say that in his observatory? If
they had said it, should we think of them as greater men than now? It will not be
the progress of knowledge, but the decay of the noble elements in human nature,
that will ever banish worship from the world. Indeed the glory of knowledge is in
fellowship with the devout sentiment. There are three purposes for which we may
study truth—to obtain power over nature, to cultivate and enlarge our minds, and
to discern and acknowledge a revelation from a boundless and invisible thought. I
say nothing in disparagement of the first two. They are essential to civilization.
The last is not inconsistent with devotion to the others. But if men stop with the
first two, do they not miss the highest relations of truth? It is to refresh men with
this noblest relation of truth and knowledge that churches are built. Worship is
the exercise which the Church is to sustain. And all the aspects of truth which
will bend the mind of man in humility, and exalt it in adoration, are legitimately
within the range of the pulpit, and are, indeed, a portion of itstrust. I have said
that the glory of knowledge lies in the acceptance of truth as a manifestation of an
Infinite mind. And this is a conception that cannot be outgrown. It is ultimate.
We can grow in the acknowledgment of it, in the power and blessedness which
acquaintance with it brings; but the wisest man that will ever live will never go
beyond it. Civilization depends on the continuance of faith in the personality
and holiness of God. It is only through that faith that the consciences of men
will be illumined, the will of man curbed, the devotion and sacrifice of heroes
in the cause of truth inspired and confirmed. But there is still a higher con-
ception connected with the personality and purity of God—the word “ Father,”
God is one, God is holy, God is the Father—the Infinite is love; then the attrac-
tion is complete in the heavens for all the faculties of man, and for all human


{
:
§


a in oto


CHAP, IV.) ST. JOHN. 368


ane ert eile Hn einen ree Aneto Sed ts es
faculties in every race, in every age, and in all stages of progress and attainment.
We owe this final revelation to Jesus Christ. The sense of mystery, the
sense of beauty, the will, the conscience, the affections—all are drawn upward
to that name with which, through Him, the Infinite has clothed Himself. Adora-
tion of the Father is the distinctively Christian worship. (Z. Starr King.)
The nature and worship of God :—I, Tut NATURE OF Gop. 1. Being a Spirit, He
is a living substance; for though all living things be not spirits, every spirit is a
living thing. The soul and angels are spirits, therefore live, but not in themselves
(Acts xvii. 28). God lives in and of Himself (John v. 26; Psa. xxxvi. 9). 2. He is
incorporeal, or without body (Luke xxiv. 39). The Anthropomorphites and Audiarii
of old, and so some new heretics, have asserted that God has a body, contrary to
Rom, i. 23; Isa. xl. 18. Objection: God is said to have (1) a head (Dan. vii. 9) ;
(2) a face (Psa. xxvii. 8, xxxiv. 6); (3) eyes (Psa. xxxiv. 15); (4) hands (Psa.
Xxxviii. 2; Acts iv. 28); (5) a mouth (Matt. iv. 4); (6) ears (Psa. xxxi. 2); (7) arms
(Exod. vi. 6; Isa. liii. 1); (8) fingers (Exod. xxxi. 18); (9) Bowels (Isa. lxiii. 15).
Answer: (1) God speaks after the manner of men and to our capacity. We see
by the eye: by that, therefore, God signifies to us His omniscience, &. 3. He
cannot be felt, because no body. Objection, Acts xvii. 27. Answer: We cannot
feel God Himself, but by His creatures (Rom. i. 19, 20). 4. He is invisible and
cannot be seen (Job ix. 11; 1 John iv. 12). No man can see Him (Exod. xxxiii.
20; 1 Tim. vi. 16). Reason: God has no body, shape, nor colour, and we cannot
see our souls. Objection: God appeared to Abraham (Gen. xviii. 1), and to Israel
(Deut. v. 24), and others. Answer: Only by special manifestations of His glory.
Objection: We shall see God (1 John iii, 2; 1 Cor. xiii. 12), Answer: With our
soul, not with our bodily eyes. II. Tue worsuie He pesiaes. Not as if no
external rites were to be used. Christ Himself lifted up His eyes (John xvii. 1);
knelt (Luke xxii. 41); fell on His face (Matt. xxvi. 39); and instituted the sacra-
ment (see also Eph. iii. 14; Acts xxi. 5). We are to worship in spirit and in
truth. 1. Not with the types and shadows of the Old Testament, but according to
the truth of them as exhibited in the New (John i. 17, xvii. 17). 2. Not under any
bodily shape, because Heis a Spirit. Tre Samaritans worshipped Him under the
representation of a dove on Mount Gerizim ; hence their worship was called “strange
worship” by the Jews. This was not to worship in truth (Rom. i. 23-25). But
we are to worship God only as a Spirit, and so truly, not entertaining our gross
conceits, or making any picture of Him (Deut. iv. 14-16). 3. Not only with
external, but with internal worship. (1) By performing all our devotions with our
minds (1 Cor. xiv. 15). (2) By preferring Him in our judgments before all else
(Psa. Ixxiii. 25). (3) By submitting our wills to His (Luke xxil. 42). 4. By putting
our trust and confidence in Him (Psa. xxxvii. 3-6). 5. By devoting ourselves
wholly to His service and obedient to His commands (1 Sam. xv. 22). Application :
1. This is the only worship acceptable to Him (Isa. i. 11-12). 2. This is agreeable
to His nature ; He isaspirit and knows the heart (Ezek. xxxiil. 31). (Bp. Beveridge.)
Spiritual religion :—Our religion is true, deep, high, and broad in proportion
as it grasps the fact that God is a Spirit, and as it recognizes that that which
gives life and force to natural and historical religion is spirituality. I. This aspect
of the Divine nature CLEARS AWAY MANY PERPLEXITIES AND DIFFICULTIES WHICH
GATHER ROUND THE DOCTRINE oF GoD. The same is true regarding man considered
asa spirit. 1, The forms of expression borrowed from nature which describe God—
rock, fortress, shield, &c.—will mislead us if taken literally. 2. The same is true
with regard to the anthropomorphic expressions of the ancient covenant—hands,
feet, husband, king, father. 3. And yet again with reference to the metaphysical
words of a later time—procession, generation, substance, person. Each of these
taken literally leads us away from the spiritual, essential nature of God. But—4.
There are three supreme Biblical definitions which are all of a spiritual character :
God is “ Spirit,” “Light,” ‘ Love.” Let us hold fast to. these ; they express the
moral nature of God and the very essence of the Christian faith. II. This same
aspect tells us how GoD WILLS THAT THE WORLD SHOULD BE BROUGHT TO Him. 1,
Not by compulsion. 2. Not by the external decrees of authority. 3. Not by
reproaches and curses. 4, Not by mere miracles and signs of outward power,
which, although secondary means of persuasion, are not the main instruments. 5.
But by the internal evidence of the spirit of Christianity, which was the earliest
method. III. Iv 1s THROUGH THE.INWARD SPIRIT OF THINGS, AND NOT THROUGH THE
OUTWARD FORM, THAT GOD IS APPROACHED. 1. It is not the letter of any creed or
ordinance, or even of the Bible, but the meaning and inner spirit which vivifies and


in “a


366 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar, Iv.
OES eee
explains everything. ‘* The letter killeth, the Spirit giveth life.” 2. The signs and
ordinances of religion derive all their force from the directness with which they
address our reason, conscience, and affections. The outward form may vary, but
if the inward meaning is the same the essential grace is there. 3. God can be
worshipped on heath or mountain side or upper room as well as in the most splendid
cathedral ; but also in the cathedral as well as on the heath, &c. And that is the
more spiritual aspect of religion which recognizes the possibility of both; which
comprehends the highest manifestations of the human spirit in architecture, music,
painting, poetry, and yet steadily subordinates them to the moral purposes of truth,
justice, and purity. 4. It is not the sublime and the grand, but the mean, ugly,
and barbarous which binds itself to idolatrous usages; not the vast aisles of a
venerable abbey, but the narrow cell; not the awe-inspiring figures wrought by
Raphael or Michael Angelo, but the hideous block picture. Luther said, ‘‘ Do not
listen to those who open their mouths and call out ‘Spirit, Spirit, Spirit!’ and
then break down all the bridges by which the Spirit can enter.’”” No! Make the
best of all the gifts of God. They are all bridges, but only bridges. (Dean
Stanley.) The simplicity of Christ’s sublime disclosures :—Pythagoras taught the
maxim to his disciples and scrupulously observed it himself, ‘‘ Never wear the
types of the gods upon your rings.” That is to say, do not publish your highest
and most sacred truths to the ignorant and uninitiated. Jesus Christ acts here,
however, on a totally different principle; in the fulness of His heart He makes to
this poor sinful woman some of His sublimest revelations. (J.C. Jones,D.D.) God
like the wind :—This disclosure doubtless is of infinite depth; but that exquisite saying
of Gregory the Great’s that Scripture has depths for an elephant to swim in and
shallows in which a lamb can wade, is capable of being pushed a littlefurther. Often-
times the same Scripture is at once a depth for one and a shallow for another, and
thus itis here. We shall do little honour to our Lord’s skill in teaching, His adapta-
tion of His words to the needs of His hearers, if, in seeking high things, we failed to
find in these words some simple truth, such as that poor ignorant woman was
capable of grasping, and such as at that moment she needed. “ God is a Spirit’;
we must not miss, assuredly she did not miss, the significant image on which this
word reposes ; like the wind therefore, to which He is likened, breathing and blowing
where He will, penetrating everywhere, owning no circumscriptions, tied to no place,
neither to Mount Zion nor to Mount Gerizim ; but rather filling all space with His
presence (Psa. cxxxix. 7; 1 Kings viii. 27; Isa. lxvi. 1), in His essence and, as
involved in this very title, free. On this it follows that ‘ they who worship Him
must worship Him in spirit and in truth.” (Abp. Trench.) The worship God
desires :—The best, the purest, the koliest and most pious worship of .the gods is
ie worship them with a heart and tongue always pure, upright, and untainted.
icero.)


Vers. 25-26. I know that Messias cometh. ..1I.. . am He.—Second evasion and
reply :—The stricken deer tries once more to wrench the arrow from the wound ;
the wanderer thus caught amid the entangling thorns makes yet one other effort to
escape the pursuing shepherd ; the bold transgressor, unable to discuss these high
spiritual themes, tries to stifle her convictions by the new plea of procrastination,
wishing to break off the conversation in the spirit of conscious-stricken Felix. I.
PosTPONING THE QUESTION OF SALVATION TO AN INDEFINITE CONVENIENT SEASON, THE
CRY OF THE CONVICTED SOUL IS ‘‘ GIVE ME THIS WATER!’’—BUT NoT ver. 1. “ Give
me this water!” is the cry of youth—but not yet. Disturb not my bright sunny
morning ; wait till I reach the threshold of manhood. 2. ‘‘ Give me this water!”
is the cry of ripening manhood—but not yet. Disturb me notin the burden and
heat of the day ; wait till I have leisure and breathing-time ; wait till the eventide
sets in, and the shadows are lengthening, and the drawers of water stand with their
pitchers around life’s fountains. 3. ‘* Give me this water!” is the ery of old age—
but not yet. Though far advanced in the pilgrimage journey, my strength is yet
firm. I have a long evening ere the sunset hour. I may linger yet a while amid
these olive-glades ere the flagon be let down for a draught. 4. “Give me this
water!” is the cry of the dying. But postponement cannot be pled now; procras-
tination merges into despair. ‘‘ Give me this water!’ but it is too late. II. In
HER ATTEMPTS AT EVASION THE WOMAN HAD NOT BEEN ABLE TO SHAKE OFF HER CON-
VICTIONS THAT SHE STOOD BEFORE A SUPERIOR Brinc. 1. She had called Him
prophet. The Jews looked for a kingly Messiah, the Samaritans for a prophetic.
As she listened to His wondrous disclosures did the thought flash across her mind,


CHAP. IT.] ST. JOHN. 367


“ Can this be He?” The world was then expecting a Divine advent. Besides the
prediction of Moses, her own Pentateuch had told her of the prophet who fifteen
hundred years before had lifted up his voice on the hills on which she could now
gaze. Caravans passing daily Jacob’s well must have brought tidings of John’s
testimony. 2. The crisis of her life had come. Will the Saviour abandon her to


~ her procrastination and say, as was said of her tribe, ‘‘ Ephraim is joined to his idols,


let him alone?” or will He disclose His Divine Person? Such a disclosure may be
fraught with peril. But the destiny of a human soul depends upon it; He will
save others, but not Himself. III. War a REJOINDER TO HER QUESTION—“ Art
Thou greater than our father Jacob?” Yes, I am the Shiloh of whom he spake,
the ladder he beheld, the angel with whom he wrestled. The Baptist’s words have
their first echo and fulfilment, ‘‘He will gather His wheat into the garner.” She
understands all now—the penetrating revelations, the living water, salvation. The
Giver of all stands by her and offers them to her. She requires no miracles.
IV. THE IMMEDIATE SEQUEL IS UNRECORDED. Her feelings are left to our imagina-
tion. She may have been dumb with silence or tears, But angels rejoiced over
this returning sinner as she starts on an errand of mercy to her native town.
Lessons: 1. Christ stands at the door of every heart. 2. None need despair; the
first may be last and the last first; for Samaritan as well as Jerusalem sinners may
find mercy. 3. Christ speaks in many ways—in the mercies He bestows, in the
blessings He withholds; in life’s storms and sunshine. 4. Christ speaks at every
season. (1) Early in the morning to His disciples on the lake shore—to youth in
life’s early morning. (2) At midday as here—in the hot noon of day to manhood
and womanhood. (3) At eventide on the way to Emmaus—in life’s evening to the
aged. (4) At night to Nicodemus—to the dying. (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) _Messias.
—Messiah :—The Hebrew, Messias in the Syriac, and Christ in the Greek, means
‘the Anointed One.” Anointing with oil was the ancient form of consecration.
Christ was anointed with the Holy Ghost. I. Tue proors or Curist’s MEssIAHSHIP.
1. He was generally expected. (1) Among the Jews. (2) Among the Gentiles, as
attested by the visit of the Magi and the testimony of classical writers. This is due
to the settlement of the Jews among the heathen. 2. The miracles of Christ were
the proof to which He always referred. These were—(1) Performed in public. (2)
Wrought in different places. (3) Many in number. (4) Not denied by His enemies.
3. The prophecies of the Old Testament were fulfilled in Him and in no one else.
(1) These were too jealously guarded for the evangelists to tamper with them. (2)
An impostor could not have fulfilled them. A man cannot arrange the place of
his birth and his family, and would not have been diligent to fulfil prophecies which
related to persecution and death. 4, The character of our Lord. “ Which of you
convinceth Me of sin?” Some have thought that if Virtue were to walk on earth
all men would immediately worship her. Pl.to knew better. He says the good
man “would be tortured, spit upon, have his eyes*put out, and be crucified.” II.
THE NATURE AND BLESSINGS or Curist’s Mrssiausuie. 1. He is the true prophet.
(1) Note the characteristics of His teaching. (a) How weighty His lessons—life
and immortality, faith, self-denial, prayer, humility, love. (b) How beautiful His
jllustrations—cornfields, lilies, leaven, fishing. (c) How kind His manner—what
tenderness to young and: afflicted, what encouragement to the timid. (d) How
faithful His warnings. ‘‘ Never man spake like this man.” (2) He taught by example
as well as precept. (3) What is the testimony of believers to His teaching? (a)
When He spoke to our hearts it was with power. (b) We learned more from Him
in five minutes than in all our lives from others. 2. Christ is High Priest. (1)
The priests were washed in water and anointed with oil. Christ was baptized and
imbued with the Spirit. (2) The priestly functions were sacrifice, intercession, bene-
diction. Christ‘ offered Himself”’; ‘ever liveth to make intercession for us’’; “gives
the Spirit.” 3. Christ is King. (1) By personal right. (2) Bydonation from the Father.
(3) By purchase. (4) By conquest. (5) By voluntary surrender. (J. M. Randall.)
The woman of Samaria :—And in bringing a man to this state, we may observe
that, commonly, some one particular sin, gross in its nature, and to which he has
been addicted, is charged home upon the conscience. Buta broad surface is not
likely to penetrate ; it must be pointed to enter. The indictment which arraigns
this criminal, like every other, exhibits some specific charge ; and the man ex-
claims, “*O my swearing, my lying, my Sabbath-breaking, my prayerless life!”
“Jesus saith unto her, Go, call thy husband, and come hither.” But she exclaims,
‘6 Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. Our fathers worshipped in this moun-
tain ; and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.”


a a
ag


¥*


368 TUE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP. Iv.


Two reasons may be assigned for her proposing this question so instantly and
abruptly. It has been supposed—1. That it was by way of diversion. But it has
also been supposed—2. That her aim was to seize the present moment to gain
information as to what was deemed important, and which she concluded this know-
ing one might afford. Herein two things are observable—(1) That it should cool
us, in many of our contests, to remember that the things we are contending about
are of short duration; and that while we are disputing, they are vanishing away.
There are “things which cannot be shaken, but must remain.” (2) The best way
to make up differences in little things is to be zealous about great ones. To these,
therefore, the Scripture always directs our regards, knowing that if these supremely
occupy the mind, we shall have neither time nor inclination for comparative
trifling. 1, Observe the omniscience of our Lord, and bring it home to yourselves.
2. Let us worship the Lord, ‘in the beauties of holiness”; and in order to this,
never forget the information which our Saviour has given us. 3. Let us inquire
whether He has manifested Himself to us. (W. Jay.) Why this revelation of
Messiahship was made to the woman and not to the Pharisees:—The eagle has
to strive hard and swoop round a great deal before he soars above the clouds,
the weight of his body being a disadvantage to him to ascend. The lark, how-
ever, though smaller of stature and feebler of wing, soars up with rapidity and
ease, the slightness of her body greatly facilitating her ascent. Thus minds of
powerful calibre, heavily equipped with native and educational endowments, find it
difficult to make their way up to the calm presence of God, their very ability being
an impediment to them. Sceing every difliculty and feeling the force of every
objection, they have to turn round and round and ascend laboriously in spiral
columns, But many souls, small as larks, shoot up easily and gracefully, almost
in a straight line, carolling all the way as they go, to the pure serene blue of the
Divine Presence. To the Samaritan woman, and not to the learned Pharisees, did
Christ openly avow His Messiahship, and present Himself in the majestic naked-
ness of His Divine mission. (J. C. Jones, D.D.) The Samaritan view of the
Messiah :—The Samaritans still expect a Messiah to whom they give the name of
Assaiéf (from 370, to return), which means ‘he who brings back” or con-
verts, or else, ‘‘he who returns”; because the waiting of the Samaritans being
founded on Deut. xviii. 18, the Messiah is in their view a Moses who returns. At
the present day they call him El-Muhdy. There is a remarkable contrast between
this woman’s notion and that of the worldly and political Jews. The Samaritan
idea was incomplete; the Messiah was a prophet, not a king. But it did not con-
tain anything else; and hence Jesus can appropriate itself to Himself, and here
declare Himself the Christ, which He never did in Israel till the last moment (chap.
xvii, 3; Matt. xxvi. 64). (F. Godet, D.D.) Christ earnestly desired is quickly
found :—No sooner do we think of Christ with the Jeast true desire after Him, but
He is presently with us. He invited Himself to Zaccheus’ table. (J. Trapp.)


Vers, 27-42. And upon this.—Sowing and reaping :—I. Wit A SOLITARY PUPIL,
1, Face-to-face work (ver. 27, chap. i. 42, 43, 47, xxi, 16; Acts iii. 4, ix.5). 2,
The convert’s message (ver. 29; Matt. ix. 31; Mark v. 20, vii. 36; John i. 41, 45
ix. 25). 3. The dawning conviction (ver. 29; Matt. xiv. 33, xxvii. 54; Mark ix.
24; John vi. 69, xx, 28; Acts ix. 20). Il. Wir a group or pisciptms. 1. Cor.
recting misapprehensions (ver. 34; Matt. v. 17, xxii. 29; Mark xii. 27; Luke xiii, 2
3; John ix. 3; Gal. vi. 7). 2. Indicating labour (ver. 35; Eccles. ix. 10; Matt. x.
6, xx. 4, xxvii. 19; Mark xvi. 15; 1 Cor. i. 17). 3. Extending inducements (ver.
36; Dan. xii.3; Matt. x. 22, xxiv. 46; Mark ix. 41; Rev. ii. 7,10). IIL. Wirs a crry's
POPULATION. 1. Commended in the city (ver. 39; Agts viii. 5, 40, ix, 27, xi. 19
xiv. 6,7; Rom, i.15). 2. Honoured by the city (ver. 40; Jonah iii. 5; Matt. viii.
34, xxi. 10; Mark i. 33, vi. 56; Acts xiv. 13). 3. Accepted by a city (ver. 42; Matt
ix. 35; Acts ii, 43, viii. 8, xiii. 44, xviii. 10; Rev. xxi, 23). (Sunday School Times.)
Sawing and reaping :—I. Conripence 1n Curist (vers, 27-30). 1. On the part of
the apostles, who kept silence at the strange communion, They witnessed the
av of Christ to awaken new life within the soul. Further on they knew better

ut as yet they were caste-bound Jews. In view of their ancient prejudices,
their silence is much to their credit. The Master may be always trusted
to do right. Let us not question, 2, On the part of the woman. Not
simply that she felt that her water-pot would be safe, but in her Saviour
The ground of this trust was Christ's knowledge of the secret life (Dan. ii,
28-30, 47). History is full of such proofs of Christ’s Divinity. He who


AG


cHAP. iv.] ST. JOHN. 369


looks within the Gospel sees his own heart mirrored. Truly this is the book of God.
II, Tur sovu’s TRUE NURTURE (vers. 31-34). 1. ‘Man shall not live by bread
alone” (Matt. iii. 4). 2. Noble souls are fed by the simple consciousness of doing
good, ‘The patriot, mother, wife, student, missionary have forgotten hunger. 3.
The best way to lift a soul above temptation is to fill it with a worthy aspiration.
An empty soul is a standing invitation to the roving spirits of evil. The music of
Orpheus is a surer guard than the wax of Ulysses in the ears. 4, The noblest pur-
pose that can occupy a soul is to do God’s will and finish His work, III. Tux co-
FARTNERSHIP OF THE HARVEST (vers. 35-38), 1. There is always an interval between
seed-time and harvest. (1) In nature. With some plants the time is less, with
some more. Life, events, great thoughts, deeds, characters, are growths. A great
man is the product of centuries. The present is born of the past. Impatience to
reap ere the seed has matured has wrought many a barren harvest. No amount
of fretting or driving will force a harvest. (2) In the spiritual world. Here the
harvest is always ripe. The foregoing ages have prepared for their successors. 2.
There is a fellowship in toil and fruitage between the dead and the living. The
influence of the dead is continuous. ‘ ‘Iheir works do follow them.” 3. ‘‘ No man
liveth to himself.’’ One supplements another’s toil. Joseph needed a Moses ; Moses
a Joshua; Joshua a Samuel; Samuel on the one hand a David, and on the other
Elijah and the prophets. All these were perfected in Christ. How this should
sweep away bigotry and encourage charity! 4. Our responsibility to the past and
the future. (1) The past has claims upon us. If we would reap the good seed our
fathers sowed we must nurture the crop that has sprung therefrom. Creeds, &c.,
are not to be dealt with ruthlessly. (2) The future has claims upon us. “ Posterity
never did anything for me,” says the sneerer. But it can do much by giving youa
noble purpose. Supposing your predecessors had thus argued! In sowing, let us
think that we are sowing for ever, and not for present use alone. 5. The com-
munity of sower and reaper in wages. (1) The dark side. Ifthe sowing be evil, so
will be the wages. What a harvest of woe Israel reaped, and Babylon, Egypt, and
Rome, and France. (2) The bright side—in both worlds. IV. Testimony AND Ex-
PERIENCE (vers. 39-42). 1. How readily the woman became a missionary! (1)
Home, in that she carried the gospel to her own people. (2) Foreign, because those
people were outside the pale of the true Israel. 2. The genuineness of the faith
and grace of the Samaritan believers is seen in that their belief on good testimony
led them to believe on good experience. (H. C. McCook, D.D.) Sowing and reap-
ing :—I. Tux creat Tracuer, 4s He avatis HIMSELF OF AN INSIGNIFICANT AND UNPRO-
MISING OPPORTUNITY. The disciples marvelled at His doing what was beneath a
Rabbi’s dignity. The same spirit interposed between Christ and little children.
The woman, moreover, was a despised, hated, and ignorant Samaritan. 1. This
was unpromising ground, but Jesus did not consider it beneath His notice. 2. In
this unpromising soil He sows the best seed. An audience of one was not too small
to call forth His richest treasures of truth. 3. Here is an example for every teacher.
Wesley remembered his father saying to his mother, ‘‘ How could you have the
patience to tell that blockhead the same thing twenty times over?” ‘ Because if I
had only told him nineteen times I should have lost all my labour.’? 4. Never
mind if your seed falls by the wayside: a bird may carry it elsewhere. Dl. Tus
DELIGHT OF THE TEACHER IN His work. He has sources of refreshment unknown to
the disciples. He would rather work than eat. 1. No one can do his work well
until he has learned to enjoy it, 2. The delight of labour is not only in that part
of it which is interesting and agreeable, A teacher of imbecile children had one
boy of five who had never spoken or given an intelligent look. He lay beside the
child for half an hour every day, reading aloud, and watching eagerly for any
volition. At length, being utterly weary, he did not read. The child began to be
uneasy, and then, after repeated efforts, the child placed his fingers on the teacher’s
lips, as much as to say, ‘“‘ Make that sound again.” After a time the boy was taught
to walk, and speak, and think. III. Taz creat SowER EXPECTING A SPEEDY HARVEST.
Men are too prone not to look for an early reaping, and so sometimes miss the
harvest, We sow with too little hope. ‘ Four months,”’ said the disciples.
‘“‘ Now,” said the Master. Expectancy is needful for courage and patience. Always
look for near results. Do not pull up the stalk to see if it has taken root, but watch,
and wait, and believe. IV. THE DISPROPORTIONATENESS OF THE HARVEST. | The
audience and time were seemingly unfavourable—the result was that many believed.
1. The woman heard and heeded. Then she ran, as did the woman from the empty
tomb, to tell those nearest. 2. All barriers were broken down. They believed not


a


370 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, — formar. rv.
Tepe ese ee a pe
only because He spoke as never man spoke, but because He spoke the truth they
needed. 8. God alone gives the increase, but He does so to the feeblest efforts,
(Sermons by the Monday Club.) A fourfold theme: —I. PREJUDICE CREATING
wonpER. The disciples had never examined the question as to the inferiority of
women for themselves. IJ. RnvERENCE LIMITING INQUIRY. Though not understand-
ing or deeming it improper, they did not dare to question. Genuine reverence will
not allow the intellect to interrogate the Almighty, but recognizes the infinite dis-
parity between the thoughts and ways of God and those of men. It becomes us to
be humble listeners rather than busy critics. III. CurisTIANITY WORKING IN LIFE.
Mark how faith worked in the woman. 1. Emotionally. The more Divine our feel-
ing the less our care for worldly things. 2. Proselytingly. Her strong desire made
her a ‘blessed missionary. 3. Religiously. She knew that Christ had sounded the
depths of her history. 4. Influentially. Real earnestness wields a magic wand.
TV. Man FEASTING ON THE INVISIBLE. 1. A common natural fact—the influence of
the emotions on the physical appetite. 2. The rare moral fact—the consciousness
of acting in harmony with the Divine will, creating forgetfulness to bodily need.
(D. Thomas, D.D.) The Samaritan woman and her mission:—1. Christ, with
divinely skilful art, seeks after a single soul. We must have large congregations
or we are disinclined for soul winning. 2. See the skill which compassion taught
Him. Souls yield not to force, but to gentleness and wisdom. 3. The disciples
marvel because Christ talked with a woman, a Samaritan, a sinner. 4. How could
they do so after Christ had chosen them? It is sad when saved ones affect super-
fine spirituality and. turn away from such as Jesus would have welcomed. 5. In
consequence of their interruption one of the sweetest conferences ever held was
broken up. No breakers of communion are more blameable or frequent than Christ’s
disciples when out of sympathy with their Master. 6. Although the conference was
broken up it was over-ruled for good. Since the woman cannot contemplate Christ
nor hear Him, she will give herself to holy activity. Driven away from sitting like
Mary at the Master’s feet, let us rise to play the worker. When you are taken out
of your usual course by a jerk, the Lord has special work for youtodo. 7. The
woman now becomes a messenger for Christ. From conference to testimony. 8.
She leaves her waterpot—(1) For speed. (2) Perhaps her errand has made her for-
getful; just as our Lord forgot His hunger in seeking her soul. (3) Without thought
she hit upon as good an action as thought would have suggested. The waterpot
may have been useful to Christ. (4) It was a pledge of her return. 9. Observe
particularly her mode of address. (1) Her one aim was to bring the people to Christ.
She said nothing about their sins, nor did she try to reform them. She called them
to one who could set them right. (2) She was very earnest. (3) She was self-for-
getful.. If you have been a great sinner be ashamed of it, but do not be ashamed
of the love which saved you. Never mind what people think—testify, and only look
to what they will think of Jesus for having forgiven you. (4) She was brief. If
women preached just as long as she did no one could find fault with them. (5) She
was vivacious—almost as laconic as Cesar, ‘I came, I saw,” &c. (6) She was
sensible. She did not say that Jesus was the Christ, but suggested it with great
modesty for the men to examine. (7) Her argument was exceedingly strong—drawn
from herself and adapted to the men. Let us look at the woman’s whole message.
J. Tun invitation. 1. It was a clever, as well as a genuine and hearty invitation.
‘* Come, see,” was putting it most fairly, and men like a fair proposal. This is
Christ’s own word to His first disciples, and they used it when pleading with others.
2. It threw the responsibility on them. I may preach the gospel to you, but I can-
not go to Christ in your stead. 3. It was pleasantly put, so as to prove the
sympathy of the speaker—not “go,” but ‘‘come.”’ A sister’s heart spoke in that
word. 4. What a blessed vanishing of the speaker there is! Preaching is spoiled
by self-consciousness, The fish knows little about the angler, but he knows when
he has swallowed the hook. IJ. THz arcument. 1. The argument lies concealed.
The woman does not argue the point. “If Jesus be the Christ, then you should
come with me and see Him,” because she is persuaded that the people have agreed
to it. You are not so practical as these people. . You believe that Jesus is the
Christ ; why then don’t you believe in Him as your Saviour? 2. What she did
argue was this—this man, is He not the Christ? because—(1) He has revealed me
unto myself. Were you ever out in a black night when a single lightning flash
has come? It has only smitten one oak, but it. has revealed the landscape. So
when the Lord showed one point in the woman’s history He showed all. No one
proves himself truly anointed unless he begins by showing you your sins. (2) He


—_


Cat eS Te ke ee er a


CHAP Iv.) . ST. JOHN. 371


has revealed Himself tome. (3) She seemed to say—‘ This is more to me than it
can be to you, for He has dealt personally with me; thereforeI abide.in my assurance
that He is the Christ; but go and learn for yourselves. (4) ‘‘ You may come, I know,
for He received me. I was at home with Him in a moment.” Conclusion: If you do
not come to Christ for salvation, you will have to come to Him for judgment. (C.H.
Spurgeon.) The mission of the woman :—I. How MARVELLOUS IN THE EYES OF MEN
ARE CHRIST’S DEALINGS WiTH souLs. 1. The feeling of the disciples does not stand
alone in the Bible (Luke xv. 2; Acts ix. 26, xii, 16). 2. This feeling is common
now. 3. If there was more real faith there would be less surprise at conversions
(Matt. xi. 25; Mark vi..6). Il. How assorpine Is THE INFLUENCE OF GRACE WHEN
IT FIRST COMES INTO A SINNER’S HEART (ver. 28). 1. We see the expulsive power of
the grace of the Holy Ghost, driving out old tastes and interests (Matt. ix. 9;
Mark i. 19; Acts ix. 20). 2. This conduct is uncommon in the present day. Why?
Because so few really feel their sins and flee to Christ. III? How zzauous a TRULY
CONVERTED PERSON IS TO DO GOOD TO OTHERS (vers. 28, 29). 1. She employed no
abstruse argument in favour of our Lord’s claims. 2. Out of the abundance of her
heart her mouth spoke—(1) Urgently. (2) Simply. (3) Experimentally. (Bp. Ryle.)
Gospel work in Sychar :—l. THE GLORY OF ALL TRUE USEFULNESS BELONGS TO CHRIST
(ver. 27). The woman is nameless, and nothing else is known of her. II. Com-
MONPLACE SELF-DENIAL AN EVIDENCE OF GRACE (ver. 28). To leave a waterpot for a
thirsty disciple better sometimes than the bequest of a fortune. Simon made a
feast for Jesus, but the woman with the alabaster box showed more generosity.
II]. THe NEAREST FIELD OF USEFULNESS IS OFTEN THE BEST (ver. 28). She knew
the prejudices of the city and the great shock they would receive. But this was
the field closest to hand. Many people spend half a lifetime in looking for their
vocation, whereas God is always saying, “Begin at home” (Mark v. 19). IV.
WoMEN ARE SOMETIMES MORE USEFUL THAN MEN. They have more tact, fervency,
fortitude. V. THE PRIVILEGE oF “Him THAT HEARETH” 18 THAT HE May BAY
“Comz” (ver. 29). The Greek is an adverb of beckoning, a gesture of language,
“ Hither.” Let no one hesitate for addresses or acts.. He who temporizes will be
like Demas ; he who calculates like Ananias; he who covets like Achan; but he
who gives himself wholly to Christ’s service will say, “Come and see.”’ VI.
REVELATION OF ONE’S SINS THE CLEAREST EVIDENCE oF Jesus’ NEARNESS. VII. No
GREAT TALENT NEEDED IN ORDER TO DO Goon (ver. 30). It is piety, not education,
spirituality and experience, not culture or learning which God uses in the conversion
of souls. VIII. Tue sUREST MEANS OF PERSONAL GROWTH IS PATIENT LABOUR FOR THE
GROWTH OF oTHERS (vers. 31-36). IX. Division OF LABOUR ESSENTIAL FOR THE WORK
oF THE GosPEL (ver. 37). Some cannot preach like Whitefield ; who can write
letters like Harlan Page. Ingatherings are the result, often, not of preaching but
prayers. X. THE TRUTHS OF THE GOSPEL COME TO US BETTER BY EXPERIENCE THAN
TESTIMONY (vers. 39-41). “If any man will do His will,’ &c. XI. THE BEsT
MEMORIAL OF ANY ONE IS FOUND IN THE SOULS HE HAS WON (ver. 42). "The Empress
Helena’s church has perished, the memory of the woman and her work has made
the well immortal. (C.S. Robinson, D.D.) Upon this came His disciples and
marvelled ... yet no man said, What seekest Thou ?—Moments of silence :—I.
Sacred story records many CRISIS-HOURS OF THRILLING INTEREST. Eli trembling
for the ark; David trembling for the fate of Absalom. II. WHo oF US HAS NOT
KNOWN SIMILAR SEASONS? 1. When the telegraph has flashed the message of a
distant bereavement ; when we have watched an approaching dissolution. 2, Or to
take the converse of these, a birth; a return; the first success in business; the
triumph of an honourable ambition. These are like the illi dies of the old Roman,
days marked with white or black chalk, symbols of joy or sorrow. 3, But what
season can be compared to the crisis-hour of a soul’s conversion ; what day so
worthy to be marked with the white chalk of gladness? III. Such seasons THRILL
THE SPIRIT INTO SILENCE. 1. Is it a time of overpowering sorrow ? The word
expresses our meaning; the lips refuse to tell out the secrets of the dumb-stricken
heart. 2. Is it some joyful occasion? Joy has its stunning moment, and holds
fast the flood-gates of speech, 3. Such is the picture before us. The disciples
have just come up. They hear the last most momentous words. And now nota
word is uttered. All three parties are spell bound; the woman a moment before so
garrulous ; the disciples with all-their curiosity; the Master more than all. IV.
The great lesson of the incident is THE DUTY OF SILENCE UNDER THE Divine DIs-
PENSATIONS. 1. Often, like the disciples, we havg reason to marvel at the Lord’s
doings. Providence often seems a dark enigma. God’s name is “Secret,” and


fi


«


blind unbelief is prone to ask, ‘‘ What seckest Thou?” in the sudden ruin ot
business prospects; the pillaging of dearer household treasure ; the breaking of
the strong staff. 2. But the duty, the prerogative, the triumph of faith is to be
silent, owning the faithfulness of God as David, ‘I was dumb, I opened not my
mouth, because Thou didst it”; as Aaron who, under a deeper trial, “ held his
peace’; as our Lord who, “ was oppressed, afflicted, yet He opened not His mouth.”
3. This duty is often inculeated (Psa. xxxvii. 7 (marg.), lxii. 1; Zech. ii. 13; Hab.
ii. 1-3). 4, Blessed it will be for us if, amid ‘‘ frowning providences ” instead of
questioning, we are ready to hear the voice of the invisible saying, ‘‘ Hold thee still
and know that I am God.” The dutiful servant asks no reason of his master ; nor
the loyal soldier of his commander ; the faithful workman asks no reason for those
rude gashes in the quarry; he is content to wait till its sculptor fashions the
unshapely block into symmetry. (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) The seclusion of Oriental
women :—The privilege of free speech with a woman is only accorded, in the East,
to the most intimate friends of the family, who are privileged to see her face
unveiled. Niebuhr, travelling in Arabia, and meeting a woman by the way, saluted
her with the customary formula of Arabian politeness: Salaému ’alaykum, ‘* Peace
be upon you”; but, to his astonishment, he received no response, the woman
turning her back at once upon him. The reason of this proceeding became clear
to Niebuhr when his Arabian companions expressed displeasure, and informed him
that to address a woman by the way was a grievous insult to her. When Burton
retails his piquant conversations with the Abyssinian slave-girls in Egypt, it is to
be borne in mind that he is speaking of the slave-market, where men and women
are treated like oxen; and that slave-girls, though they have not the rights of the
free woman, are also free from many of the restrictions imposed upon her. In
general, it may be said that the old rule of the Rabbins is still in force in the East ;
speech with a woman on the street is a grievous scandal. (S. 8. Times.) Jewish
prejudice against women:—A Rabbinical prejudice prevailed to the effect that
woman is not capable of profound religious instruction: ‘‘ Do not prolong con-
versation with a woman; let no one converse with a woman in the street, not even
with his own wife; rather burn the sayings of the law than teach them to women.
(F. Godet, D.D.) The test of friendship :—HKven those whom we love and
honour, and with whom our relations are peculiarly intimate, are likely to do things
which we cannot at the time fully understand or account for. Then it is that our
friendship is tested, and that it can show itself at its truest and best. A friend
can be trusted even when he cannot be understood. A real friend will trust even
when he does not understand. Nor does a friend always want to ask what or
why when he is in doubt as to a loved one’s conduct—which does not bear on his
possible duty to that loved one. Peculiarly is it true that our Saviour’s course,
even in His dealings with ourselves, is not always understood by us. We must
trust Him bécause we know Him, even while we do not know just what He is doing,
and why, in His loving control of our interests and of His own. (H. C. Trumbull,
D.D.) The reticence of the disciples :—Although the hesitancy of the disciples to
ask Jesus why He spoke with the woman, was due to their reverence for Bis
character, and their trust in Him, rather than their fear of Him as their Master,
yet it is to be noted that their silence was eminently Oriental. Let a high official
do anything, however foolish or however unjust, and his servants will stand by
impassively, giving no sign that they notice that anything unusual is taking place.
After the Indian mutiny, it was remarked by many of the English officers that their
body servants, who must have been aware of what was about to happen, not
only gave no sign of their knowledge, but bore supercilious, and in some instances
unjust, treatment from their masters without changing their attitude of impassive
docility, or giving other evidence that their day of vengeance was about to dawn.
Of course, when this impassive obsequiousness gets a chance to avenge itself, it
does so with an excess of Oriental vindictiveness which an Occidental can hardly
understand. Let the balance of power be suddenly changed, and the slavish
inferiors who before cringed in the presence of their tyrant, will tread him in the
dust with savage joy. (S.S. Times.)  Christ’s treatment of the waifs and strays :—
A certain painter was once employed to adorn a window in one of our national
cathedrals, a work which he did with credit and skill. The artist, however, had an
ingenious inventive apprentice, who picked up and preserved all the bits of glass
that were nipped off and thrown away as useless, But out of these rejected pieces—
so runs the story—he constructed a window of such exquisite beauty as to command
greater attention and win heartier applause than that designed by the master artist.


ee


372 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (omar. tv.


2


CHAP. Iv.] ST. JOHN. 373


Thus the Scribes and Pharisees of Judaism, the poets and philosophers of Gentilism,
the renowned builders of social fabric, had been constructing their imposing temples
out of the best men and chastest women of their respective ages and countries;
the slaves, the harlots, the publicans, had been contemptuously rejected, and
trampled upon as worthless refuse. At last Jesus Christ appeared; He fixed His
kind, compassionate eyes on the huge heap of human rubbish ; He associated with
ths offscouring of society; and lo! He built a grander temple and made more
beautiful windows than the world had ever beheld before, out of the soiled characters
rejected by the architects and builders of states and churches as vile, noxious offal.
The woman of Samaria, the ‘‘woman who was a sinner,’’ Mary Magdalene, how
attractively the light of Divine grace streams down upon our world through their
variegated histories. (J. Cynddylan Jones.)


Vers. 28-30. The woman left her waterpot, and went her way into the city.—
A woman’s zeal :—I. THE ENGROSSING NATURE OF conveRSION. 1. To meet Christ
causes ordinary events to shrink into insignificance. Paul for three days did
“ neither eat nor drink.” Bunyan “ran about the streets distracted.” Fuller was
“go moved that he was unable to pursue his customary avocations.”” These were
extraordinary cases, but it is impossible to be turned from darkness to light and
remain impassive. The adjusting of eternal relationships and attending to immortal
interests may well make a man distracted. 2. It were better to renounce all work
than to attend to the demands of the soul. To neglect the latter for the former is
neither reason nor duty. 3. Religion willafterwards not impede but assist the per-
formance of duty. The woman no doubt regained her waterpot, and cheerfully
resumed her domestic toil. 4. All our instruments may become useful illustrations
of God’s spiritual work. The waterpot must have been a continual reminder, II.
THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT EVOKED. 1. Religious joy seeks to make others share in it.
Every Christian should be a centre of light and usefulness. 2, She wisely acted on
the spur of the moment. Had she waited courage might have failed or excuses
suggested. Nothing quenches fire like delay. 3. She hasted lest Christ should
depart. The waterpot would impede her. Any time would do for water. There
are times when Jesus is at the door; if these are neglected He may not return.
Ill. Tue rorcrsne appran. 1. Attention called to an object of acknowledged im-
portance. 2. An inference suggested from a fact of personal history. 3. An invi-
tation given (chap. i. 46, 39). IV. THE HEARTY RESPONSE, (S. R. Aldridge, LL.B.)
The Woman of Samaria:—In the conversion of the woman of Samaria, we have an
example of this grace; an example—l. Its freeness: in selecting for its object a
profligate creature, not only without her desert, but without her desire. 2. Its
sweetness: in having no recourse to violence or terror, but in adopting the most
suitable, gentle, and insinuating means to conyince and soften her. 3, Its power:
in changing her heart and sanctifying her life. 4. Its effects: for here we see
grace in its triumph, grace in its glory. No sooner is she enlightened, than she is
inflamed; no sooner is she a convert, than she becomes a preacher. However
this may be, the character of the persons to whom our Saviour reveals Himself
has always scandalized flesh and blood. If the disciples were astonished at our
Saviour’s conversation with the woman, their behaviour was dutiful and submissive ;
thoy said nothing, but acquiesced in the rectitude of His procedure, And hence I
would remark two things. The first regards the advice of Solomon, “ If thou hast
thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth.” Honour our Lord with our reverence
and implicit confidence when we meet with anything in His conduct that seems
inexplicable. Short as the interview was, our Saviour had effectually gained her
heart. 1. Perhaps it was from kindness to our Lord and His disciples. 2. Perhaps
she left her waterpot from indifference. Wholly occupied now about greater things,
she forgot her errand. The feelings of young converts are often very lively. 3. Per-
haps, finally, she left it as an impediment to her haste, willing to lose no time in
bearing home the welcome intelligence. No sooner 18 her opportunity of getting
good over, than she seizes an opportunity of doing good. Five things may be
remarked. 1. I admire her benevolence. 2. I admire her zeal. See how urgent
she is. She even begins with a pressing invitation, ‘‘Come.” 3. I admire her
wisdom. ‘Come, see a man who told me all things that I did: is not this the
Christ?” ‘‘ You all acknowledge that Messiah cometh, and that when He is come
He will tell us all things.” 4. I admire her honesty. She does not say, He has
told me everything pertaining to the worship of God; but “ all things that ever I
did.’ Now, if a person knew your faults, you would wish to have him shunned.


i


374 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (CHAP. IV.


a


5. L admire her courage. It was no small trial for a plain and wicked woman to
go openly and address the inhabitants of the place where she lived, and was per-
haps well known, upon a religious subject, We now conclude, with observing—l.
What a real and wonderful change does conversion always accomplish. 2. Divine
grace is not an inoperative principle. As the sun no sooner rises than it shines,
and as fire is no sooner kindled than it burns, so grace acts as soon as it exists. 3.
Behold an apology for what some would deem officiousness. How often do you
hear, as soon as any attempt is made to bring people to seriousness, “ Pray do not
intermeddle with us. Go to heaven your own way, and leave us to go ours.” Is
not charity to the soul, the soul of charity? 4. Be persuaded to resemble this
woman. Endeavour to diffuse the savour of the Redeemer’s knowledge, and to
bring souls to Christ. It is absurd to complain of a want of opportunities and
means. Much is in your power, much more than you are willing to allow. (W. Jay.)
The home missionary :—1. The impulse is natural to communicate to others what-
ever may have been imparted to ourselves. The successful son sends word quickly
home ; the soldier of the forlorn hope hastens to communicate intelligence of his
safety and success, The shepherd calls his neighbours to rejoice with him, and the
father of the prodigal throws open his banqueting halls; Mary Magdalene “ de-
parted quickly from the sepulchre ” to the disciples to communicate her joy. So
with the woman of Samaria. 2. This is ever the result of saving conversion.
Christianity must be expansive. The work of the Spirit is a life ever giving. 3.
How unlike the selfish, grasping spirit of the world! 4. Christian influence is not
confined to the active. ‘The sick Christian may speak with a speechless eloquence.
Notice—I. THe womay’s CREDENTIALS, 1. Honesty and outspoken candour. In
ordinary circumstances she would have shrunk from such a self-revelation. We
should have expected efforts to keep them from Christ lest He should disclose more.
But her honest avowal could not but have its weight with her fellow-townsmen. 2.
Her earnestness ; perhaps at first derided as fanatical, or hypocritical to serve her
own ends. But her pleadings are irresistible. Harnestness is the power of the
ministry, not charm of intellect or subtlety of reasoning, or sorcery of eloquence,
but living words welling up from experience. 3. Her happiness. She had what
they all wanted. II. Tue suBsect or HER MESSAGE. She tells what we should
have expected her to withhold. 2. She omits what we should have expected her to
proclaim—the well, everlasting life. 3. The effective and influential characteristic
of the gospel message is not figurative descriptions and metaphysisal disputes, but
the direct commending of the truth to the conscience, awakening the sense of sin,
and thus preparing it for the remedy. In conclusion, notice the power of feeble
influences, Never undervalue weak instrumentality. (J. R. Macduff.) The
forgotten waterpot :—She came to draw water, and when she had lighted upon the
true Well, she after that despised the material one; teaching us even by this trifling
instance when we are listening to spiritual matters to overlook the things of this
life, and make no account of them. For what the apostles did, that, after her
ability, did this woman also. They, when they were called, left their nets: she of
her own accord, without the command of any, leaves her waterpot, and winged by
joy performs the office of evangelists. And she calls not one or two, as did Andrew
and Philip, but having aroused a whole city and so brought them to Him.
(Chrysostom.) With her waterpot on her shoulder she had hitherto been listening
to the Lord’s discourse. She was the forerunner of those Bechuan women who
would stand for hours together, with their milking-pails in their hands, as if rooted
to the ground, whilst Moffat was preaching to them the gospel of the living water

(R. Berser, D.D.) Sudden conversion :—Here was a genuine case. This woman
came a prejudiced Samaritan, and left a believing Christian ; she came a confirmed
sinner, and left a contrite and believing penitent; she came absorbed in the tem-
poralities of life, and left engrossed with eternal solemnities, In the New Testament
there are twenty-four cases, including this, of sudden conversion. Let us then
never call in question the possibility of a sinner being led to Christ in the course of
afew hours. (J. H. Hitchens, D.D.) The expansive power of Christianity :—
The work of the Spirit of God in the heart is not a fiction, not a form, but a life

To use the simile of this narrative, it is a fountain not only “ springing up Ss (bub-
bling up), but overflowing its cistern, and the superfluous supply going forth to
gladden other waste places. Not the mass of stagnant water without outlet, but the
clear, sparkling lake, discharging its rush of living streams which sing their joyous
way along the contiguous valleys, and make their course known by the thread of
green, beautifying and fertilizing as they flow, Or, if we may employ another


CHAP, Iv.] ST. JOHN. 875


figure, let it be the stone thrown into the same still lake. The ripples formed are
deepest in the centre. Christianity is deepest in the heart in which its truths have
sunk; but its influence expands in ever-widening concentric circles, till the wavelets
touch the shore. Religion, intensest in a man’s own soul and life, should embrace
family, household, kindred, neighbourhood, country, until it knows no circumference
but the world! Christianity breaks down all ‘walls of narrow isolation, and proclaims
the true brotherhood of the race. Selfishness closes the heart, shuts out from it the
rains and dews and summer sunshine; but Christianity, or rather the great Sun of
light, shines ;—the closed petals gradually unfold in the genial beams: and they
keep not their fragrance to themselves, but waft it all around. Every such
flower—the smallest that blushes unseen to the world—becomes a little censer
swinging its incense-perfume in the silent air, or sending it far and wide by the
passing breeze. (J. R. Macduff’, D.D.) God will honour zeal:—While I was in
London there was a man away off in India—a godly father—who had a son in
London, and the father obtained a furlough and came right from India to England
to see after his boy’s spiritual welfare. Do you think God let that man come thus
far without honouring that faith? No. He converted thatson, (D. L. Moody.)


Vers. 29, 30. Come see a Man which told me all things whatever I did : is not this
the Christ ?—Christ and modern scepticism :—This judgment on the claims of Christ
is the verdict of common sense in contrast to that of Nicodemus, which was the
verdict of scholarship. It is for learned men to study for us the question of miracles,
which are the foundation of intellectual belief; but that which secures for Jesus
the faith and heart of the common people is the Word of Jesus. Christ’s teaching
was at first a riddle to the woman, but an unexpected fact startled her into serious-
ness and conviction. ‘There was another who was in the secret of her life, and this
revelation by one who, humanly speaking, knew nothing of the rumours in circula-
tion about her, prepared her for the revelation that He was the Christ. I. Carist’s
KNOWLEDGE OP HUMAN NATURE IS A SUFFICIENT WARRANT FOR OUR BELIEF IN His
Divine mission. The teachers to whom we give the highest rank are those who
teach us how to live. They stand higher than the mere scientist or philosopher.
In the present day the scientist is more popular than the preacher. But that is
because the question which inspires all his labours is ‘What is man?” and this
question derives all its significance from two others—* What is man appointed to
do?” «What is man destined to be?’ People are therefore looking to him to evolve
a new theory of life, and to become a moralist at some time. Some have already
become preachers—of another gospel, which is not another. Taking one age with
another, the foremost teachers have been those who have dealt with morals and
character. II. WHATEVER VIEW MAY BE TAKEN OF CHRIST’S KNOWLEDGE OF MAN, NO
SUBSEQUENT TEACHER HAS MADE ANY ADDITION TOIT. We know nothing that helps us to
understand man’s position upon earth, and the reasons that have made it what it is,
which cannot be traced to Matt. v.-vii. There were illustrious teachers before Christ,
but there is a great gulf between the obscurities and uncertain foundations of their
teaching on man and the clear, authoritative teaching of Jesus Christ. Pagan
teachers—1. Were ignorant of the origin of man. 2. Were at a loss to account for
moral evil. These problems defied their reason, and therefore they remitted them
to thé imagination of the poets, and with the poets they found very eloquent expres-
sion in the mythologies, III. THERE ARE MEN WHO REJECT THE woRDs or CHRIST ON
THESE SUBJECTS, BUT WHO EXPRESS THE HIGHEST ADMIRATION OF HIS CHARACTER AND
wispom. Now it is essentially unscientific to affirm arbitrarily that while Christ was
right on one subject, He was wrong in another. He was right in every doctrine,
and the very men who object to receive all He said, by the pre-eminence which they
give to Christ say He is above their criticism. Bring to the examination of His life
and teaching every new method of analysis and research ; bring the latest discovery
on the antiquity of man, and the last speculation of the evolutionist and the meta-
physician, and you leave the Redeemer where the Jews, and where you found Him.
There He is, and you cannot touch Him. IV. THERE ARE TWO MODERN MOVEMENTS
RESPECTING CHRIST equally vigorous and conspicuous. 1, An anti-Christian
scepticism. This is undeniable, but its power may be exaggerated. The ungodli-
ness of our age happens to assume a sceptical guise, but it will assume another by
and by. It must not be imagined that it represents the intelligence and judgment
of society. There is a religion in the heart of the masses of the people waiting to
be evoked. 2. A growing belief in Jesus, not so much fostered by the literature of
the Church as by the words of Jesus. Thousands are studying the New Testament


376 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. Iv.
he a tenner eure ie
outside all churches. The Stranger that met the woman is silting on other wells all
over the world, and looking for thirsty souls. Conclusion: It is the duty and
vocation of churches to plant themselves upon the highways of thought and life
and look out for thirsty travellers and offer them the water of life freely, (EH. E.
Jenkins, M.A.) The self-revealer :—I. THE WOMAN’S FAITH AND HOW IT WAS TO
BE TESTED. 1, She was a most unlikely subject. A Samaritan scorning the Jews,
having her own notion of the Messiah. 2. Christ was most unlikely to strike her
as the Messiah. A Jew; asuppliant for water. 3. Yet she was thoroughly con-
vinced, for she leaves her water-pot and carries with enthusiasm the joyful news into
the city. 4. This is what has happened ever since. It is not those who are in a
most favourable position for believing who are readiest to believe. There are thou-
sands of young people who have been trained in Christianity who never dream of
loving Christ, whilst there are thousands for many years utterly untouched by
Christian influences who find in themselves a strange power to lay hold of Christ.
Beware of the subtle influence of familiarity with Divine things. II. How ruis
WOMAN GOT HER FAITH. 1. Not by miracles. A miracle suggests omnipotence, but
does not prove it. 2. There is a much higher thing than power—knowledge. She
felt herself in the presence of omniscience. 3. Upon this knowledge of her secret
life she based her belief in the Messiah (ver. 25, cf. ver. 29). III. Waar turs
WOMAN DID WITH HER FalTH. She put it into her proclamation of Jesus. (G. W.
Conder. ) The duty of spreading the Gospel :—Huber, the great naturalist, tells us,
that if a single wasp discovers a deposit of honey or other food, he will return to
his nest, and impart the good news to his companions, who will sally forth in great
numbers to partake of the fare which has been discovered for them. Shall we who
have found honey in the rock Christ Jesus, be less considerate of our fellow-men
than wasps are of their fellow-insects? Ought we not rather like the Samaritan
woman to hasten to tell the good news? Common humanity shculd prevent one of
us from concealing the great discovery which grace has enabled us to make. (C. H.
Spurgeon.) Livery Christian must be a missionary :—According to Christ’s law, every
Christian is to be active in spreading the faith, which was delivered, not to the
ministers, but to the saints, to every one of them, that they might maintain it,
and spread it according to the gift which the Spirit has given them. Shall I
venture a parable? A certain band of warlike knights had been exceedingly vic-
torious in all their conflicts. They were men of valour and of indomitable
courage; they had carried everything before them, and subdued province after
province for their king. But on a sudden they said in the council-chamber, *‘ We
have at our head a most valiant warrior, one whose arm is stout enough to smite
down fifty of his adversaries; would it not be better if, leaving a few such as he
to go out to the fight, the mere men-at-arms, who make up the ordinary ranks,
were to rest at home? We should be much more at our ease; our horses would
not so often be covered with foam, nor our armour be bruised, the many would
enjoy abundant leisure, and great things would be done by the valiant few.” Now,
the foremost champions, with fear and trembling, undertook the task and went to
the conflict, and they fought well, as the rolls of fame can testify ; to the best of
their ability they unhorsed their foes and performed great exploits. But still, from
the very hour in which that scheme was planned and carried out no city was
taken, no province was conquered. If we are to subdue the earth, every one of us
must join in the fight. We must not exempta single soldier of the Cross, neither
man nor woman, rich or poor. We shall see great things when we all agree
to this, and put it in practice. (Ibid.) The joy of having found Christ:—No
sooner do you pass the brow of the St. Gothard pass, on your way to Italy
than you perceive that, beyond all question, you are on the sunny side of the
Alps. The snow lying there is nothing in comparison to the vast accumulation
upon the Swiss side of the summit, the wind ceases to be sharp and cutting, and a
very few minutes’ ride brings you into a balmy air which makes you forget that you
are so greatly elevated above the sea level. There is a very manifest difference
between the southern side and the bleak northern aspect. He who climbs above
the cares of the world, and turns his face to his God, has found the sunny side of
life. The world’s side of the hill is chill and freezing to a spiritual mind, but the
Lord’s presence gives a warmth of joy which turns winter into summer. Some
pilgrims to heaven appear never to have passed the summit of religious diffi-
culty; they are still toiling over the Devil’s Bridge, or loitering at Andermatt, or
plunging into the deep snowdrifts of their own personal unworthiness, ever learning
but never coming toa full knowledge of the truth; they have not attained to a


4
3
;
}
f
¥


oy ©


CHAP. Iv.] ST. JOHN. aTT


comfortable perception of the glory, preciousness, and all-sufficiency of the Lord
Jesus, and therefore abide amid the winter of their doubts and fears. If they had
but faith to surmount their spiritual impediments, how changed would everything
become! It is fair travelling with a sunny land smiling before your eyes, especially
when you retain a grateful remembrance of the bleak and wintry road which you
have traversed ; but it is sorry work to be always stopping on the Swiss side of the
mountain. How is it that so many do this? (C. H. Spurgeon.) Weak instru-
ments useful :—Weak means may, by God’s blessing, work great matters. He can
make the words of Naaman’s servant greater in operation than the words of great
Elisha, and by a poor captive girl bring him tothe prophet. (J. Trapp.) How
souls are won :—No address is so powerful as that which comes in private from heart
to heart, with all the living power of a lip warm with love. God is more likely to
bless this form of address than any other. There is no escaping from the direct-
ness of such an appeal, and it is hard to resist its pleading power. ‘‘ Come, George,
and walk down the road with me! ” was the call of an earnest preacher to one of
his hearers, In the course of that walk the preacher’s private word had by God’s
blessing accomplished in George what all his former teachings had failed to do.
George yielded himself to Christ, and declared that the personal talking while
going along the street was the means of his decision, It is a great delight to the
pasior of the Tabernacle frequently to see certain elders in the corners of the build-
ing after service conversing with individuals. Are we backward in such labours?
Do we altogether neglect them? How shall we answer for it at the last great day ?
(C. H. Spurgeon.) Tell the news :—At the first invitation to penitents to come
forward, only half a dozen responded to the call; but as soon as these stood up
rejoicing in God, another company came forward. No sooner was the joy of pardon
received into the mourners’ hearts, than they hastened to seek after others. One
young man, about twenty years of age, was overheard praying, immediately after he
felt relieved of his guilty load, ‘‘ Please, Lord, let me tell somebody, or I shall die.”
Upon receiving permission he gladly stood up, and related what God had just done
for his soul. (W. Booth.) Come :—In travelling across the arid desert, scouts
upon camels and dromedaries are sent off in every direction to scour the country
and look for springs of water. When these are discovered the finder immediately
calls aloud fo the nearest, ‘“‘Come!” and this one repeats the word ‘‘ Come!” to
the next, and so this word passes from one to another until all hear and are gathered
at the well. Now those of us who are Christians must do the same. We have
heard the good news that Jesus Christ bore our sins in His own body on the tree.
We have found the well of living waters, and we must raise the cry, ‘‘Come!”’
Christ the Saviour of great sinners :—A woman came to a minister one day, carry-
ing a bundle of wet sand. ‘*Do you see what thisis, sir?” said she. “ Yes,” was
the reply, “it is wet sand.” ‘‘But do you know what it means?” ‘I do not
know exactly what you mean by it; what is it?” ‘Ah, sir,” she said, ‘ that’s
me, and the number of my sins they cannot be counted.” And then she exclaimed,
‘« Oh wretched creature that I am! how can a wretch as I ever be saved?” ‘“ Where
did you get the sand?” asked the minister. ‘At the Beacon.” ‘Go back then to
the Beacon; take a spade with you; dig, dig, and raise a great mound; shovel it
up as high as ever you can, then leave it there; take your stand by the sea-shore,
and watch the effect of the waves upon the heap of sand.” ‘Ah, sir,” she ex-
claimed, ‘‘I see what you mean—the blood, the blood, the blood of Christ ; it would
wash it all away.” (New Cyclopedia.) Master eat. .. I have meat to eat that
ye know not of—The two forgettings :—I, Cunist forgets His EARTHLY Foop. II.
Tae woman forgets HER EARTHLY PITCHERS. (J. P. Lange, D.D.) _ The zeal and
food of Christ :—I. His zuau. 1. For His Father’s house (chap. ii. 17), purity of
worship. 2. For His Father’s will (chap. ix. 4), the salvation of men. 3. For His
Father’s children (chap. xvii. 9), the sanctification of His Church. II. His Foop. l.
Heavenly in origin. 2. Spiritual in character. 3. Sustaining in quality. 4. Suffi-
cient in supply. (TZ. Whitelaw, D.D.) The Lord’s meat :—I. It was a roadside
conversation, an “accidental” interview. And yetin less time than an ordinary
religious service Hr HAS TOLD MANKIND THREE SECRETS. 1. What rest or peace is for
every unsatisfied heart, 2, Who it is that knows these hearts through and through.
3, What God is, and how He may be found. 4. These are secrets, because for
four thousand years the loftiest intellects had been striving to find them out.
Prophets and kings, Solomons and Platos, desired to see these things,and did not. II.
WHERE SHOULD WE SAY THIS REVELATION WOULD BE MADE. 1. In some crowded church,
advertised beforehand, with thousands of people and a popular orator? 2. In some


~,


a,


378 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Iv. |
a

lecture-hall with sharp-witted students stimulated by some master brain? 38. Notice
that the occasion was commonplace. The teacher sat on the stones of a wayside
well. The audience was one woman, not respectable. Men of the world that day
were about their business. Fortunes were building and wasting. Rome was ruling.
Athens was carving and painting and making orations. Jerusalem was garnishing
the sepulchres of the righteous, and devouring widows’ houses. But in one still
spot two people were talking together of things which have helped to revolutionize
the world. III. WuILe ruvs ENGAGED THE TEACHER'S ATTENTION WAS DISTRACTED.
The disciples came and asked Him to eat. Then were repeated instances when, at
the moment He needed sympathy most, those around Him went on chattering about
superficial trifles, misunderstanding His teaching and His life. But Christ’s patience
always triumphed. Hesimply announces—1. The fact that He had meat they knew
not of. (1)He does not mean that He was not in natural wants and exactly like our-
selves. Honest hunger is no more disgraceful than honest riches. He knew that some
of the most beneficent and beautiful impulses are associated with eating and drinking.
He made both sacramental signs. Christianity is not the killing out or mutilating
of any faculty; it is to use everything purely, unselfishly, faithfully, and in the
name of the Lord Jesus. 2. While Christ would not sunder what God hath joined
together, the hungering body and the immaterial soul, yet His mission is to bring
the two into their right relation, and set the one over the other as its master.
Eating and drinking are well enough in their place and time, but man shall not
live by bread only. It is something higher that makes life worth living—the life
and work of Christ. 8. Why should this be called meat? Food does two things.
(1) It satisfies uneasy desire: so Christ satisfies a desire which is the hunger of the
soul. You say many do not feel it, or they would give up their selfish way and turn
to God. But (a) although many people have lost the longing for a purer life by
indulgence, they had it once. (b) The desire for better things is stronger in finer
natures than in coarse. (c) Do we not all want something deeply, and are miserable
when we cannot get relief. (d) The restless heart needs to be shown the secret of its
discontent, and Christ comes into the world to show it. (e) Ask yourselves if you
do not sometimes feel it. (2) Besides the craving filled and the sense of relish, there
is actual nourishment. At first it seems as if Christian service were all giving and
spending. But as you go on you take more than you give. A good life is con-
tinually strengthened by living it. All we give away for a good object enriches us.
4, Christ further tells us that the life of love and duty is the carrying out of
God’s plan. 5.Christ uplifts the ideal of a‘‘ finished” life and work. ‘ Finished,’
because to the last stroke spent and the last breath drawn Christ gives it power
and grace. Nomatter how long life is or how short if it is faithful. Nomatter where
death is, if within us is the life of Him who liveth evermore. (Bp. Huntington.)
Mysterious meat :—The disciples had gone to buy meat: and for this they cannot be
censured. Do not say that they were carnal or unspiritual, for most spiritual people
must eat to live. And then I admire their care for their Master. It is right for the
spiritual man to forget his hunger, but it is equally right for his true friends to
remind him that he ought to eat for his health’s sake. Jesus has now gone, but
His mystical body remains. If you know of any of His people in poverty, ask
them to partake of your abundance, lest haply your Lord should say ‘I was an
hungered,” &c. Having done this justice to the twelve, let us do honour to Christ.
His mind was absorbed in spiritual objects, and He wished to lead them to that
higher field, I. THERE ARE REFRESHMENTS THAT ARE LITTLE KNOWN. ‘ Man shall
not live by bread alone.” Our Lord found refreshments that were not known to
His disciples, and the reason for this was-—1, That this nourishment was enjoyed
on a higher plan than they had yet reached. 2. It implied a greater sinking of self
than they as yet knew. In being a servant obeying the will of another, He feels
Himself so much at home, that it revives Him to think of it. Not in self but in
self-surrender is there fulness for the heart. 8. Christ was in fuller harmony with
God than His disciples. 4. Christ was sustained because He understood the art of
seeing much in little. As a wise man sees a forest in an acorn so our Lord saw the
vast results of this little incident. II. Tursr sucrET REFRESHMENTS SATISFIED OUR
Loxp. 1. He had so long hungered to be at His work. 2. When He got at His
work He gave Himself wholly to it. 3. He found great joy in the work itself
4, Ile forgot to eat bread because of the enthusiasm which filled Him in the pursuit
of that soul. 5. He was moved greatly by the sympathy of pity. 6. He felt great
joy in present success. 17. He saw the prospect of better things. III. Ler ts at
ONCE SELK THIS REFRESHMENT. 1, Let ug remember that we are sent of God


CHAP. 1V.] ST. JOHN. 879


2. Let us find joy at once in God’s work and will. 3. Let us get to work and leap
into our place at once. 4. We may also anticipate the wages. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
The hidden support of life:—1. In the case of human creatures life is a higher
thing than existence. The soul is superior to the body. The body has its wants,
but the supply of these is only the means of doing the will of God by the soul.
When the means are elevated into the end manhood is sunk into animalism. How
often is a young man tempted into sensuality by the invitation, ‘‘ Let us see life.”
But sensuality is not life for aman. 2. In the prosecution of life we must lay our
account with privations and conflicts. We do not begin in a paradise of innocence.
The very first motions of real life within often take the form of conflict. 3. Under
such experiences the strength of the man comes from hidden support. He has
meat to eat of which others know not. This hidden meat is the food of heroes and
has always nourished those who have “resisted unto blood, striving against sin.”
4. When a man has no such secret support his life loses all spiritual importance
and becomes a mere grovelling thing of animal enjoyment. The soul is starved
and all true nobleness disappears. Now let us particularize some of the forms of
this hidden support—I. A Goop conscrenczr, This when rectified by the Holy
Spirit is God’s representativain the soul. Its approbation therefore being the reflex
of the approval of God is a great source of support, even as its condemnation must
always be a cause of weakness and pain. A good conscience is a continual feast,
and they who have that within can do without the banquets of the world. II. A
WORTHY AMBITION. If we are intent on the attainment of some fixed purpose we
shall be sustained amid trials which would otherwise have overmastered us. We
see that exemplified on a lower level, in the case of Warren Hastings, e.g. Let the
Christian set his soul on the attainment of some good, not for Himself, but for his
fellow men, then that purpose will bear him up. Christ, for the joy that was set
before Him, endured the cross, &c. This is the secret of the strength of those who
have given their lives for missions, Livingstone, e.g. ILI. Farr IN THE UNSEEN
AND IN THE FUTURE, as in the case of Moses. What the student is doing for his
scholarship, and the merchant for his wealth, the Christian is doing for his recompense
of eternal reward. Both alike are walking by faith, but the Christian’s faith takes
in eternity. IV. Divine companionsHir. ‘I am not alone because the Father is
with Me,” said Jesus. ‘The Lord stood by me and strengthened me,” said Paul.
God is “a very present help in time of trouble,” not only for great emergencies, but
for the common weariness of a common day. (W. M. Taylor, D.D.) Heavenly
nourishment :—I. Our Lorp’s ENTIRE DEVOTEDNEss To His Faruer’s witt. This
is no isolated instance. Turn to any part of His life and you see the same principle.
1. He was profoundly submissive to that will. 2. He manifested His delight in it.
3. He felt the necessity for His work as Saviour, knowing as He did the dreadful
power of sin. 4. Love was the foundation of His obedience. II. Our Lorp
FOUND NOURISHMENT AND SATISFACTION IN boinc His Faruer’s witu. 1. There
may be entire devotion arising out of a sense of obligation, 2. Our Lord’s devotion
sprang from delight in it. 3. It so absorbed Him that He forgot His hunger,
being spiritually fed, “‘He saw the travail of His soul,” &c. III. THe END WHICH
our LoRD KEPT IN view. “To finish His work.” So at the close He was able
to say ‘It is finished.” His was a perfect life. Every part was filled in as it went
on, no imperfect fragments, nothing left out or to be done over again. IV. Lessons.
1. Every Christian should regard it as his meat to do the Fathev’s will. ‘As the
Father hath sent Me even so send I you.” 2. All may learn what a joy it is to:
save the lost. (G. W. Humphries, B.A.) My meat is to do the will of Him
that sent Me. Consider Messiah’s ministry of: salvation as—I. A work WHICH HE
peRrormEp. 1. Hespeaks herein His capacity of Son and Servant. In His essential
nature He is one with the Father, but in the actual execution of the Divine purpose,
He stands in a low place charged with a specific mission. 2. The will of the
Sender is learned best by looking at the Sent. The Gift reveals the Giver’s heart.
The Christ sent into the world is fitted to draw men to God, not to drive them from
Him. The will of thé Father corresponds with the Messenger sent to execute it.
God is love and Christ embodies that love. 3. The desire of God could not be
carried into effect without Christ sent. 4. This work is not left half done.
Creation was completed ere God rested. His next more glorious work will be
finished too. The earth was complete as a habitation for man ere the children
were brought to it as their home. So will heaven be. II. Tux Foop IN WHICH HE
DELIGHTED. 1. It is not enough to learn what Jesus did and suffered, we must look
into the secret motives of His heart. 2. Knowing all that redemption would bring


380 . THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Iv.
upon Himself, He longed for the work as His daily bread. In this glass we see
reflected the nature and intensity of the Saviour’s eagerness to save. 3. Jesus is
Lord of all. The stars are His, He values them, but they do not satisfy His soul.
He does not need to redeem bright worlds and unfallen angels; they cannot, there-
fore, appease His hunger. To seck the strayed, and save the lost—this is His meat.
4, Blessed are they that hunger ; for this they shall be filled.” This He felt ; and
His joy will be fall when all the ransomed shall reign with Him. 5. Over Jerusalem
He wept for hunger. His appetite brought Him from heaven to the cradle and the
cross. 6. It is difficult to reconcile Christ’s desire with His omnipotence. Had he
not power to accomplish His desire? Could He not have seized a whole city, as
angels seized Lot, and hurried them to heaven? This would not have satisfied
Him, Material acquisitions cannot sustain the spirit. Though all power is given '
to Him He will not satisfy His physical hunger by converting stones into bread, nor
His spiritual by lifting mytitudes to heaven by omnipotence. 7. With the limits
of our capacity and condition the appetite of the Master may be shared by the
servants. Our spiritual hunger is first a desire to get and then a desire to give
salvation. In the second part of the process the disciple enters into the joy of His
Lord. (W. Arnot, D.D.) Jesus about His Fatha~’s business: —It is peculiarly
pleasing to observe the interest which God the Father takes in the work of salvation.
In our childhood in grace we conceived God as an austere Judge made propitious
by Christ. Since then we have learned the Father through the Son. This interest
is three times hinted at in the text. (1) Salvation work is called the Father’s will.
It is His will not only that we should not perish, but be redeemed. (2) Jesus was
sent of the Father. (3) Salvation is called God’s work. When this world was
made God did not make it without reference to the Spirit, for the ‘ Spirit moved on
the face of the waters”’; nor without the Son (chap. i. 3); yet it was the Father’s
work. Sothe Father does not save without the Spirit, for ‘the Spirit quickeneth.”
Nor without the Son, for it is through His death that we are forgiven ; yet it is the
Father’s work. This work it was the meat of Christ to do and to finish, Notice—
I. His soun was in ALL He pip, The task was not irksome. There are men who
work with such reserve and coldness that you perceive it is but the shell that acts,
not the man’s whole soul. But our Lord’s whole Being was at work. His Father’s
service was His element. II. He was atap WHEN He saw His work SUCCEEDING.
An infallible proof of His devotedness. You know when a man’s heart is in his
work by the joy he feels in it. True ministers call preaching pleasure, not duty.
Let Him see a penitent and the Man of Sorrows wears a smile on His sorrowful
face. IIT. He was ancry wHEN His work was OPPOSED. When good men see
penitents discouraged or evil rampant they do well to be angry. IV. He weer
WHEN HIs woRK was UNSUCCESSFUL. Never otherwise. He will weep over unpeni-
tent Jerusalem, but not on the cross. V. HE was NOT DISCOURAGED BY OPPOSITION.
How oftén, when our motives are misconstrued and our efforts hampered, are we
tempted to give up! But Christ went cn His way apologizing for nothing, doing
His work whatever men thought of it or acted against it. WI. Hm anways LABOURED;:
never resting: intruding on sleep for prayer and helpfulness. His three years
seemed like three centuries. VII. WHEN IN FULL LABOUR HE DOES NOT SEEM TO
HAVE FELT FATIGUE; as here, and when hungry forgot to eat bread. He seemed to
get refreshed in His work, and instead of getting tired renewed His strength. This
could not have happened unless His soul had been init. VIII. Our Lorp never
SWERVED FROM His ong oBgxct, although tempted by the devil with the world and
by the Galileans with a crown. IX. He was NoT DAUNTED BY THE THOUGHT oF
pEATH. This thought was not before Him as a possible.prospect of momentary
heroism, but a certain prospect all His life through. And to this He hastened
as the crowning point of His work. In conclusion—1. Let the timid soul who
thinks that Christ is unwilling to save be encouraged by all this, 2. Let the mind
that was in Christ Jesus be in all Christian men. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Sources
of Christ’s satisfaction :—I, IN Tux Fact or service. It is no mean satisfaction
to a servant of God to feel, “I am here of no private choice or purpose of my
own; I have been sent hither by a Divine hand.” What a freedom from anxiety
and discouragement! The humblest task is made glorious by the authority of
the Giver. Many think there is no glory but in independence. But we are so
made that we are not sufficient to ourselves, and therefore, the selfish man is
wretched. True joy is the joy of sympathy, but no human love can satisfy the
soul’s demands. In God’s favour alone is life. This favour is accorded only to
His servants, I. In rae Law oF THE service, God’s will, Many persong think


c lias ok
Mena


> pe a a a


“wap. Iv.] ST. JOHN. 381


there is no joy but in doing their own will, and to walk in the plain path of duty is
repulsive to them. And merely walking in the path of duty will not bring joy.
There is no acceptable obedience that does not spring from love. But there is all
joy in that Christ found it so. And this is not wonderful. The will of God is the
outcome of His perfections, and therefore that will must be the perfection of blessed-
ness, Can you choose so well for yourself as that will which measures all things.
This holds good both with regard to the suffering and the doing of God’s will, III.
IN THE FIELD OF SERVICE. Every man has his work Divinely allotted and adjusted.
This work is various, and all of itmust be accepted as given of God. Then satisfaction
will be found in—1. Doing the work may not have been successful, but if it has
been done, we have the satisfaction of having fulfilled our task. There are those
who will only work when there is human applause and visible results. 2. The
effectual accomplishment of the work, and receiving the glad, ‘Well done.” (J.
Riddell.) Service should be willing service -—When the Spartans marched into
battle they advanced with cheerful songs, willing to fight; but when the Persians
entered the conflict, you could hear, as the regiments came on, the crack of whips
by which the officers drove the cowards to the fray. You need not wonder that a
few Spartans were more than a match for thousands of Persians, that in fact they
were like lions in the midst of sheep. So let it be with the Church; never shou!¢
she need to be forced to reluctant action, but full of irrepressible life, she should
long for conflict against everything which is contrary to God. (C.H. Spurgeon.)
Joyful service :—‘* I wish I could mind God as my little dog minds me,” said a little
boy, looking thoughtfully on his shaggy friend; ‘‘he always looked so pleased to
mind, and I don’t.” What a painful truth did this child speak! Shall the poor
little dog thus readily obey his master, and we rebel against God, who is our
Creator, our Preserver, our Father, our Saviour, and the bountiful Giyer of every-
thing we love. (Christian Treasury.) God’s work is our work :—The other
evening I was spending a few hours with a friend, and a lady who happened to be
present when we were talking about this missionary work, said, “ But, Mr. J ohn, do
you not know that we have a great deal of our own work to do?” ‘ Why,
madame,” said I, “is not the missionary work your work? Is it not the work of
the Churches?” That seemed to be a new light to her altogether; and there are
a great many people in these days who seem to think that this work is the work of
the missionaries and not their own. I go to China to do your work. If I gointo the
deep well, it is for you to hold the rope you must not leave me there. (Griffith
John.) Enthusiasm :—When George Moore was deputed to the relief of Paris,
after the seige, he hastened off to reach the place as quickly as possible. “ I think
I should have died,” he said, “if I had not been the first man in Paris.” (Smiles.)
The power of concentration :—In the eighteenth century, an immense burning glass
was constructed in France, in which all the heat, falling on a great lens, was then
concentrated on a smaller one till at the focussuch was the heat that iron, gold, and
other metals ran like melted butter. Another one, made in England by Parker,
fused the most refractory substances, and diamonds were reduced by it to vapour.
(H. O. Mackey.) The satisfying power of a great aspiration :—It was this pros-
pect that cheered and refreshed Him. When our 33rd regiment was nearing Mag-
dala, they had marched for hours over burning plains, under a scorching sky, without
water or rest, and the heat began to tell upon the men—many were ready to fall
down from exhaustion—when suddenly the sharp cracking of rifles told onr soldiers
that the foe was in the front and fighting had begun. Hunger, thirst, exhaustion,
were all forgotten in the excitement and desire for the fray. If a desire like this
could make soldiers forget weariness, much more a desire to save a sinner could so
fill the loving, tender heart of Jesus with such delight and satisfaction. (R. H.
Lovell.) Christ’s improvement on common things :—I observe our Saviour apply-
ing every accidental occurrence to His holy purposes, as it were, by a kind of
chemistry, separating the gross matter, and subliming ordinary affairs | to heavenly
doctrine; insomuch that there was scarcely any common affair of life, ... but
He spiritualized it, and applied it to His designs. Now, if we would learn of Him,
we might with great ease, and without all violence, surprise men into religion, and
not only at every turn introduce pious discourse, but render the subject of it in-
telligible to the meanest capacities ; and withal by those sensible resemblances give
such lively touches upon the minds of men, as that what we delivered upon those
occasions would stick and remain with them... . As, for instance, when we visit
a sick friend or neighbour, what a fair opportunity have we to discourse of the im-
morality of the soul! And what an easy transition is it from a physician to a


igs <
389 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, (cua. TV.


ee
Saviour! Or, why may we not as well cheer up our afflicted friend with the comforts
of religion, as well as amuse or divert him with impertinent stories? Or, suppose
friends to be together and disposed to be merry, why may not some word come in
seasonably of the everlasting friendship in heaven, or the continual feast of a good
conscience ? Why may not the common chat about news be elevated to the con-
sideration of the good tidings of the Gospel? What hinders but our dishes of meat
may be seasoned with a gracious word or two about the food of our souls? When
men are talking of old age, it would be no great strain, if thence our thoughts rise
up to eternal life; nor is any great flight of fancy requisite to improve all the
accidents of our lives to the contemplation of Divine Providence, which orders and
governs them. In a word, everything is capable of improvement, if we be not
wanting; we shall never want opportunity, if we embrace it; anything will serve
an intent mind and a devout heart to these purposes (Prov. xv. 23; Luke viii. 1, 5).
(Dr. Goodman.) The superlative value of food:—A traveller lost his way in an
Eastern desert. His provisions were exhausted, and he had already wandered about
for several days without food, when he descried under a palm tree on his track the
marks of a recent encampment. He approached the spot tremulous with hope.
He found a bag which the travellers had left behind, filled with something that
appeared to be dates. He opened it eagerly, expecting to satisfy his hunger, when
lo! it contained only pearls! He sat down and wept. What are pearls to a man
who is dying for want of bread? (W. Arnott, D.D.) Love the secret of
successful work :—There is absolutely nothing more absorbing on the one hand, or
more satisfying on the other, than successful effort in behalf of a cause or of a
person loved by us. This is alike true from the lowest plane to the highest. Even
a child will forget to be ready for his meals, if he once gets fairly into a game with
his playmates outside, before lunch-time or supper-time. Many a hard student is
sorry to stop his work in order to eat or to sleep. And when one can hope to finish
a piece of work for one whom he loves, by keeping at it a few hours longer—who
wouldn’t rather do that than have a good dinner? If the work of the Lord drags in
our hands, it is not because that work is not worth living for, and dying for; but
it is because we fail of a fitting interest to its doing. (H.C. Trumbull, D.D.) True
work :—We should aim to be too active to stagnate, too busy to freeze. We
should be like Cromwell, who not only struck when the iron was hot, but made it
hot by striking; like the missionary who said, ‘‘ If there be happiness on earth, it
is in labouring in the service of Christ.’’? (Family Churchman.) Soul food :—
Many who have gathered crowds about them, who have produced a marked im-
pression on those crowds, have said truly that such success was meat and drink to
them. Ifit did not feed their vanity, but sustained them because it showed them that
they were doing God’s will and finishing His work, they may have understood some-
thing of Christ’s meaning. But the secret food He partook of certainly came
from no sudden success that followed His words. First, He met with a woman
who had in general answered Him with levity; then a few people of her own rank
came at her call, How little would such honours satisfy the ambition of some
eloquent disciple of Christ, who has the power of influencing thousands! Could it
satisfy Him who came to found a kingdom of which there was to be no end? Yes;
for in their first sheaves He could see certain pledges of a world’s ingathering. The
corn-fields would not be reaped for four months; these men whom He saw coming
showed Him that the other harvest was nearer still. (F. D. Maurice.) The
ruling passion :—When a man dies his friends often say of him, in praise of his
diligence, energy, and concentration, ‘‘He lived simply to carry through that impor-
tant line of railway”’ ; or, ‘‘ His only object was to extort from the Government a more
scientific education for the people”; or, ‘‘ He devoted himself to the cause of Free
Trade”; or, ‘‘ He was a martyr to his exertions in favour of Protection.” It was his
one idea; it grew with his growth; he could think of nothing else; he spared
neither time nor money to it; it was hismonomania. He did his work in his day, and
did it well, because he was heart and soul in it; and the worldis in debt to him for
it, Now, why should it not be said of us, ‘‘ Well, he is gone, he was a man of one
idea, he cared for nothing but that God’s will be done on earth asin heaven. He
was eaten up with this; he made it his hobby; it was meat and drink to him

And whereas the other men left behind the railway or the cheap bread, our friend
has left behind him a better world.” (Family Churchman.) ;


Vers, 35-38, Say not ye there are yet four months and then cometh h
i arvest.—
Che spiritual culture of the world :—Not unfrequently does the Bible represent nt


eT


I ee eh ee ee eee


pave.


’


ettar. rv.} ST, JOHN. 393


great work of the moral reformation of the world by that of husbandry. I. Tue
SERVANTS OF GOD SHOULD EARNESTLY SEIZE EVERY OPPORTUNITY FOR THE SPIRITUAL
CULTURE OF MAN. Don’t think the work distant, to be waited for, it is present and
must be attended to at once. 1. Moral seasons are not like material ones, beyond
our agency. We cannot hasten the months of harvest. Years come and go irres-
pective of our choice or effort. But inthe moral domain you can change tempera-
ture, create seasons, turn foul weather into fair, and make a moral November as
bright and genial as June. ‘Say yenot then.” Makenoexcuses. 2, The feeblest
honest effort to improve the world will develop encouraging symptoms to persevere,
Christ’s conversation with the woman stirred the heart of the whole city. True
thoughts increase the soul’s appetites and supplies. The more you give the more
you need. IJ. A LoNG SUCCESSION OF AGENTS ARE REQUIRED FOR THE SPIRITUAL CUL-
TURE OF MANKIND. ‘‘ One soweth, another reapeth.” ‘Paul plants, Apollo waters.”
John sowed seeds for Polycarp, he for Athanasius, he for Augustine, he for Anselm;
Bernard for Tauler, Luther for Calvin, he for Chemitz; Wickliffe for Tyndale, and
he for Coverdale, &c. This suggests—1. The moral connection of the race. Man
transmits his principles as well as his nature. 2. The slow progress of moral
principles. Humanity requires ages for the full appreciation of great truths. 3.
The humble part which individuals play in the history of the world. What wesow
may not appear till we are gone. We pluck a few ripe ears, drop aseed or twoand
then pass on, 4. Results are not the right rules for conduct. We see more the
effects of other men’s labours than our own. We have to do with work, consequences
must be left to God. III. THeREIS A VITAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ALL TRUE WORKERS
IN THE SPIRITUAL CULTURE OF THE WORLD. 1. In working out one grand purpose.
Whether they reap or sow. 2. In participating in the same rewards. In the
universal rejoicing there will be no under-rating of the humblest, and the greatest
will not glory in himself. Hach will rejoice in another’s labours rather than his
own, ali ascribing their achievement to all inspiring love. (D. Thomas, D.D.)
The gospel harvest :—I. THE GREAT HARVEST REMAINS YET TO. BE GATHERED IN, The
purposes of grace have as yet received a very partial accomplishment. This is seen
if we will consider—1. God’s gracious intentions as announced to us by the ancient
seers. 2. The means which God has employed to fulfil His purposes. The incar-
nation, death, resurrection, and glorification of His Son, and the creation of a
Church to proclaim these saving facts to the whole world. Nothing short of the
salvation of mankind can indemnify the Redeemer and enable him to see the
travail of his soul. 3. The preparatory processes. (1) Before the Advent. (a)
Among the Jews the progress of redemptive disclosures. (b) Among the Gentiles
the progress of a civilization which should help to carry the Gospel to every creature.
(2) Since the advent. (qa) In early Christian times. (b) Subsequent to the Refor-
mation. 4. If such has been the length of time over which the preparations have
extended, if such the grandeur of the means employed, if such the extent of the
plan announced—what must be the harvest that is before us? I. Have we REASON
TO HOPE THAT THE HARVEST IS NEAR? The expectation of seeing it burst on the
world in full or hid splendour by stupendous miracle is not to be encouraged.
There is no reason to expect it through any other agency than that which God
has already employed. As for the signs, observe—1, That the whole world has
become accessible to the gospel to a degree altogether unprecedented, 2. The com-
manding and influential position of those portions of the globe, where Christianity
exists in its purest and most active forms. 3. The general spread of knowledge
and extension of education. 4. The success already achieved. III. Tue srntt-
MENTS AND CONDUCT WITH WHICH THIS STATE OF THINGS SHOULD BE MET BY THE CHURCH
or Curist, 1. Attention. 2. Thankfulness, ‘ Blessed are our eyes, for they see.”
8. Zealousefforts. 4. Steady perseverance. (B. Godwin.) The gospel harvest :—
I. A DESCRIPTION OF THE EXISTING CONDITION OF THE wortp. The “fields” are the
world ; they were ‘‘ white unto harvest,” ready for the accomplishment of the work
of mercy. 1. It was the time which had been appointed in the predetermination of
the Divine counsels for introducing the economy of grace. It was ‘the fulness of
time,” 2. The fields were “‘ white” because of the spiritual necessities which then
actually pressed upon the circumstances of man. No time could have been more
apt. Jews and Gentiles were alike at the furthest limit to which want could
possibly impel. 3. The time of the Saviour’s advent was one of great expectancy.
Among the Jews were many like Simeon ; among the Gentiles many like the Magi.
The state of the world since has always to some extent admitted the application of
the words ‘‘ white unto harvest,” and some periods more particularly than others


884 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cnar. Iv,
(1) When the gloom of the Middle Ages was about to pass away. (2) Now, as seen
in the state and relationships of human governments; the influence of our own
country in every continent; the feeling of sympathy and the acknowledgment of
duty on the part of professing Christians; the wealth and talent of the Church ;
the actual wants of heathendom, and their readiness to receive the Word of God.
The disciples of the Saviour are summoned themselves to contemplate the state of
the world. ‘Lift up your eyes and see.” II. A STATEMENT OF THE DIFFERENT
OFFICES OF LABOUR APPOINTED AND HELD IN CONNECTION WITH THE CONDITION DESCRIBED.
1. As to the origin of the offices to be contemplated they are of Divine appointment.
«The Lord of the harvest” alone sends forth labourers; and here the Redeemer
asserts His own prerogative, ‘‘I sent you.” 2. The nature of the offices thus exhi-
bited. He that sows has not the immediate tokens of success; he that reaps
gathers at once the ripened corn. So the office of some has been to prepare the
mind, to settie preliminaries, to lay foundations; of others to follow and to garner
the result. The labour of the prophets, and the success of the apostles, is typical
of much modern Christian labour. The reformers laboured, ministers now reap.
And while we reap from generations past, we sow for generations tocome. 3. The
spirit in which these offices should besustained. There should be—(1) Contented-
ness. (2) Diligence. (8) Patience. (4) Supplication for the Divine blessing. III.
THE PROMISE OF THE BLESSING BY THE BESTOWMENT OF WHICH THOSE OFFICES SHALL BE
consummatrep. 1, There isa recompense granted to the faithful exercise of the
duties which the offices comprehend. ‘He that reapeth,” &c. 2. There will be
a final meeting of all the labourers for mutual communion and joy, ‘ together.”
(J. Parsons.) | Earnestness essential to success :—Duncan Matheson, the Scottish
evangelist, when in the Crimea, was not slow in seeking out men of his own spirit
in the army. His first acquaintance was Hector Macpherson, drum-major 93rd
Highlanders, a soldier both of his country and of the Cross, of whom the missionary
used to tell the following story :—‘‘ One day, achaplain, newly arrived, called on the
sergeant and asked his advice as to the best method of conducting his work.
‘Come with me,’ said Hector, ‘to the hill-top. Now lookaround you. See yonder
the pickets of Liprandi’s army. See yon batteries on the right, and the men at the
guns. Mark yon trains of ammunition. Hear the roar of that cannon. Look
where you may, it is all earnest here. There is not a man but feels it is a death
struggle. If we don’t conquer the Russians, the Russians will conquer us. We
are all in earnest, sir; we are not playing at soldiers here. If you would do good
you must be in earnest too, An earnest man will always win his way.’” (New
Cyclopedia.) The fields are white :—Leonard Keyser, who was burned at Scher-
ding, in 1527, as a Protestant, when he came near to the stake, exclaimed, as he
looked at the crowd, ‘‘ Behold the harvest! O Master, send forth Thy labourers.”
(Bowes.) The heathen are waiting for the gospel :—Revy. J. Hudson Taylor related,
in China’s Millions, the bitter hardships he, with Rev. W. C. Burns, experienced
during his early days in China, The sketch closes with an account of aremarkable
incident. After they had spoken one day in the city of Ningpo one of the listening
crowd said: ‘I have long sought for the truth; I and my father beforeme. I have
found no rest in Confucianism, Buddhism, Taoism; but I do find rest in what I
have heard here. Henceforth I believe in Jesus,” Afterwards he asked Mr. Taylor
how long the glad tidings had been known in England. When he was told, ‘* Some
hundreds of years,” he looked amazed. ‘*‘ What!” he exclaimed, ‘‘is it possible,
and yet you have only now come to preach them to us? My father sought after the
truth for more than twenty years, and died without finding it. Why did you not come
sooner?” The woman of Samaria :—After expressing His own regard to the work
that was given Him to do, our Saviour stimulates His disciples to similar zeal. For
this purpose He employs three arguments, all borrowed from husbandry. 1. The first
is taken from the necessity for their exertions, When the grain is ripe, the sickle
must be thrust in. 2. The second is taken from the profitableness of their exertion.
The reaper is well paid. 38. The third is taken from the facility of their exertion:
the work being prepared to their hands. ‘ They besought Him that He would
tarry with them.” How natural was this! 1. They were eager to give Him
entertainment. 2. They wished to be instructed by him more perfectly. It is the
nature of grace to wish its increase, 3. They hoped that He would be useful to
those of their families and of their neighbours, who had been either unable or
unwilling tocome. What a work of God was here! Let me conclude by calling
upon you to observe, who were the subjects of this work, and who was the instru-
ment. 1, The subjects were Samaritans, not Jews: and we may exclaim with onr


a
-
af
4
Gb
7
Fa
2


cHaP. rv.] ST. JOHN. 885


Lord, on another occasion, we ‘‘ have not.found so great faith, no, not in Israel.”
2. The instrument was, not a philosopher, not an apostle armed with tongues and
miracles, but a poor, wicked, but converted woman. (W.Jay.) Zeal for soul-
gathering :—In Switzerland, where land is very precious because rock abounds and
the rugged soil is chary in its yieldings, you see the husbandman looking after a
little tuft of grass growing on one of the edges of a lofty cliff. From the valley he
had caught a sight of it and thought of clambering up to where it grew, but the
rock was all too steep. From a ledge nearer the top of the precipitous wall he
looked down, but could see no pathway to the coveted morsel of green. That
armful of grass would feed his goat, or help to fill the cottage loft with winter
fodder for the cow. Every armful is an item, and he cannot forego that tempting
clump. He looks, and looks, and looks again, but looks in vain. By-and-by, he
fetches his bold boy who can follow wherever a chamois can climb, but the boy
after a hard scramble comes back with the tidings, ‘‘ Father, it cannot be done.”
Father’s answer is, ‘ Boy, it must be done.” It is only an armful, and would not
be worth a farthing to us, but to the poor mountaineer even a farthing or a far-
thing’s worth is precious. The grass waves its flowers in the breeze and scorns
the daring climbers from below; but where there is a will, there is a way; and
what cannot be reached from below may be gained from above. With a rope slung
round him, or firmly grasped in his accustomed hand, with a stout stake or tree to
hold it up above, the Switzer is let down till he gets to the jutting crag, there he
stands with his sickle, reaps the grass, ties it into a bundle, puts it under his arm,
and climbing back again, joyfully returns with his little harvest. Poor pay, you
think, for such dangerous toil ; but, fellow-worker for Jesus, I wish we were as ven-
turesome for souls, and as careful of them, as these poor peasants are concerning
miserable bundles of grass. I wish that we sometimes looked up or down upon
apparently inaccessible spots, and resolved to reach immortal souls who are to be
found there, and pined to bring them to Christ. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Love to
souls :—An old man in Watton, whom Mr. Thornton had in vain urged to come to
church, was taken ill and confined to his bed. Mr. Thornton went to the cottage,
and asked to see him. The old man, hearing his voice below, answered, in no very
courteous tone, “‘I don’t want you here; you may go away.” The following day
the curate was again at the foot of the stairs. ‘ Well, my friend, may I come up
to-day and sit beside you?” Again he received the same reply, “I don’t want you
here.’? Twenty-one days successively Mr. Thornton paid his visit to the cottage,
and on the twenty-second his perseverance was rewarded. He was permitted to
enter the room of the aged sufferer, to read the Bible, and pray by his bedside.
The poor man recovered, and became one of the most regular attendants at the
house of God. (Life of Rev. S. Thornton.) The wages of doing good—joy:—A
person was once asked what had been the happiest moment she had ever known.
She was one who had had more than a common share of the good things of this
world. She had a bright home and many friends. She had achieved success in a
brilliant society, and won literary fame, and had drunk deep of intellectual plea-
gures in the course of a life which was far spent. Yet she said the happiest
moment she had ever known was that in which a withered old woman tottered into
the room, held out her shaking hands towards her, and wept for joy as sbe ex-
claimed, ‘‘I said I’d come and thank you for saving my boy, though I dropped on
the road.” Her boy was a poacher, who, in a midnight affray, inadvertently, as he
said—wilfully, as others declared—shot a gamekeeper. He was tried for his life,
and almost to the last moment he had no counsel, as neither he nor his miserable
old mother had the means of securing one. The lady, knowing nothing of him,
heard incidentally that if he remained undefended it would go hard with him, and
she engaged a first-rate counsel on his behalf. The result was that although his
sentence was death, it was accompanied by arecommendation to mercy. A petition,
which was afterwards drawn up by his defender, procured a commutation of the
extreme penalty ; and so it was that the joys of happy love, and fame, and pleasure,
paled before the grateful light in the poor old mother’s eyes as she spoke her
homely thanks, and then dropped back to her obscurity and was no more seen.
(Good Words.) Fruit after many days :—I was called, in Philadelphia, to visit a
sick girl in a very worldly and irreligious household, with whom I had but little
acquaintance, and went anticipating only a painful visit of warning to a careless
soul. To my astonishment, I found a gentle child of grace, perhaps eighteen years
of age, sinking in a consumption, but perfectly clear in mind, and happy in hope.
“How,” I asked, “‘ have you learned all this in your condition here?” Her answer


886 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Iv.


a


was most precious. “I had a faithful Sunday-school teacher ; and though I left
her some years ago, and never gave her much satisfaction, yet when I was taken
sick, I took my little Bible, and went over the lessons she used to teach me, and
God has taught me here alone.” She then showed me her little Bible, turned down
and marked with many Sunday-school lessons, her constant and loved companion.
Dear child, she had no other religious companion. But she departed in sweet
peace and hope, and my visits to her while she lived were full of satisfaction and
delight. Similar incidents of actual conversion under Sunday-school instruction have
occurred in such numbers, that I might fill many sheets of paper with them. (S. H.
Tyng, D.D.) The wages of doing good :—Occasionally a benevolent action wrought
in faith brings with it an instantaneous recompense in kind; therein Providence is
seen as smiling upon the deed. The late John Andrew Jones, a poor Baptist
minister, whilst walking in Cheapside, was appealed to by some one he knew for
help. He had but a shillipg in the world, and poised it in his mind, to give or not
to give? The greater distress of his acquaintance prevailed, and he gave his all,
walking away with a sweet remembrance of the promise, ‘‘ He that hath pity upon
the poor, lendeth unto the Lord, and that which he hath given, will He pay him
again.” He had not gone a hundred yards further before he met a gentleman who
said, ‘Ah, Mr. Jones, I am glad to see you. I have had this sovereign in my
waistcoat pocket this week past for some poor minister, and you may as well have
it.’ Mr. Jones was wont to add, when telling the story, “‘ If I had not stopped to
give relief I should have missed the gentleman and the sovereign too.” The
reaper’s joy :—One Sunday, in the house of God, the minister noticed the restless-
ness and anxiety of a little girl during the morning service. After the service, he
addressed the teacher thus :—‘‘ You have had a very unquiet class to-day, and one
of the children I observed was particularly restless; why did you not keep her
quiet?’’ ‘¢ Oh, sir, you mean Sarah She has for these three months past
set her heart upon bringing her father here, and this morning he had promised to
come, and she was so anxious to see if she could find him among the congregation,
until at length she came to me, and throwing her arms round my neck, sobbed out,
‘Oh, teacher, teacher, there’s my father!’” How often I have had my hand
grasped by loving persons who have said, ‘‘ I wanted to tell you that you led me to
the Saviour!”? They wanted to say it to me; and often have they written to me,
and cheered my heart, because they felt a personal gratitude which wanted a per-
sonal expression. A poor woman once forced me with tears to receive a small sum
of money for myself. I declined it till I saw that it would hurt her feelings, for
she had evidently longed for this opportunity for expressing her thankfulness
for the sermons she had read. If we feel thus towards an earthly friend, how
much more shall we feel it towards Him who has saved us by His blood!
(C. H. Spurgeon.) The harvest and the labourers (in conjunction with
Matt. ix. 37, 38):—On the occasion mentioned by Matthew there were fields
of ripe corn within sight (Luke vi. 1, 12, 13). The words reported by St. John
were spoken four months earlier when the fields were comparatively bare.
The one, therefore, was a similitude, the other a contrast, 1. In Samaria, Jesus
bade His disciples recognize fields white to harvest. The people were ready to
hear if only the gospel were delivered unto them, 2, But there was a risk of letting
the favourable opportunity slip for want of preachers. What can be more vexatious
to a farmer than to see his crop spoil for lack of hands? So grievous was it to
Christ fo see the leaders of the nation indifferent or hostile to His heavenly message.
3. The fields of opportunity are constantly widening, but the difficulty is to get an
adequate supply of labourers. (1) Home fields are scrambled over, and while there
are too many labourers in some corners, others are neglected. (2) In foreign fields
labourers are too far apart, and their strength overtaxed. 4, It is easy enough to
multiply ecclesiastics, but workmen who need not to be ashamed have always been
too few, And field work needs labouring men. Time is precious, and reapers must
not spare themselves. 5, Labourers are all the better fora training. In every kind
of activity training tells. Much more so here, as shown by Christ’s careful training
of the twelve. 6. But the first requisite is that the labourers be sent by the Lord
of the harvest, 7. The Church must pray for such labourers. (1) Christ so prayed.
(2) Now that Christ has ascended, and is Lord of the Church, we must pray for
His gift of labourers (Eph. iv. 11). 8. Why should we thus pray? The fields ara
His. He knows the value of the opportunity and the need of labourers; surely He
will provide them of His own accord. But prayer is not enjoined to tell Christ what
He does not know, or to persuade Him to do what He would otherwise neglect, but


+


~


OAL) A


OR Oe ore


CHAP. Iv.] ST, JOHN. 387


to bring His followers into harmony with His will. (D. Fraser, D.D.) The great
harvest ; or, Christian enterprise (in conjunction with Matt. ix. 36-38; Luke x. 2):—
. THE ORIGINAL MOTIVE OF ALL CHRISTIAN ENTERPRISE. ‘‘He was moved with com-
passion.” 1. Christian enterprise should be irrespective of class, creed, or character.
“The multitudes” were a mixed assembly, a fair picture of the world. Friends
and foes. Christ confined His benevolence to none. Christians should do good to
all, 2. Christian enterprise should have special reference to the spiritual state of
man. ‘Sheep without shepherd.” Our Lord did not overlook temporal and intel-
lectual needs, but made them subservient to the spiritual. 3. Christian enterprise
should be the result of feeling, deep and genuine. II. THE PRESSING CLAIM OF ALL
CHRISTIAN ENTERPRISE UPON ALL CHRISTIAN MEN (Luke x. 2). 1. The state of the
harvest—(1) There is sufficient scope for all Christian labour. No one can com-
plain of lack of material. Work when and wherever you can. (2) There is a
sufficient motive. The harvest is great. (a) In point of difficulty. ‘The conversion
of one soul is a work of no ordinary magnitude; how much greater that of a world!
The difficulty arises from human depravity. (b) In conseqnence of its responsibilities.
To control the parliament of a mighty nation far less responsible than changing the
eternal destiny of myriads. (c) In the glory connected with its final triumph. (3)
There is sufficient maturity. ‘ White unto harvest.” God’s time is the present.
History is what men, under God, make it. Mere time will never bring a millennium.
That will result from work, not waiting. 2. The paucity of the workmen.
‘Labourers are few”—(1) In comparison with the work to be done. (2) In com-
parison with the idle. In every church a few do all the work. III. Tus sprcran
PROVIDENCE WHICH SHOULD BE EVER RECOGNIZED BY ALL CHRISTIANS IN CARRYING ON
EVERY CHRISTIAN ENTERPRISE. ‘‘ Pray ye therefore,” &c. There is here a recogni-
tion—1. Of the divinity of our work. 2. Of the necessity of human agents. 3. Of
the importance of prayer. 4. Of final triumph. ‘‘ Gathered fruit unto life eternal.”
(Evan Lewis, B.A.) On reaping:—I. WHEN DOES THE REAPING COME (ver. 35) ?
1. The law of nature is that there should be delay between the sowing and the
reaping. It is not always so in grace. It was not so at Pentecost, nor with Philip
and the eunuch, with Peter and Cornelius. Both sometimes coincide—(1) To con-
vince us that the power is of God, not of man. (2) To encourage us to be instant
in season and out of season. But commonly there is delay. This should not dis-
courage. God knows best. II. WHat DorS THE REAPING BRING? 1. Reward (ver.
36). Wages—the work itself. To be workers with God is a great reward. But
fruit is also gathered. No Christian labours in vain. Sow the seed and expect the
harvest. 2. Joy and mutual rejoicing. (R. V. Pryce, LL.B.) The soul harvest :—
The garments worn in those days were white, and as Christ and His disciples were
seated on a slight elevation, they could observe the coming of the crowds of people
thus arrayed. ‘here are times, seasons, for the natural world, but all seasons are
harvest time in the moral world. Why, you ask, has Christianity been so long
conquering the world? Will it speedily triumph? I answer, God is working in His
wisdom and power most earnestly. He has done everything on His part; the delay
is caused by ourneglect. The harvest is ready; God is ready; the Church is not
ready. Let us look at some of the evidence for the world’s ripeness. I. Tax ctvin-
IZED NATIONS HAVE PIERCED TO ALL PARTS OF THE WORLD. A century ago how much
of the world was unknown, what an impulse has seized the heart of men to find
out every foot of land! The destruction of one expedition gives no discouragement;
others are pushed forward. Why this impulse? That we may send the gospel
everywhere. Observe how geography is being taught in the schools. How different
was it when we were children! Providence is thus acquainting the rising genera-
tion with the condition of the different nations. II. THz woNDERFUL FACILITIES
FOR ACCESS TO ALL PARTS OF THE WORLD. Wherever commerce can go the Bible and
missionary can go. III. THz CHuRcH IS NOW ABLE TO GAIN INTELLIGENCE FROM
ALMOST EVERY REGION HOURLY. If a missionary is in danger or needs assistance,
help can be sent to him on the wings of lightning. IV. ALL PARTS OF THE WORLD
ARE BEING BROUGHT INTO NEIGHBOURHOOD. The realization of unity amongst nations
is marvellously helping the Church. V. Tur BisLE HAS BEEN TRANSLATED INTO ALL
THE PRINCIPAL LANGUAGES, ‘The foundation of Christian work in Mexico was laid
during the European invasion by the soldiers dropping fragments of Bibles which
were picked up by the natives. VI. Tum SAFETY OF THE MISSIONARY IS EVERYWHERE
SECURED. God has given power over the earth into the hands of the great Protes-


tant nations, The Cross is above the flag. The greatest earthly power to day is


the Cross of Jesus Christ. VII. Ta wEALTH OF THE WORLD IS IN THE HANDS OF THB


hes ep


388 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHar. rv.


NATIONS THAT ARE SPREADING THE GosPpEL—England, Germany, America. (Bp. M.
Simpson.) Autumn: a season for national instruction :—Autumn, or the “ feast of
harvest,” is not only a season for national gratitude, rejoicing, philanthropy, but
also instruction. Look at the fields and mark—I. The resusciratine principle of
the Divine government. What you see ripened was a few months ago buried and
apparently dead, but the dormant germ has been quickened by God. This principle
is seen at work—1. In the mind of mankind, calling up buried thoughts and impres-
sions. 2. In the conversion of souls, quickening the conscience, and imparting
spiritual vitality. 3. On a grand scale in the general resurrection. II. The RETRI-
BUTIVE principle in the Divine government. Nature gives back what she has
received —1, In kind. Wheat for wheat. 2. In amount. The more she
receives the more she gives. ‘‘ Be not deceived,” &c. III. The munripiyine principle
in the Divine government. For one grain many are returned—some thirty, some
sixty, somea hundredfold. Soin morals. One thought may run into thousands,
one noble deed may become the parent of millions. Nothing true is lost; every-
thing true is multiplied. IV. The marurtne principle: the Divine government.
Through slow stages of growth. The blade, the ear, the full corn in the ear.
Character ripens. (D. Thomas, D.D.) Lift up your eyes, and look.—I. Tur
STANDPOINT. In calling the disciples’ attention to the Samaritans who were ready to
believe without the help of miracle, our Lord is calling upon them to take a larger,
higher, and more spiritual view of things; to labour for that which is more endur-
ing than the grass, the bread without which man cannot live. He is looking down
upon us. 1. What does He see? He sees us eager, busy, absorbed, notin things
unlawful, but in things below the supreme worth. Harvests, markets, eating, drink-
ing. (1) The poor struggling fora maintenance. (2) The middle class striving
for wealth, comfort, culture. (3) The rich absorbed in society and ambitious pro-
jects. (4) The student. (5) The philanthropist. 2. These are not to be condemned,
but are commendable in their way. But the wrong lies in the fact that we are
buried in these things. 3. Christ summons us to rise above these things to His
own standpoint. II. Tur visions. 1. Of the world’s great spiritual need. There
was something in these Samaritans not so obvious as pain, or physical hunger, and
that did not seem to be of such importance as the growing corn, or the meat the
disciples had brought. Look at the people around you, not with the superficial eye

but with the eye of faith, and you will see in them the children of God, wanting
God. This want is not to be satisfied by better houses, sufficient bread, present
comfort. There is need in man’s heart for a peace, a joy, a liberty, a life, not
otherwise to be obtained but by fellowship with the Father. 2. Of the Son of man
who can supply this need? This was His revelation to the woman. Every page of
the Gospels shows that Christ was not indifferent to man’s physical woes. But it
was for their spiritual wants that He cared most. And to become food for this He
died, as a grain of wheat sinks into the ground to die, in order to bring man back
to God, and become the food of the world. 3. Of the future. (1) The remote
future. That which is near is apt to hide that which is at a great distance, and so
that which is near in time is apt to hide that which is of infinite importance in the
far future, To-morrow with its cares and engagements is big enough to hide from
us the eternal. How are we to qualify ourselves for looking on the Lamb slain for
us? Only by doing His work and carrying His burden. (2) The near future. Max
Miiler tells us that ‘‘there are no people more ripe for Christianity than the
Hindoos,” and the same holds good all over the world. But we can only see it
with the eye of faith and the spirit of sacrifice. (H. Arnold Thomas, M.A.

White already.—Our Lord teaches the ripeness of the world for the highest blessing

1, Men everywhere have a certain religiousness of nature : religious ideas, capacities,
instincts, aspirations ; in some instances starved, degraded, dulled, but still there—
the sense of infinity, dependence, duty, accountability, futurity. So far, then they
are ready for the gospel—able to comprehend its works, to receive its grace to
realize its blessings. 2. Not only so, but there is in all men a felt need for the
truth, grace, hope of the gospel. They are feeling after God. Not equally vivid

understood and expressed, are their longings, but they are everywhere existent 3.
But whilst we believe all this we do not believe in the immediate readiness of man-
kind. We feel that much must be done first There must be a sowing and ripenin

before the reaping. Itis this spirit of doubtfulness and postponement that a8
Lord rebukes. “ The sowing and ripening has taken place ; put in your sickles,”
Let us observe the cases in which our Lord’s rebuke applies. I. Take the conver-
sion of the youna. 1. You do not expect this, The children must wait. “ First


cHap. tv.] «ST. JOHN. : 389


the blade,” &e. So we instruct, encourage, discipline them, but should be much
surprised by anything like a religious experience, and should look upon it as on pre-
mature bloomings and blossomings in garden and orchard. But what is that doc-
trine of yours of prevenient grace? That God gives a secret light, light, strength,
bias to the soul, and as socn as we awake to consciousness we find within us the
sense of law and grace. 2. Have we not been astonished at the spiritual capacity
of children? They cannot understand theology, but they can religion. They
cannot understand entomology, botany, optics, but they admire a butterfly,
love the flowers, leap with joy at the rainbow. Go to them at once with
a spiritual appeal and expect the effect. Don’t talk about their wanting
experience. If a chrysalis be placed in an ice-house, its development may be
retarded for years, but take it into a hothouse, and it flutters a thing of
beauty in a few days. So with our children. II. Take the conversion of the
masses. (1) Such as are ignorant, What do they want? Education, say many.
But on trial it comes out that they discover a spiritual faculty most acute. It was
on this ground that the Royal Reaper gathered many noble sheaves, So it was
when Wycliffe appealed to the serfs of Leicestershire, Luther to the peasantry of
Germany, Wesley to the colliers of Kingswood. Without knowing arithmetic they
feel the worth of the soul; without skill in languages they know the voice of God ;
without e#sthetics they admire the beauty of holiness. (2) Such as are worldly.
They appear immersed in the material, but under that thick clay the Spirit of God
is at work. There seems no life in a garden in early spring; but under the surface
the seeds are swelling, the roots full of ferment. All that is wanted is rain and
sunshine. (3) Such as are vicious. What do these want? Reformation, say the
wise of this world. No; with crimson sins they are white unto harvest. How
readily Christ found the missing chord in publican and harlot! In this very
Samaritan Christ wished His Church to learn that the guiltiest are able to appre-
hend the sublimest truths, truths which convict and save. III. Take the conversion
of the scrprican. What do they want? Argumentation, say many. No; men
cannot get rid of their religion so easily as some think.~ The atheist has eyes to
see this wondrous universe, spiritual longings, thoughts, arguments within himself
not to be-suppressed, and is compelled to doubt his doubts. Go to him, and speak
not so much to the sceptic as to the man. IV. Take the conversion of the savacE
portion of our race. What do they want? Civilization—nature never leaps.
Indeed! Is there not a leap from the caterpillar through the pupa into the
butterfly? ‘No,’ says the man of science, ‘‘it only seems a leap.” Very good;
we won’t argue. There is the penitent thief; it was not a real leap—the Spirit of
God had worked the intermediate stages in silence and darkness—it only seemed a
leap. Fiji, fifty years ago, was cannibal, to-day it is Christian. God is in all other
dark places. ‘The isles wait for His law.” V. The conversion of THE WORLD AT
LarcE. This seems a long way off to the carnal eye. But it is only waiting. The
sowing is done. 1. Christ is the Sower. He moves with His Spirit among the
million. 2. His ripening forces have long been at work (chap. i. 4,9). The Light
of the World acts when He does not manifestly shine. Go and expect fruit. You
are not waiting for God; He is waitingfor you. (W. L. Walkinson.) The grain
ripe:—I. Tue sicxues. 1. Preaching the gospel. The sickle may have a handle
of rosewood, and be ‘adorned with precious stones, but it is worth nothing if it does
not bring down the grain. We might preach the sciences from our pulpits, but
Agassiz would beat us at that. We might philosophize, but Kmerson would beat
us at that. But he who with faith and prayer takes hold of the gospel sickle, how-
ever weak his natural arm, shall gather deep swarths of golden grain. 2. Singing
the gospel. This scythe has been long neglected, much abused, but has been
sharpened anew. 3. Prayer. By this John Knox reaped Scotland. IJ. The
REAPERS. 1. Tract distributors. 2. Sunday-school teachers, ministers. III.
THOSE READY TO BE REAPED. 1. Those who feel too bad to be saved. You are
ripe because you feel that. Christ came to save the worst. 2. The religiously
educated. (7. De Witt Talmage.) Harvest :—I. The nrpentne principle of the
Divine government is at work—1. In the inorganic realm. Our system is travel-
ling to a crisis. 2. In the vegetable realm. The oak moves from century to century
from an acorn to a point when its perfection is reached. 3. In the human realm,
(1) In the body. From infancy to old age our bodies are ripening for the grave.
(2) In the character, which is ripening for bliss or woe. (3) In institutions, which,
whether good or evil, reach their culmination. (4) Individuals are ripening. (5)
Nations. (6) The world—the harvest is the end of the world. II. The compen.


890 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cHap. tv.


a


_


saTory principle in the Divine government. This principle rewards the labourer—
1. According to the kind of his work. What was sown is reaped in species and
quality. The same holds good in morals. 2. According to the amount. “ He that
soweth sparingly shall reap sparingly.” There are degrees in glory which are
regulated according to degrees in goodness. III. The co-oPERATIVE principle. In
the harvest-field you have the result of a vast combination of agencies, animate and
inanimate, human and Divine. The harvest demonstrates that man is a co-worker
with God. Paul plants, &e. (D. Thomas, D.D.) The fields white to harvest :—
I, WE MUST LOOK AT THE ASPECT OF THE FIELDS. 1. That in most places there
is evidently a preparation in the minds of both Pagans and Mohammedans
for receiving the servants of Christ. 2. What are the peculiar advantages
which pious and zealous Christians in Britain enjoy for extending the gospel. 3.
But the disposition among the heathen to receive the gospel, and the facilities which
we possess for diffusing it, would be insufficient, unless the activity of the spiritual
Church were awake to improve the occasion. Il. ENcouURAGEMENTS HELD OUT TO
THE REAPERS. 1. The important good, which the Christian missionary effects, is,
that he gathers fruit to life eternal. 2. The abundant reward which awaits him,
when the toil is finished, ‘‘ Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.” (1) This common
joy began when the holy apostles, having finished their labours, were taken to
receive their reward. (2) This joy has been increasing, as the several sowers and
reapers, in different ages of the New Testament Church, have been taken to their
eternal rest. (3) It will be completed when all the Church shall meet before the
throne; when the mystery of Christ shall be finished; when God shall have
accomplished the number of His elect, and have hastened His kingdom.
(Bp. Daniel Wilson.) Fields white for harvest :—Many Christians have a
large stock of reasons for not expecting many conversions. They are for
ever dwelling on the past or in the future, but never look for God’s arm being
made bare now. The common reason is, ‘There are yet four months, and
then cometh harvest. This is not the time or the man; we must wait”; and
in the meantime death doth not cease to slay, and multitudes are perishing for lack
of knowledge. Patience is a virtue, but sometimes decision is a greater one. Four
months !—have there not been many months? That was the cry in the days of
our forefathers, in the days of our fathers, and it is four months still. Oh, to
learn the Saviour’s words, ‘‘ The fields are white already’?! Expect a present
blessing. I. Stens or HaRvEsT. 1. The Saviour had preached a sermon, and the
whole of His congregation had been converted. He had only one hearer, it is true.
But the conversion of one soul is a sign that God is going to convert others. The
cholera is raging. A physician has been studying the disease. Many methods have
failed. At last he hits upon the drug which cures one. ‘ Now,” he says, “I shall
have a harvest of men, for what cures one will cure all.’”” When Napoleon landed
from Elba one man offéred to serve the emperor. ‘‘ Here,” said Napoleon, ‘is one
recruit at least.”” If some have found the Saviour, why not more? 2. This one
was at that moment engaged in making more. It was Christ’s strategy to bless the
men of Samaria through this woman. When this country was asleep half a dozen
young men at Oxford felt the inspiration of God, and soon the same inspiration was
felt from one end of the country to the other. There is not a plant that grows by
the hedge side that does not scatter all adown the bank seeds of succeeding genera-
tions. 3. The others were coming to hear. When the fish get round the net surely
some will be taken. 4. The persons who were coming to hear were those who
seemed least likely to listen. When the giddy multitude crowd together to listen to
the gospel it is a good sign of the coming harvest. 5. Recollect the men who have
laboured before us. Has all this labour been for nothing? The days that are past
have been preparing the population of England. 6. It is a sign of good when there
is a stir among the people. The worst thing is stagnation. When people are not
thoughtful about other things it is seldom you can get them to be thoughtful about
religion. A farm overgrown with thistles is better than a barren one. 7. Old
priestcrafts do not now hinder men from hearing the gospel. We can get at the
people. If Luther, Bunyan, Baxter, and Alleine could have lived now, how they
would have rejoiced! II. Harvest wants. 1. Many labourers. There is no
machine that can do this work of soul-reaping. 2. Sharp sickles; such cutting
truths as justification by faith, the total ruin of mankind, the Cross, the energy of
the Holy Ghost. 38. Close binders. Those who cannot use the sickle can gather
up the wheat. Invite people to the house of God. 4. Some to take the sheaves
home, and assist to bring people into the Church. 5. Others to bring refreshment


omens smell


a) aT


crap. t¥.] St. JOHN. 391


to the reapers. Encourage them. III. Tue rears or narvest. The husbandman
sometimes fears that—1. Through lack of labourers his harvest may be damaged.
After a certain time the wheat spears out, and birds will feast upon it. Every hour
that men are not saved there are capacities of usefulness that are falling out, and
Satan is running away with them. 2. Some wheat may remain unreaped, and so
be destroyed. If the Christian does not work, there are others who will. 3.
Whether we gather in the harvest or not, there is a reaper whc is silently gathering
it every hour—Death. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Fields white already unto harvest :—
I. THE LIKENESS BETWEEN NATURAL AND SPIRITUAL HUSBANDRY. 1. The first coming
of Christ was the seedtime, and His second will be the harvest. From the seed
which was then dropped will spring ripened fruit. 2. Generally the seed is the
Word, and the sowers are the ministers of the gospel. 3. In all cases sowing is a
means to an end. No man ever cast seed into the ground for the sake of the
sowing. Even when we have preached well our end is not attained. 4. The only
aim that will animate a ministry is to save souls from death. 5. When anxious
inquirers come and close with Christ the joy is the joy of harvest. Il. Tur
DISSIMILARITY. Whereas in nature an uniform period intervenes between sowing and
reaping, in grace the fruits may be gathered at any season or length of time—
longer or shorter. 1. Do not wait four months, for the harvest may come at an
earlier period. The seed sown to-day may be ripe to-night, as at Jacob’s well and
on the day of Pentecost. Ministers, therefore, should look for immediate results.
2. Do not despond although four months, four or forty years, should pass. If the
cultivator of grain does not see his harvest whitening in four months, he abandons
hope. Not so the Christian seed-sower. To know that some of the seed ripens
early keeps his hopes active from the first ; and to know that some of it ripens late
prevents his hopes from sinking even to the last. (W. Arnot, D.D.) _ One soweth,
and another reapeth.—The reaper and the wages :—A double reward is promised
the garnerer of souls. It is a reward which flows back to the garnerers, and itis a
reward which flows out to the souls garnered. 1. He that reapeth receiveth wages;
something comes to him. (1) He has the wage of being linked into the highest
fellowship. (2) He makes the best possible investment of his toil. (3) He has
the wage of the supremest joy. (4) He has the wage of richer reward in heaven.
2. The garnerer of souls has wage also toward others; He gathereth fruit until
life eternal. 3. Consider the place where the reaper is to reap. ‘Lift up your
eyes and look ’’—you need not travel far to find a place for reaping. Your own
local church, your own special Sunday-schools, your own neighbourhood—put in at
once your sickle there. (W. Hoyt, D.D.) Sowing and reaping :—In Palestine
neither all the sowing nor all the reaping of the fields is done at one and the same
season. As soon as one crop is out of the ground another is prepared for.
Ploughing and sowing follow close upon reaping and gleaning. Different crops
require different lengths of time for their maturing; and, as a consequence, the
planting for one crop will sometimes be going on while another crop near it
is not yet ready for the harvest. As soon as the fields are cleared, in the
midsummer or in the early autumn, the ground is ploughed, and the winter
wheat or some other grain is sowed, in advance of the rainy season. Again,
between the early and the latter rains of the springtime, there will be plough-
ing, and the sowing of barley. or oats or lentils for a later crop. In the
second week in April I saw on the Plain of the Cornfields, not far from Jacob’s
well, the grain already well ripened toward the harvest, while just southward
of that region, and again, two days later, just northward of it, I saw ploughing
and planting going on; so that I might have been in doubt, from my own obser
vations, whether that were the time of seed-sowing or of harvest; and so it is
likely to have beén in the days of Jesus. Whether this were the springtime or
the early winter, whether it were at noonday or at eventide, are points which have
been much discussed in connettion with the gospel narration of the visit of Jesus.
It would seem most natural, from the story as it stands, to suppose that the season
was the springtime, and that the hour was noonday ; but, however that may be, it
is obvious that there were within the eye-sweep of Jesus and His disciples
the signs of seed-sowing on the one hand and of ripening harvest on the other ;
and that it was by calling attention to these two processes, of nature in so close
proximity of time and space that Jesus taught the lesson His disciples were shown
that even while seed-sowing for one crop was going on in the natural world
there might be also a making ready for an ingathering of former crops; so that
sowing and reaping should go on together. Then came our Lord’s application of


+ r i ae) s


392 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cmap. Iv.
this fact in nature’s sphere. (H. C. Trumbull, D.D.) Sowing and reaping :—
The proverb, “One soweth, and another reapeth,” as generally used, suggests that
the rewards of labour often fall into hands that have not earned them. The profits
of an invention are frequently made by others than the inventor. In diplomacy, as
Leicester says, “The hap of some is that all they do is nothing, and others that
do nothing have all the thanks.” Job could wish himself nothing worse than ‘‘ Let
me sow, and let another eat.” But Christ widens our view; He corrects the
selfishness of the individual by fixing his thoughts on humanity, and brings the
rewards of eternity to counterbalance the apparent anomalies of time. Consider—
I. OvR RELATION TO THE Past. Every man is born into an inheritance which he had
no hand in earning. This distinguishes him from the brute. Instinct makes no
progress, Through long millenniums the earth was preparing for man. One species
of vegetation after another came and left its deposit. One kind of animals after
another left their bones to petrify. Thus stratum after stratum arose. 1. Thus
the child of to-day is richer than our own childhood. Take the matter of school-
books. The discoveries of one age are confined to the few; in the next they are
the creed of the learned; in the third they become the elementary principles of
education. What strides have been made in science since Galileo, Newton, and
Watt! No child can begin where his father began. 2. The same holds good in
religious matters. (1) The Church is richer to-day than she was a hundred years
ago by the whole missionary enterprise, by which she has added a new volume
to Christian evidences, acquired new property in noble lives, raised the standard
of home piety and augmented her joy. (2) The same is true in hymnology and
(3) in Christian literature. All this has come about largely without our own
exertions. No man is self-made: he is what he is because of others’ labours. Il.
OuR DUTY To THE PRESENT. Not to rest in our inherited advantages, but to so
add to them as to leave a richer inheritance. The danger of the youth to whom a
large fortune has been left—1. In the direction of indolence or prodigality. It is
a common remark that the children of wealthy men often come to grief. 2. In
the direction of conservatism. The young heir is apt to think that he must
be simply a repetition of his father. The same perils attend us in receiving
the heritage of the past. We must, therefore, set ourselves to such work as
is in harmony with our generation. 1. In science Franklin went a certain length
in the investigation of electricity ; but his successors did not rest there. Hence we
have through Henry, Morse, Wheatstone, Bell, and Edison, the telephone. 2. The
literature of the present is not a reproduction of the past, but an outgrowth. 3. The
theology and Church life of to-day are distinctive of to-day. Each age has to meet
its own problems, and without drifting from central truths must solve them in its
own way. Thus it happens that the leaders of a former generation fail to secure a
hearing in the next. III. Our soy IN THE FUTURE. Jesus takes in eternity and
gives all workers alike a share in the reward—the reaper for his reaping, the sower
for his ploughing. Conclusion: 1. How much there is in this to cheer the despond-
ing labourer, Livingstone seemingly accomplished little in missioning Africa, but
he stimulated others to evangelize. Though a man bring only one soul to Christ,
he has an interest in all the successes of that soul. 2, This truth is well calculated
to keep us humble. The credit is due to God. He gives the increase. (W. M.
Taylor, D.D.) One soweth, and another reapeth:—I. How THIS PROVERB WAS
VERIFIED IN THE CASE OF THE APOSTLES. The general view is that they went into a
moral wilderness, and that planting and sowing were simultaneous. This was not
the case. 1. As regards the Jews, the prophets, &c., John and our Lord had sown
the seed. The harvest at Pentecost was the result of centuries of seed-sowing, and
in preaching Peter was merely putting in the sickle. 2. As regards the heathen
the seed had been sown—(1) By the teaching of nature and conscience. (2) By
priests and prophets such as Melchizedek, Jethro, Job, Balaam, by whom the tradi-
tion of a purer age had been preserved, (3) By the dissemination of truth through
the dispersion of the Jews. 3. Thus the fields were now white unto harvest, and the
apostles reaped where others had sown. II. How rr may BE CONTINUALLY VERIFIED
AMONGST OURSELVES. 1, Sudden conversions produced by preacher or friend are
only the outcome, it may be, of a long series of impressions. 2. An apparently
unfruitful ministry may be a preparation for a rich harvest under some successor.
III. THE GRACIOUS ASSURANCE THAT BOTH SOWER AND REAPER SHALL REJOICE TOGETHER,
It may make a difference to a man as far as his present comfort is concerned
whether he be a sower or a reaper, but none as far as his future is concerned. If he
has done his work faithfully he shall have his reward. Moses and the prophets and


cHapP, Iv.] ST. JOHN. 893


the Gentile teachers will rejoice with apostles and Christian missionaries; apparently
unsuccessful parents and missionaries with those who have spoken effectively.
Lesson: Be not weary in well-doing—parents, teachers, preachers—you may see
no fruit, but you are sowing good seed. (H. Melvill, B.D.) Sowing the gospel
seed :—I. THE sowERS—men, not angels, 1. This seems strange when we consider
the grandeur and breadth of the gospel. Who is equal to summarizing the truths
of the gospel, much less to expounding them? 2, Yet men have ever been entrusted
with the gospel—Adam, Noah, Abraham, Melchizedek. Ona human body was
placed the priestly robe, and he who entered the Holy of Holies was a man. When
another order of teachers arose neither Gabriel nor Michael were summoned, but
Samuel, Elijah, and Isaiah. And when Christ came He entrusted the gospel not
to the heavenly host, but to Galilean fishermen. 3. There is a fitness, however, in
this. The fields are those of earth, the harvest is of men, therefore the sowers and
reapers must be not angelic, but human. Knowing their weakness and fallibility,
ministers may well shrink; but if they forsake the plough angels will not direct it along
the furrow. And with all their fallibility they being men can weep with men’s sorrows
and partake of their joys, which angels cannot. The appeal of an angel would be
more powerful, that of man more pathetic. No angel could speak of human
sympathies and call to remembrance the pathos of a mother’s prayers. Il. Tue
MAGNITUDE OF THEIR worEK. 1. The seed—the Word of God. 2. The field. (1) The
apathetic. (2) The infidel. (3) The depraved, 3. The personal féebleness of the
instruments, II, THE GREATNESS OF THEIR REWARD. 1. God-given help to do what
they have todo. 2. The sympathy of those who are benefited by their labours.
3. The present benediction of the great Master. 4. Eternity of blessedness in
heaven. (R. B. East,M.D.) Spiritual harvest:—I. THE SALVATION OF SINNERS I8
THE WILL of GoD AND THE DELIGHT or His Son Jesus Curist. This is manifest
from—1. The provision He has made for effecting it. 2. The place it has borne in
the eternal counsels. 3. The preparation of infinite wisdom and almighty power in
overruling the affairs of the world. 4. The succession of great men inspired to fore-
announce it. 5. The manner in which it was carried into execution by the incarna-
tion and cross of Christ. II. THoueH THE goSPEL IS AT ALL TIMES NECESSARY FOR
SALVATION, CERTAIN PERIODS ARE PECULIARLY FAVOURABLE TO IT. 1, Always necessary
because—(1) It is the means appointed by Christ. (2) Because of its proved fitness.
3) Because God is to have all the glory. 2. Sometimes specially seasonable.
ty As here. The providence of God had over-ruled the envy of the Jews to the
iving of the Saviour into Galilee and His going to Galilee to lead Him through
Samaria; when He meets with the woman, who, saved herself, summons _ her
fellow citizens to Christ. (2) As in the case of modern missions. What doors have
been opened by the abolition of slavery, the progress of commerce, &c. II]. WHEN
SUCH A PERIOD ARRIVES CHRISTIANS ARE CALLED UPON TO EMBRACE IT AS A HARVEST
wimg. Such a season—1. Must be immediately embraced. Its duties cannot be
put off to a more convenient season. It is now or never. Men are crying for the
words of life. If we refuse, the curse of Meroz will be ours. 2. Must be diligently
pursued ; from various considerations. (1) The shortness of the season. (2) The
precariousness of the weather. (3) The ripeness of the crops. Idleness, amuse-
ments, in harvest time! 3. Should be joyfully performed. Harvesting 1s hard
work, but there is much pleasure in it, and itis generally performed with cheerful-
ness. IV. Bor sUccESS AND REWARD WILL CROWN THE FAITHFUL LABOURER, 1. One
of the greatest stimulants to labour is the probability of success, but here success is
certain. 2. The almighty influence of the Holy Spirit is behind it. 3. It is
assured by the pledged word of the Lord of the harvest. (J. Gwyther, B.A.)
The harvest of heathen souls :—I. THE PRINCIPLE OF MISSIONARY EFFORT IMPLIED.
1. This principle combines two apparent opposites: it necessitates the agency of
man and preserves the supremacy of God. By the one it precludes man from
yielding to the bent of his natural indolence and attaining nothing; by the other it
annihilates the unseemly arrogance which would vaunt the arm of flesh as though
it could accomplish everything. 2. It furnishes a reply to scepticism which asks,
‘¢Why,if God bea perfect agent, does He need man; and why, if man be an imperfect
agent, does God employ him?” Lift up your eyes! Though the husbandman has
to sow, on God depends the fruitful seasons. Man works for God, God works by
man. It is for us to employ, it is for Him to bless the means. II. Toe purty
ENJOINED. In the natural world we do not expect a harvest without labour, nor
without God’s blessing. So Paul must plant and Apollos water, but God giveth the
increase. Duty is irrespective of results. III. THe BENEFIT TO BE CONFERRED


aay


mm
894 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Iv.


Labourers do not depend for their hire on the upspringing of the seed, nor for its
quantity or quality. Under all circumstances he is worthy of his hire. But in
spiritual husbandry He who employs the sowers can also command the elemental
influences. He who engages the reapers can ensure the crop, He therefore who
sows not only receives present wages, but ‘‘ gathereth fruit,” &c. (T. Dale, M.A.)
Missions :—I. Tur DUTY OF ALL WHO POSSESS THE PRECIOUS SEED TO sowiT. 1. Our
obligation to sow must be in proportion to our estimate of the value of the seed.
2. This obligation affects the Church collectively and individually. (1) It is the
execution of a trust with which all Christians are put in charge. (2) It is the
acceptance of a benefit to which all are permitted to aspire. 3. It is the accredited
indispensable token of union with Christ and of membership in His Church.
Il. THe CERTAINTY THAT THEY WHO sow SHALL REAP, 1. ‘The liberal soul shall be
enriched.” ‘He that watereth others shall himself be watered.’’ The exercise of
grace under one aspect leads to the communication of grace under another. 2. The
preciousness of the future reward may be gathered from the excellence of the
present. 3. Both are sure. They may be long delayed, but the seed shall spring
fresh and vigorous even as Jesus rose triumphant from the grave. III. Over wHat
FIELD THE SEED IS TO BE SCATTERED. “ The field is the world.” 1. In its widest
extent. 2. In its varieties of guilt, 3. In its diversities of promise and prospect.
IV. WHAT HARVEST WE MAY HOPE TO SOW FOR OTHERS, AND WHAT WE MAY CALCULATE ON
REAPING FOR OURSELVES. 1, Remember the promise. 2. Remember its fulfilment.
(1) In England under previous missions. (2) Abroad under existing missions.
V. THE MANNER IN WHICH WE CAN PROFITABLY PERFORM THE DUTY AND EFFECTUALLY
ENSURE THE BENEFIT. Let each do what he can, where he can. 1. Prayerfully.
2. Earnestly. 3. Patiently. 4. Believingly. (Zbid.) The passion for immediate
results :—Men read what the Missionary Herald tells them of the progress of
the gospel among the heathen ; and there are those that take out their pencils and
say: ‘The whole missionary world numbers so many millions, and there have been
about so many hundred people converted by the influence of this amount of capital.
That is about ten thousand dollars for one soul. It is rather dear work, ain’t it?”
There are such moral arithmeticians that sum up the fruit of moral seed-sowing
under arithmetical proportions. But the whole world has been stirred up by the
mission cause. I am what I am because Henry Obookiah, from the Sandwich
Islands, was taught at the Cornwall School in Connecticut, and in my boyhood
came down to my father’s house, and produced an impression on me which has
undulated, and propagated, and gone on influencing me. Some of the enthusiasm
which I have felt for moral conditions came to me from seeing him. Who can tell
what the retroaction of foreign missions is? Who can tell what benefit may be
received here from our Western missions? Who can tell what is the effect of send-
ing our abundance to the waste places of our own land, and to the torrid and frigid
zones? It stirs up that which is not reportable. Ten thousand more leaves are
born every year than the botanist ever sees. Ten thousand times more storms blow
on every sea than are ever registered on charts or log-books. (H. Ward Beecher.)
Reaping :—Once a vessel bound to a distant part of the world happened to be
detained by contrary winds at the Isle of Wight. A minister who was on board went
on shore to preach. His text was “‘ Be clothed with humility.” Among his hearers
was a thoughtless girl, who had come to display her finery rather than to be
instructed. The sermon was the means of her conversion. Her name
was Elizabeth Wallbridge, the celebrated ‘ Dairyman’s Daughter,” whose
interesting history by Legh Richmond has been the means amongst nearly
all peoples of bringing thousands to Christ. (Family Churchman.) Receiving
wages :—What wages? Christ had already told them that His own wages were
to do the will of God, and to finish His work. Did they want better? They
would gather in fruit—the fruit of all His work and travail, of all God’s revelations
of Himself from age to age, of all the toil of patriarchs, kings, prophets. These had
laboured—they were entering into their labours. They were come in at the end of a
period when all things were hastening totheir consummation, They would have the
reward which all these men had longed for; the reward of seeing God’s full revela-
tion of Himself, of opening the spring of eternal life, of which all might drink
together. The divisions of time had nothing to do with an eternal blessing. The
sower and reaper would rejoice together. Why might not Jacob, who had given
the well, and the newest Samaritan convert who drank of it, share in those
pleasures which are at the right hand of Him who is, and was, and ia to come?
(i. D. Maurice, M.A.) Large results from humble beginnings :—A small bit of


oe aN


eS he


Bh Wi


CHAP. IV. ST. JOHN. 395


rock feels something or other tickling it behind; and through a seam, at last, there
trickle cut some drops of water, as if the rock itself were shedding tears; and the
drops increase; and a rill is formed; and it runs quietly, finding its way, down the
declivity. Soon another little rill is met on the road, and they join forces; and a
little further down a third is added ; and then a fourth, and then a fifth, and so on,
till by-and-by they make a plunge through the gorge with spray and thunder; and
out comes below the stream, voluble and violent ; and down in the meadows it
quiets itself, and runs between flowery banks, until a mill catches it and makes it
work for its way; and passing through industries it still deepens ; other streams
break into it here and there towards its mouth; and there the city dwells upon, and
navies ride upon it; and in its pride of strength and depth and width and accom-
plishments, it says, ‘Who but I?” But that great voluminous river is itself the
child of those drops, those trickling rills, those mountain springs. If it had not
been for them it would not have existed nor have been nourished. We need not
despise, therefore, in any direction, small things. Who can tell what that poor
old nurse wrought who cared for the orphan child of her mistress that was gone,
crooning songs to the child, telling her fairy stories, and making an empyrean
above her? Setting loose in that little child all the germs of poetry, she fashioned
its mind; and her humble, unconscious work will never be washed out; nor will
the colour be taken from it; it will go on and be part and parcel of the child, if it
lives to be fifty or a hundred years old. When the child has come to mature
womanhood they will say: ‘‘ Well, were you not brought up in your babyhood by
that old nurse?” ‘Yes; she was a nice old creature,” and that is all you say
about it; but you are very largely what you are from what she did for you, If the
throbbing of her heart sets yours to throbbing more, if the outlook of her imagina-
tion threw open the windows of yours, she, I might almost say, was your creator ;
and though she was so humble and powerless, without learning or genius, never-
theless you were so plastic that her influence moulded you. (H. Ward Beecher.)
The penalties of neglect :—To what will the wilful neglect. of seed-time on the part
of the whole community be equivalent but to an act of national suicide? If, again,
a distant colony were dependent on the surplus produce of the land that sent it
forth, and yet enough were purposely sown only for home eonsumption, what
would such conduct be but an act of national fratricide? It would be to exhibit
the maliciousness of Cain, and to bring the curse of a brother’s blood upon that
guilty nation. Like the first—like an act of national suicide—would be the crime
of the Church, which is bound to ‘‘love the Lord her God with all her heart,” did
she not take care to provide sufficient ministration of God’s Word throughout the
circumference of her immediate domestic responsibility ; and, like the second—
like an act of national fratricide—would her crime be, if, forgetful of the second
principle of action, ‘‘thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,” she made no
proportionate effort and application to extend similar ministrations in those
her missionary stations, which are her colonies, planted in heathen lands, and all
around which there is a famine and a perishing, not for want of the natural
sustenance, but of ‘the bread that cometh down from heaven,” and which alone
“giveth life unto the world.” (7. Dale, M.A.) Herein is that saying true.—
The frequent use of proverbial sayings in the New Testament deserves notice. It
shows the value of proverbs, and the importance of teaching them to children and
young people. A pointed proverb is often remembered when a long moral lesson
is forgotten. (Bp. Ryle.) Sowing and reaping :—A ragged school teacher was
telling a friend in Philadelphia that he was afraid he would have to discontinue
the school, as he had seen no fruit whatsoever of his labours. At the moment
a little ragged boy came up and asked him if he would come and see his
brother who was very ill. He went with the boy into one of the lowest streets
in the city. On entering the room he was struck with the supreme misery of it.
Going up to the suffering boy, the teacher said, ‘‘My poor boy, what can I do for
you? Shall I get youa doctor?” ‘Oh, no, captain,’’ said the boy, ‘but tell me,
tell me, did you say that Jesus died for everybody, that He gave Himself for me? 2
‘Yes, I did.” ‘And that He will receive any one who comes to Him?” “ Yes,
indeed I did, dear boy.” ‘ Well, I know that since He gave Himself for me, that
He will receive me.” And then the boy dropped back on his bundle of rags—dead,
Sowing and reaping:—From the labours of ministers that are dead and gone
much good fruit may be reaped by the people that survive them, and by the
ministers that succeed them. John the Baptist and those that assisted him had
laboured, and the disciples of Christ entered into their labours. (Matthew Henry.)


396 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP.1v.


pe a
Sowing and reaping—missions :—A seaman, on returning home to Scotland after a
cruise in the Pacific, was asked: ‘‘Do you think the missionaries have done any
good in the South Sea Islands?” ‘TI will tell you a fact which speaks for itself,”
said the sailor, ‘ Last year I was wrecked on one of those islands, where I knew
that, eight years before, a ship was wrecked and the crew murdered; and you may
judge how I felt at the prospect before me—if not dashed to pieces on the rocks, to
survive for only a more cruel death. When day broke we saw a number of canoes
pulling for our ship, and were prepared for the worst. Think of our joy and
wonder when we saw the natives in English dress, and heard some of them speak in }
the English language. On that very island the next Sunday we heard the gospel
preached. I do not know what you think of missions, but I know what I do.”
Sowing and reaping :—Mr. M—— was for many years a pious and indefatigable
Sunday-school teacher. It pleased God to call him to suffer severe affliction and
to an early death. During his long affliction,though it was painful even to see him
walk, he went to his class; nor would he resign as long as he could possibly reach
the school. ‘It was my happiness,” says a writer in the Teacher's. Magazine,
‘¢to visit him during his trying illness, and the calmness of his mind under afilic-
tion, and his triumphant departure, I never shall forget; nor shall I cease to
remember another circumstance. Turning to me, and with something like
despondency, he said, ‘Well, I believe I never was useful as a Sunday-school
teacher.’ Some short time after his death, I visited a Sunday School in a small
town some distance from that in which Mr. M had lived. I soon recognized
among the teachers one who had been a Sunday scholar; I conversed with him,
and found he was a professor of religion, and a member of a Christian Church in
that town. I congratulated him upon his employment, and inquired by what
means he had been led to love the Lord Jesus Christ. He replied, ‘ The advice
which my teacher again and again gave me, led me to reflection and to prayer, and
I hope was the means of leading me to Christ.” ‘And who was that teacher?’
He replied, ‘Mr. M——.’ Yes, that same dear friend who, upon a dying bed,
said he believed he had never been useful as a Sunday-school teacher.” (New
Cyclopedia.) Sowing and reaping—tracts:—A clergyman some time since,
as he was riding, passed some young females near a school-house, and dropped
from his carriage two tracts, which he had previously marked. Some time
afterwards he was conversing with a young woman with reference to her
spiritual state, and found her rejoicing in the hope of pardoned sin. He
inquired the history of her religious feelings, and she traced them to a tract
dropped by a traveller, which was manifestly one of the two above referred to.
He was afterwards called to visit another young woman on a sick-bed, whose mind
was calm and composed in view of death, which the event proved was near at hand.
She traced her first serious impressions to the circumstance of two tracts being
dropped by a traveller, one of which, she said, was taken up by her cousin, and the
other by herself; ‘‘ and now,” said she, ‘‘ we are hoping both in Christ.” She had
retained the tract as a precious treasure, and, putting her hand under her pillow,
showed it to the clergyman, who immediately recognized the marks he had written
upon it, (New Cyclopedia.) Other men laboured, and ye are entered into their
labours.—I, TRACE THE STREAM OF PROVIDENTIAL EVENTS FROM THE BEGINNING sO
FAR AS THEY BEAR ON THE SPIRITUAL CULTURE OF THE WORLD. The fall, the first
promise, animal sacrifice, Enoch, the deluge, the colonization of the world through
the confusion of tongues, the call of Abraham, and the preparation of the Jews in
Egypt for their inheritance, idolatry exposed and punished by the plagues, the
establishment and mission of the Jewish nation, the captivity, restoration and
dispersion, the function of Persia, Greece, and Rome, the fulness of time, the papal
apostacy, Luther, the Puritans, Methodism, missions, Sunday Schools, Bible Society
education, II, Noricr somm OF THOSE EXISTING EVENTS WHICH HARMONIZE WITH
THOSE OF PAST TIMES, AND ARE CONNECTED WITH THE HAPPINESS OF MANKIND, 1.
Consider what is doing within the Church. It has awakened out of sleep. All
denominations have their missionary society. All are talking about the coming
of Christ. 2. Consider what is doing without the boundaries of the Church
Many, without thinking or meaning it, are contributing to the spread of the
knowledge of Christ. (1) Think on the increase of knowledge—Bacon, Newton
and their successors. (2) The rapid progress of colonization. (3) The ex:
tension of the British empire. Why has God given us India? Not to add a
new gem to the crown of our monarch, nor to give us an increase of
power, not to augment our luxuries, but to extend the gospel. III. Starz ray


CHAP. Iv.] ST. JOHN. 397
DUTIES WHICH THE YOUNG OWE TO THIS GREAT CAUSE, AND THE WAY IN WHICH THEY
MAY FURTHER IT. 1. You may do this by your own personal religion. Give your-
selves first to the Lord, then to His Church. 2. Maintain a deep conviction of the
importance of man’s spiritual interests, and of the necessity of religion to promote
them. Knowledge will not save the world, only Christ can do that. 3. Maintain
right views of the importance of truth in the conversion of the world. The
divinity of Christ, His atonement, regeneration by the Holy Ghost. 4. Let all
your efforts be carried on in the spirit of religion. (1) Beware of the secular spirit
in religion. (2) Do everything in a spirit of prayer. Resolutions, sermons,
speeches are vain without this. IV. PRESENT SOME MOTIVES TO URGE THE YOUNG TO
DEVOTE THEMSELVES FULLY TO THIS cAUSE. 1. Think of the nature of the cause
itself. (1) Its first attribute is religion. It is to proclaim salvation to the sinner,
and immortality to those who have no prospect beyond the grave. (2) It is
intellectual. The heathen world is a vast wilderness of mind, (3) It is charac-
terized by compassion. (4) By comprehension. The missionary society is a Bible
society, a school society, a home missionary society, a mechanic’s institute, a peace
society, an anti-slavery society, a civilization society. 2. Think of the advantages
you possess. 3, Remember that it remains with you whether the missionary cause
shall be transmitted to posterity. (J. A. James.) Personal effort must be en-
couraged :—A little maid directed a great prince to Elisha, Our Saviour, by
instructing one poor woman, spread instruction to a whole town. Philip preached
the gospel to a single gentleman, in his chariot upon the road; and he not only
received it himself, but carried it into his own country and propagated it there.
This woman could say but little of Christ, but what she did say she spoke
feelingly. ‘‘He told me all that ever I did.’ Those are most likely to do
good that can tell what God has done for their souls. (Matthew Henry.)
Mutual dependence :—We enter upon life weak, unconscious infants, depending
eyery moment on other eyes to watch for us, and other hands to minister to us,
while we kindle in their hearts the most powerful emotions. But not less depen-
dent are we on our fellow-creatures for our continuance in life from the cradle to
the grave. There is not a thread of clothing which covers our body, not a luxury
that is placed on our tzble, not an article which supplies the means of labour, not
one thing which is required of us as civilized beings, but involves the labours of
others on our behalf; while by the same law we cannot but contribute to their well-
being. The cotton which the artizan weaves or wears has been cultivated by
brothers beneath a tropical sun and possibly beneath a tyrant’s lash. The tea he
drinks has been gathered for him by brothers in distant China. A mother writes a
letter to her son in some distant spot in India, and conveys it in silence to the post-
office, perhaps thinking only when she may receive areply. But how much is done
before that letter reaches its destination! The hands of unknown brethren will
receive and transmit it; rapid trains will convey it over leagues of railways ;
splendid steamships will sail with it. It is watched day and night, through calm
and hurricane; and precious lives are risked to keep it in security until, in safety,
after months of travel, it is delivered from the mother’s hand into that of her boy.
(Family Churchman.) And many of the Samaritans of that city believed.— The
first female missionary :—I, HER PREVIOUS CHARACTER. 1, Of dissolute morals.
‘Antecedent wickedness no barrier to grace, given repentance and faith (Isa. i. 18,
lv. 7-9; Micah vii. 18; Matt. xii. 31; 1 John i. 7-9). Examples: Manasseh (2
Kings xxxi. 16 ; 2 Chron, xxxiii. 12-15); Saul of Tarsus (Acts ix. 1-18); Philippian
jailer (Acts: xvi. 34), and no disqualification for after service. 2. Of lively under-
standing. The success of the gospel not dependent on the intelligence of its
preachers, but high mental endowments no misfortune, Paul and Luke have their
place as well as Andrew and Peter: 3. Of religious inclinations. Divine grace
often keeps alive in souls seemingly going downwards to perdition—a spark of good-
ness that only waits the Spirit’s breath to fan it into flame. II. Her INSPIRING
morive. 1. Not mere excitement. Her love and novelty an unsatisfactory hypo-
thesis, since she grounds her invitation on a moral basis (ver. 29). 2. Not conscious
peace. She was scarcely yet rejoicing in-the assurance of salvation. But—3.
Simple faith. She believed Christ to be the Messiah. It was impossible, therefore,
for her to be silent. She acted like David (Psa. lxvi. 16, cxvi. 10), the apostles
(Acts iv. 20), Paul (2 Cor. iv. 13), the leper (Mark i. 45), III. Her cLowine zEan
(ver. 28). 1, The trivial action. . 2. The important revelation, (1) An intention
to return, (2) The forgetfulness of her errand in her eagerness to proclaim her
new-found joy (ver. 34). (3) The importance she attached to one who could answer


same


| "pie


398 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. Vv


all questions and satisfy all aspirations (Matt. xiii. 44-46). (4) The estimate in which
she held Divine things in comparison with earthly. (5) The desire she felt that
others should hear the good news. IV. Hex ciapsome messaGE (ver. 29). 1. The
startling announcement. The language of exaggeration contained a truth. Christ
had not only shown His acquaintance with details of personal history, as in the
case of Nathanael (chap. i. 48), and with the quality of her spirit, as with Peter’s
(chap. i. 42), but had discovered her to herself so as to enable her to realize her
guiltiness before God (cf. Luke v. 8), and her need of that living water of which she
afterwards drank, 2. The joyous question. An interrogation not of doubt, but of
faith. She spoke as if she believed not for joy (Luke xxiv. 41). Her adroitness is
worthy of all imitation. 3. The eager invitation. Compare Christ’s address to
Andrew and John (chap. i. 39 ; cf. Psa. xxxiv. 8; John vii. 17). V. Her wonDERFUI
success (vers. 30, 39, 41). 1. The extent of it. (1) She produced a commotion in
the city—as the gospel usually does in strange places (Acts viii. 8, xili. 44, xvii. 5).
(2) She enkindled faith in the hearts of many citizens. 2. The reason of it. (1)
A persuasion of the woman’s sincerity and accuracy guaranteed by her humiliating
confession, (2) A feeling of the self-evidencing power of the truth even when
repeated at second-hand (2 Cor. iv.2; 1 Thess. i. 5, ii. 18). Lessons: 1, The duty
of those who know the truth to publish it (chap. xvii. 18, xx. 21; Matt. v. 16, x. 8;
Acts v. 20; Rom. x. 14,15). 2. The place and power of female agency in the
Church, e.g., Mary (Luke i. 26-38), Elizabeth (Luke i. 6), Anna (Luke ii. 37),
Dorcas (Acts ix. 36), Lydia (Acts xvi. 14), Priscilla (Acts xviii. 26), &. 3. The
adaptation of the gospel to the highest needs of man (Isa. lii. 7; Ezek. xlvii. 8;
Luke i. 78, 79; John viii. 32, xii. 50; Rom. i, 16). 4. The certainty that all
nations will yet be obedient unto the faith (Psa. ii. 8, xxii. 8; Isa. xi. 9; Dan. ii.
35; Matt. xxviii, 18; Rom. i. 5; Phil. ii, 11; Rev. xi. 15). (7. Whitelaw, D.D.)
Faith :—I. In rvs nature. 1. Testimony. (1) Credit or assent (ver. 39; 1 Cor.
xi. 18). Hearsay faith: that of a child who accepts, on the word of his teacher,
facts about Egypt, Palestine, &c., or as a child receives at his mother’s knees what
she says about God, and Jesus, and heaven. (2) Confidence and trust (ver. 40).
This differs from assent in that it leads men to act. In this sense all men live by
faith. (3) The Samaritans’ first faith. What a contrast between them and the
Jews! They received Him on the word of a woman when they saw the change
wrought in her. She was a living epistle. (4) Faith in the testimony of God
(chap. i. 33). 2. Conviction (ver. 41). Their faith advanced beyond trust in the
woman’s word. 3. Experience. ‘‘Know.” II. In rts opsects. 1. The word of
Christ (see vers. 47-53). 2. The promise of God (Matt. viii. 7). Faith in the
promises makes the future present, and the heirship possession. 3. The work of
Christ (ver. 42). 4. The Person of Christ. III. In rvs resuurs. 1. Its effects on
this occasion. (1) In the woman. She showed it by proclaiming Christ. (2) In
the Samaritans. They came to Christ, confessed Him, invited Him to tarry with
them, believed His word, and knew Him to be the Saviour. 2. How it grew: by
stages. 3. Its issues (see Acts vill. 6-25). (J. Gill.) Testimony and experience :—
I. HUMAN TESTIMONY IS FREQUENTLY MADE THE MEANS OF PRODUCING FAITH IN MEN’S
HEARTS. A large number owe their conversion to the personal and practical testimony
of others. To encourage others to testify note that this was that of—1. A woman.
A woman was the founder of the Church in Samaria; a woman was the first con-
vert in Europe. Let none of our sisters, therefore, refrain from giving their testi-
mony. 2. A sinful woman. Now the very life which had else been so just a cause
for silence became an impelling motive for witness-bearing. The more mischief we
have done, the more good we should try to do. The chief of sinners became the
chief of apostles. 8. Her testimony was personal, and that was the secret of her
power. She did not discuss or quote the opinion of others, as some preachers do.
If we wish to win souls there is notbing like telling them what the Lord hath done
for our souls. 4. Her testimony was delivered very earnestly. If our sermons are
icicles they are not likely to melt the ice in your minds. If in speaking to a man
you treat your conversion as commonplace, or aim at his conversion as though it
was a matter that didn’t much signify, you might as well be silent. 5. Notice the
judiciousness of her testimony. She did not say, ‘I am sure He is the Christ,”
If you positively assert a thing, it is very likely some one will deny it, although they
would draw the same inference if left alone. In fishing for souls you need as much
judgment as in angling. We must be wise to win souls. 6. Observe the result,
Many believed because of the woman’s speech. Her heart was in it, and therefore
God blessed her. 7. Your not believing in Jesus does not arise from want of testi.


Sh eee


Tee eh ee


a i


aye eee


CHAP, Iv.] ST. JOHN. 399


mony. You have had the best testimony—of a mother, a wife, a minister. II.
FaITH MAY ARISE APART FROM THE TESTIMONY OF MEN. When you have borne
testimony to a man, and he doesn’t yield to it, don’t despair of him. God has
other ways of working besides the testimony of His servants. 1. Some of the
Samaritans who had not received the testimony of the woman believed because of
His own word. We have God’s Word amongst us now, and it will work in hearts
quickened by the Spirit to remember what they learned in the Sabbath school. 2.
Sickness, poverty, and other ills are God’s servants, and sin itself has led men to
the Saviour. III. Persona EXPERIENCE ECLIPSES HUMAN TESTIMONY. 1, It is
far more convincing. 2. More essential, A doctor’s medicine may have over-
whelming testimonials, but that will do no good unless you take it. 3. More com-
plete. Testimony may tell you something about Christ, but not much compared
with what you may learn by going to Him yourself. The Queen of Sheba did not
learn half of what she saw. 4. More enduring. What you receive from others you
may give up, but only experience can make you faithful unto death. 5. More per-
suasive to others. This woman had first of all a personal experience herself.
In conclusion. It is a serious thing to reject the personal witness of others,
but it is false not to try for yourself whether Jesus is what He professes
to be. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The world’s redemptive faith:—I. Its oBgxEcT.
Christ. 1. He thoroughly knows all pertaining to human life (vers. 29,
39). 2. He is susceptible to human appeals (ver. 40). 3. He is the Restorer
of mankind (ver. 42). II. Irs erounps. 1. The initiatory faith. This is
built on testimony (ver. 39). In their initial faith they accepted two things—(1)
Omniscience as a proof of Divinity. (2) The credibility of the woman’s testimony.
This is the faith of all mere nominal Christians, 2. The consummating faith (ver.
41). This faith was—(1) Intuitive. (2) Direct (ver. 42). (3) Certain (ver. 42).
(D. Thomas, D.D.) Closing incidents :—1. THE TWOFOLD BASIS OF ALL RELIGIOUS
BELIEF. 1. The evidence of faith illustrated in the message of the woman, which
elicited an unhesitating assent to the trustworthiness of the tale. 2. The evidence
of sight obtained by personal converse. Of these two the first alone remains; but
it is well to remember that the faith of many was kindled not by the irresistible
testimony, but by that which we deem the less satisfactory. II. MmNn cRavE ror
THE FAITH WHICH COMES THROUGH sIGHT, like Thomas, forgetting Christ’s benedic-
tion on those who have not seen and have believed. That higher blessedness is
ours. III. Taz sUPERIOR EFFICACY OF PREACHING TO MIRACLE. In Judea Christ
did many miracles, yet no man received His testimony. Here He did no miracles,
He simply spoke the living word, and multitudes believed. It was the same at
Pentecost; and now while the temporary and miraculous agency has ceased the
truly efficacious still remains. ‘‘If they hear not Moses and the prophets,” &c.
IV. THE RECEPTION oF CHRIST’S WORDS LEADS TO THE WELCOME OF CHRIST'S PERSON (Ver.
40). It was a blessed and transient visit. Those who forfeited the opportunity of the
hearing Him forfeited it for ever. There are tarry days of Christ in the soul ; when
sickness, bereavement, trial brings Him within the Shechem gates. Have we made
the most of the season? V. THE TESTIMONY OF FAITH CONFIRMED BY EXPERIENCE.
This inward, subjective evidence is more convincing than that of the schools. It
is the soul testing the remedies of the Great Physician, VI. Taz rururs or THE Sama-
RITAN WOMAN AND Cuurca. Cornelius & Lapide tells us that the woman’s name was
Photina, that she journeyed to Carthage, proclaiming in that vast city salvation
through Christ ; and that after an honoured martyrdom her head was conveyed to
Rome, where it is still preserved as a holy relic in the Basilica of St. Paul’s: more-
over, that the 20th of March, the day of her death, is still held in reverence in the
Roman martyrology. As for the Church (see Acts viii. 14-25, ix. 31), founded
under circumstances of such interest. by this wayside fountain, it was not suffered
to languish or decay. A Christian bishop, Germanus, has his name appended
among the subscriptions to the councils of Ancyra and Nice, and so late as the
middle of the fifth century his successor signs in the Synod of Jerusalem. Alas,
however, subsequently to this, the old intolerance and hatred of the Samaritan
towards the Jew was transferred to the Christian. During the reign of the Em-
peror Zeno savage atrocities were perpetrated by fire and sword. The Church at
Shechem, now called Neapolis, was invaded during the celebration of the Holy
Eucharist; the consecrated emblems, torn from the bishop’s hands, were subjected
to shameful indignity, and he himself frightfully wounded in his effort to prevent the
sacrilege. The emperor espousing the cause of the injured, drove the aggressors
from their sacred mountain, and a church in honour of the Virgin Mary crowned


400 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. | CHAP. TVs


the heights of Gerizim. Under the succeeding reign of Justinian, the turbulent
Samaritan tribes made an ineffectual attempt to recover their lostsanctuary. They
destroyed by fire five Christian temples within Neapolis, subjecting many to torture
and death; but they were overpowered by the Roman troops. The brick walls
which surrounded the Church on Gerizim were further strengthened; and, indeed,
it is conjectured that it is a portion of this second wall or outer fortress, whose ruins
survive at the present day. Shechem once more emerges from obscurity in the
time of the Crusades. An appanage to the Latin bishopric of Samaria, its
revenues reverted to the abbot and canons of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre
in Jerusalem. But unable to escape being involved in these fierce wars, it was
sacked and plundered twice by the infuriated army of Saladin, and after a varied
alternation of fortune, it finally fell into the hands of the Mohammedans, where it
continues at this day. (J. R. Macduff, D.D.) Success in unexpected quarters :—
The historian seems to put an emphasis upon their being Samaritans. These had
not that reputation for religion that the Jews had: yet the Jews, who saw Christ’s
miracles draw Him from them, while the Samaritans, who saw not His miracles
nor shared in His favours, invited Him tothem. The proof of the Gospel’s message
is not always according to the probability. (Matthew Henry.) For the saying
of the woman. JVoman as a Christianizer :—I. WHEREIN IS WOMAN NOT DIFFERENT
FROM MAN. 1. Certainly not as a sinner, nor as a sinner saved. Not in the plane
which her averaged powers give her. 2. To her as to man belong the superiorities of
the intellect, the aspirations of the Holy Ghost, the sublimities of faith or genius,
the openings into the realms of prayer. 3. But all these require the human
activities as their occasions. 4. Hence it must be that now as once Jesus is best
pleased with Mary’s, whose activities take higher regions and aim at the better part,
than with Martha’s, who lose all in the wearying round of petty cares and fitful
fashions. 5. Spiritual service being the requirement of growth, and woman having
an open sea to those elevations upon the condition of toil, spiritual service is her
high privilege. II. WHEREIN DOES WOMEN DIFFER FROM MAN? There is an un-
likeness radical and essential. Man excels in outerness. He is stronger persistently
than woman, although in a spasm woman is endowed with greater strength. Man
igs moral, woman emotional; the one rational, the other affectionate; the one is
fibre, flax, and tow, the other silken. Man in method is decisive, woman incisive;
what one would do by force the other would do by tact. From man as from Rome,
we deduce principles and bring laws; from woman as from Greece we derive nice
adaptations and graces; and so from both blending their contributions to the Re-
deemer’s cause we look for a many-sided evangelism. Difference is the law of life.
III. Let us now turn to THE WORK TO BE DONE and ask—I1. What ideals of character
does Christianity seek to establish? It seeks to bring into human character faith,
liberty, heart purity, heart power, to bring about a reconciliation on the basis of
love. Christianity would not break into hearts by mere force. 2. What has Chris-
tianity done already? The John the Baptist and purely masculine part of the
work. The law of love has been from the beginning, but because of the hardness of
heart, the bill of divorcement has seemed to show Christianity with the Christ out.
3. What is the character of the work to be done? After war and its chaos, peace

order, gentleness, conciliation. Lights have been carried by masculine sacrifice
and heroism into forty centres of India, it remains for feminine affection and tact
to carry them into 10,000,000 Zenanas around each centre. IV. Woman 18 PECU-
LIARLY ADAPTED TO THIS PART OF THE WORK OF CHRISTIANIZING THE EARTH. The
kind of work on hand calls for those elements which distinguish her. The old
question, ‘would it not be unfeminine to meet mocking crowds and bear severe
travel?” lose all their force by the absence of former obstacles. V. Woman’s
SPHERES, — She does not have to seek them; they come to her. 1. All civil and
ecclesiastical organizations grow out of the family. In all the earth mothers hold
none but Christ’s own. The Millennium is suspended on two hooks. (1) Keeping
the children. (2) Using the spiritual power that is offered us. Woman has mar-
vellous power and privilege in both. 2. Woman pioneered Sunday-school work

Hannah Ball was in the field before Robert Raikes, and now of the teachers in the
United States, 84,000 are women, 42,000 men, 3. In the charities of life woman
can do more than man, or than Government as a Christianizer: witness Florence
Nightingale and the Red Cross sisters, and Grace Darling. What does the Scrip-
ture say of their predecessors? That they ‘‘ were well reported of,” ‘ received
strangers,” ‘ washed the disciples’ feet,” ‘“aged women as mothers.” diligent]

followed good works,” “laboured much in the Lord.” 4. It was women who ied


:
r
§


E
4
-
-
b


. Weds Fes Bs


CHAP. tv.] oo ae ST. JOHN. 401


the Holy Crusade against the liquor traffic in America, and it is women who are
doing the most effective Home Mission work among the poor and depraved. 5. As
to foreign missions, the testimony is strong that ‘‘ nothing but the hand of infinite
love through the agency of Christian women can work out the full and final redemp-
tion of India.” 6. But shall women preach? Let the hearers decide. Perhaps
woman is needed now in the pulpit to call ministers back to telling ‘the old, old
story.”. 7. Let but Christ’s light fall upon woman’s heart and intuition and her
‘mission ”’—she will find it—anywhere. (N. H. Axtell.) The ministry of woman.


I. Woman IS EVER FOREMOST IN ALL Goop. This is but fitting since she was first


in transgression; but it is a fact, as witnessed by all historians and travellers,
charity has been her vocation from the days of Dorcas to those of Elizabeth Fry.
‘*The Sisters of Mercy ” were the stars that relieved the darkness of the Middle
Ages. Paul put Priscilla before Aquila. The most faithful friends of Christ were
women. A woman watched by His cradle; woman stood weeping by His cross; a
woman was first at the sepulchre; and from that time to this woman has most
firmly laid hold upon the crown of martyrdom, and been amongst the most devoted
and dauntless missionaries for Christ. II. Woman Has ALWays Most FAITH. ‘‘Oh
woman, great is thy faith,” the Saviour is saying still. If man be confident,
woman is confiding. This is her weakness and her strength. By this she fell and
by this she rises to newness of life. Allchurches prove this. Christ’s mother was
His first disciple. Few are the Christian women that dishonour their profession
or deny their faith. III. Woman poxs Not sPEAK orricraLLy. Had one of the
apostle’s said, ‘* Come, see a man,” &c., he would not have had such success as
this unofficial woman. IV. Woman DOES SPEAK MORE TENDERLY. In her tone of
voice there is the key to unlock the human heart. It is not fit for strife or con-
troversy, but for persuasion and consolation. And wherefore has she the larger
share of sorrow? To kindle sympathy. Her’s also is a mother’s love not for her
children only, but for mankind. The congregation wants a son of thunder, society
a daughter of consolation. V, Woman HAS SPECIAL INFLUENCE OVER MAN, whether
for good or for evil. Her moral force is greater than all the physical force of govern-
ment, VI. Woman owes MucH To Curist. To her the Gospel brought the promise
and possession of the life that now is. In every country in proportion to its
Christianity she has her rights and the pure joys of life. Owing so much her
love to Christ should be deep, and her work for Christ energetic. But what can
she do? 1, Are you a wife? If your husband be not a Christian you have to
make him in love with religion, or if he be one build him up in the faith; and
knowing that he has many temptations from home, see that he has none at home.
2. Are you a mother? No one but God has such power over your infant as you, and
if your children are grown up, and are beyond a mother’s authority, you may yet
reach them by a mother’s love. 3. Are youa sister? Your loveissecond in power
to a mother’s. 4. Are you a mistress? A woman’s kindness will have double
weight from you. Your servants have souls for whom you are responsible, 5, Are
you a servant? ‘Adorn the doctrine of God your Saviour in all things.” If you
cannot speak about religion to your employers you can live it, (J. De Kewer
Williams.) Great results from small causes. How often will a small cause set
in motion a train of events that will issue in universal good. May I be allowed
to recapitulate what, I have no doubt, some of you have either heard or read before?
About two hundred years ago a travelling pedlar with his bundle on his back entered
a Shropsbire village. He called at a farm-house and offered for sale a copy of the
‘Bruised Reed” by Richard Sibbes. The farmer bought the book, and the farmer’s
gon read it, and through it found salvation in Christ. That farmer’s son was none
other than Richard Baxter. Baxter wrote a book called the ‘‘ Everlasting Rest of
the Saints,’”’ which was read by a young man, who was led by it to consecrate him-
self to the service of God. That young man was Dr. Doddridge. Doddridge in his
turn wrote a book called “The Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul.” That
book was diligently perused by another young man, who was led by it to a life
of holiness and widespread influence, That young man was William Wilberforce,
the liberator of the slave. In his turn he wrote a book entitled ‘A Practical View
of Christianity,” the study of which was blessed to the conversion of Legh Rich-
mond, Again, Legh Richmond wrote a book called “ The Dairyman’s Daughter,”
a book blessed to the salvation of hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Englishmen
all over the world. Let us therefore take encouragement, and labour in season
and out of season, for we know not which will prosper, this or that. (J. C. Jones,
D.D.) Conviction :— Conviction lies at the root of all consistent action. A


402 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fomap. I¥.


mechanical genius conceives an idea. It is as clear as noon-day in his mind, but
that idea is embodied, he must believe in the possibility of its embodiment ; and
just in proportion to the strength of bis conviction as to its practicability and
success, will he be consistent and earnest in working it out. Columbus conceived
the existence of a continent ; the conception grew into a conviction ; the conviction
was followed by consistent action, and that action was crowned with success by the
discovery of America. A man believes that an observance of certain physice] laws
is conducive to health, and he acts accordingly. Another believes that obedience
to certain moral laws is necessary to a good character, self-respect and peace, and
he obeys those laws. Christianity, then, by making man’s pardon and happiness
hinge on faith acts in accordance with the laws of his mental and moral being. A
man, é.g., must believe in God or he will never serve Him; in sin or He will never
see the necessity of a Mediator. ‘As a man thinketh in his heart so is he.” Con-
victions are the springs of actions, and actions make the man. (H. Tozer.) He
abode there two days.— According to the unwritten law of hospitality in the East,
the stranger who enters your house or your tent, and touches any part of your
property in claim of protection, is entitled to protection as your guest for three
days and a part of the fourth day, sufficient to permit him to get safely off your
territory. If a Bed'wy enters a strange camp, and touches the tent-ropes, he
becomes by that act a protected guest, for the same period, of the Arab whose tent-
ropes he has touched. This unwritten law of hospitality is honourably observed.
Our Lord, as the protected guest of the Samaritans, could have remained in the
house of His host, according to custom, for three days, If He had desired to stay
longer among the Samaritans, He could then have changed His lodging to the next
house, where He would have been entitled to stay for three days longer; and He
could have gone on changing from house to house, until He wished to go away.
The three days’ limit, however, does not bind the host not to give more than three
days’ hospitality. On the contrary, a host may press a guest to stay for weeks and
months ; and if the guest is too polite to leave without the host’s permission, he can
generally get that permission by calling for things which he knows the host does
not possess. (S. S. Times.)


Vers. 41-42. Many more helieved, because of His word, and said ... . This is
indeed the Christ. Christianity adapted to man’s moral constitution :—The counter-
part of this narrative at a missionary station may easily be imagined. The
Missionary says, ‘‘ Come, learn the missionary doctrine which has made me happy.
I know it to be Divine.”” The natives are induced tolisten. As they grow familiar
with evangelical doctrine it gains their heart. Although they cannot estimate the
evidence, they believe because they have tasted and handled of the word of God.
I. UNLESS THE MISSIONARY CAN CONFIDE IN THE INHERENT POWER OF THE GOSPEL
HE IS HELPLESS. 1. The heathen can neither appreciate your facts, nor under-
stand your mode of reasoning upon them. To the contemplative Brahmin, or
cunning Chinese, your inductive reasoning is as unintelligible as is the subtle argu-
ments of the Plantonic philosopher or the medieval schoolman to you. 2. Butif you
had crossed that chasm and learned to think as they think you would be destitute
of the materials of demonstration. Upon the knowledge they possess to establish
the authenticity and transmission of your sacred books appears a hopeless task. 3.
And even if you had satisfied them of this the appeal must be made to miracles, and
it would fail where they are, as the heathen suppose, so common; and the idea of
a miracle authenticating a doctrine would be unintelligible to an Hindoo whose pre-
sumption is that the splendour of Deity shines more in good doctrine than in
wonderful power. 4. Of the roll of prophecy we cannot read a word to a people
whose history is confined to their own legendary tales. 5. As to the internal
evidence this requires a more careful examination than you can expect, unless you
can present an object of surpassing value which shall prepossess the mind in its
favour. 6. The only serviceable instrument, therefore, is the Cross in its saving, all-
conquering power. 7. We may be reminded of the virtues of Christians, but we
cannot, alas! use that when crime has been perpetrated by professing Christians,
II. Tum GosPrL ITSELF IS SO APPROPRIATE TO THE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN—
APPEARS 80 LIKE TRUTH—AS TO CONCILIATE A FAVOURABLE RECEPTION, AND PRODUCE
CONVICTION, WHERE IT DOES NOT OFFER DEMONSTRATION. This is extremely probable
on noticing the purpose it is intended to accomplish. It is intended for all men: it
is an ample provision of mercy for our fallen world. It is intended only for man;
angels are above, demons below itsreach. But, leaving presumptive evidence, consider


CHAP, Iv.] ST. JOHN. 403


a few of the more important doctrines in their relation to the wants of men. 1. The
Gospel is proposed as a revelation from God. Against the notion of a revelation
there is no prejudice whatever; it is the favourite doctrine of mankind. Men have
never been content with somuch knowledge of God as may be derived from His
works, but have always yearned for some more direct communication of His will.
Hence, astrology, dreams, divination, sacred books. As the voice of God was the
first he ever heard (in Eden) man still turns towards it a most attentive and listen-
ing ear. Revelation was the language of His infancy, and its tones after the lapse
of ages and in the far country still come sweet as music to his heart. The prepos-
sessions of these millions, therefore, are in your favour; they are anxiously seeking
revelations, but alas! like Saul at Endor. And at Endor will you let them die?
Say to these wretched devotees prostrate at the altar of ‘‘ an unknown God.”—‘‘ Him
whom ye ignorantly worship, declare we unto you.’ 2. By the Gospel ‘life and
immortality are brought to light.”” There is no doctrine that the mind of man is
so ready to receive. The search after God is a germ of it which only requires to be
sanctified in order to its development. Virtue by its hope, and guilt by its terrors,
attest it. Love of posthumous fame and the longing for immortality are its har-
bingers, Preach, then, this favourite doctrine, and as you tell the sinner he is
immortal, you may hear a full, quick response from his heart. 3. If the doctrine
of immortality flatter the complacency of man, the doctrine of his inherent corrup-
tion mortifies his pride, and unless the heart be girt closely round with self-
righteousness, this doctrine is yet armed with the mighty power of conviction.
Under the ministry of Jesus, publicans and sinners, rather than Pharisees, pressed
into the kingdom. So now, the appeal to the moral law will suffice; it requires no
demonstration. The inevitable consequence is the conviction of sin. Then, go
speak with a friendly voice of sin, and they will understand every word; of pardon,
and their voice will brighten at the prospect ; as Jesus when He said, ‘‘ Come unto
Me all ye that labour,” &. 4. Closely connected with this doctrine is that of the
general judgment. It corresponds with many presentiments of the sinner’s heart.
Unless the religious feeling be extirpated, in every man’s bosom isa tribunal before
which his thoughts and actions are arranged, and acquitted or condemned. What
is this but a premonition of the final assize! These presentiments may not induce
the sinner to accept the Christian doctrine, but they will ensure attention, prepare
the mind, and the probability, or possibility of judgment may be quite as effective
as the vertainty. 5. We must now pass on to the doctrine of salvation by Christ.
Man is disturbed and perplexed by sin and is afraid to approach a Holy God.
Hence, in order to avert His displeasure, man has indulged in sacrifice. The stern
maxim is deeply inscribed in the heart of man as expounded by his history, ‘‘ with-
out the shedding of blood,” &c. To such your missionaries preach ‘ Christ cruci-
fied.” They address hearers prepossessed in favour of the doctrine of propitiation.
To the guilty conscience there is in ‘‘ Behold the Lamb of God” something more
cheering and consolating than all the sanguinary rites of heathenism. Man’s own
religion makes exorbitant demands; yours offers an aundant supply ; his god
demands a sacrifice; yours presents one. Conclusion: Such, then, is Christianity ;
it rises in solitary grandeur above all the religions of the earth. It has no affinity
with any local association or national peculiarity, but is equally adapted to man,
civilized or savage, in the pole or the tropics. It speaks a language which all can
understand, in tones which all must feel. 1. Confide in its powers. It cannot fail.
It carries with it the Spirit of the living God. 2. Argue from its past achievement
its future and finaltriumphs. (R. Halley, D.D.) Three more saved :—A few days
after the wreck of the ill-fated steamer: Central America, which sent hundreds to
a watery grave, and plunged the American nation in grief, a pilot-boat was seen, on
a fair breezy morning, standing up the bay of New York. .The very appearance of
the vessel gave token that she was freighted with tidings of no common interest.
With every sail set, and streamers flying, she leaped along the waters as if buoyant
with some great joy, while the glad winds that swelled her canvas, and the sparkling
waves that kissed her sides and urged her on her way, seemed to laugh with
conscious delight As she drew nearer, an unusual excitement was visible on her
deck, and her captain, running out to the extreme point of the bowsprit, and swing-
ing his cap, appeared to be shouting something with intense earnestness and
animation. At first the distance prevented his being distinctly understood. But
soon, as the vessel came farther into the harbour, the words, ‘‘ Three more saved !
Three more saved!” reached the nearest listeners. They were caught up by the
crews of the multitudinous ships that lay anchored around, and sailors sprang


“ eg, pi


404 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR.


wildly into the rigging and shouted, ‘Three more saved!” They were heard on
the wharfs, and the porter threw down his load, and the drayman stopped his noisy
cart, and shouted, “Three more saved!” The tidings ran along the streets, and
the news-boys left off crying the latest intelligence, and shouted, ‘‘ Three more
saved!” Busy salesmen dropped their goods, book-keepers their pens, bankers
their discounts, tellers their gold, and merchants, hurrying on the stroke of the last
hour of grace to pay their notes, paused in their headlong haste, and shouted,
‘‘Three more saved!”? (New Cyclopedia of Illustrated Anecdotes.)


Ver. 42. Now we believe not because of thy saying: we have heard Him our-
selves.—The Samaritan’s confession of faith:—I. THE PERSONS FROM WHOM IT
came. Samaritans out of the covenant, with imperfect notions of God and the
Spirit of His worship, yet they were so captivated by Christ’s teachings that they
felt He could be no other than the world’s Saviour. IJ. THE gust NOTIONS THEY
EXPRESSED OF THE OFFICE oF Curist. 1. That He was to effect the salvation of
the world, not of their race merely. 2. That He was to save by teaching the true
religion. ‘ I know,” said the woman, “ He will tell all things ”—i.e., concerning the
worship of God, the topic of discussion. 3. Thus they must have placed the sal-
vation itself in sucha deliverance as these means were fitted to accomplish, viz., in
deliverance from ignorance, hypocrisy, and superstition. 4. They were aware that
the time was actually come for this Deliverer’s appearance: Jesus said, ‘‘ The hour
cometh and now is.” The woman responded, ‘‘ I know that the Messiah (lit.) is
now coming.” Learn then—(1) How little benefit the external means of grace may
prove to those whose minds, like those of the Jews, are occupied with adverse
prejudices, so as to be negligent of their own improvement. (2) What a proficiency
may be made, by God’s blessing, on the diligent nse of scanty talents. The
Samaritans had no light but what came obliquely from the Jews, but they so far
improved under their imperfect discipline as to attain views of the promised
redemption which the Jews missed in spite of Moses and the Prophets. III Tur
WARMTH AND ENERGY OF THEIR conviction. ‘‘ We know.” Conclusion—l. Let
every one take encouragement and learn the necessary assiduity in self-improve-
ment. 2, Let no sinner despair of salvation. (Bp. Horsley.) The: progress of
faith :—I. Irs awaxenine. Through indirect testimony concerning Christ. In this
case by speaking of the woman; in other cases through the witness born of and to
Christ—1. By parents to children. 2. Ministers to congregations. 3. Teachers to
scholars. 4. Believers generally to the world. 5. The scriptures to readers. II.
Irs conrrrMaTIon. By the direct testimony of Christ Himself. In this case through
Christ's conversation with the Samaritans; in others, by the word of Christ carried
home to the individual heart by the Spirit of Christ. III. Irs miumrnation. In
the attainment of a true knowledge of Christ’s person and work, As here, learning
led to believing, and believing to knowing; so will all in whom the ear and eye of
faith are opened, the taking up of Christ’s word, and through that of Christ Himself,
into the heart leads to that higher knowledge of Christ in which consists eternal
life (chap. xvii. 2). Lessons: 1. The value of Christian instruction. 2. The indis-
pensableness of Christ’s own teaching. 3. The insight of faith. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.)
Christ the Saviour of the world :—I, THE sTavE OF THF WORLD REQUIRED A SAVIOUR.
II. Curist BecaME THE SAvIoUR OF THE worLD. 1. He was Divinely appointed
(John vi. 27; Isa. lxi. 1-3). 2. He voluntarily assumed the office (1 Tim. Tomoye
TIT. Tue cHaracter oF Curist as A Saviour. 1. A willing Saviour. 2. A free
Saviour. 3. An all-sufficient Saviour. He can save—(1) From the guilt and con-
demnation of sin (Rom. iii. 24), (2) From the dominion of sin and its polluting
power (Titus ii. 12; iii, 5). (3) From the tormenting power, and the destructive con-
sequences of sin (Heb. ix. 14; 1 Pet. iii. 18). (4) From the wrath of God, and the
vengeance of everlasting fire (1 Thess. i. 10; Rom. vy. 9). IV. Tue rvipEnce THAT
CHRIST WAS THE SaviouR OF THE worLD. “ This is indeed the Christ,” &c. Those
who are saved by Christ can give the same testimony, for—l. They have the witness
in themselves. They have proved the ‘gospel to be the power of God to their
salvation,” 2. Believers are well assured that Christ was the Saviour of the world
by regarding the internal evidence of the Scriptures. 3. Christianity has survived
all the attempts of its enemies to destroy it. 4. It is proved that Christ was the
Saviour by a reference to the pages of history. Application: 1. Let Christians
examine and be satisfied with the truth of the gospel. 2. Be thankful for such a
Saviour. 3. The rejector of Christ has cause for alarm. (Helps for the Pulpit.)


a a


OHAP. 1v.] ST. JOHN. 405


Vers. 43-45. And after two days He departed thence, and went into Galilee.—
Moral usefulness :—I. MAN MAY DO MUCH GOOD WITHIN A SHORT PERIOD. ‘Two days
Jesus spent in Samaria, and what did He accomplish? 1. He broke up religious
monotony. 2. Set minds thinking. 3. Won many to His cause. 4. Sowed truth
that has yielded glorious harvests in all subsequent ages. Every man can and
ought to accomplish great spiritual good in two days—not only by preaching
and writing for the press, but by indoctrinating his family with Christly senti-
ments, and distributing through the neighbourhood the ‘‘ Bread of Life.” No
man will be able to plead the brevity of life for moral uselessness. II. Man’s
EFFORTS TO DO GOOD ARE OFTEN OBSTRUCTED BY A STUPID PREJUDICE. 1, Christ
here states a fact. Of course there are exceptions. Home teachers are
not so valued as foreign. 2. There is no good reason for it. The doctrines
of a teacher should be independent of his country. 3. There are bad reasons
for it. The prejudice springs from jealousy, envy, pride. 4. The prejudice
Christ felt was against His usefulness. Prejudices are fetters that enslave the intel-
lect, clouds that obscure the vision, bolts that shut out the truth. III. Man’s pr-
SIRE FOR DOING GOOD SHOULD BE THE INSPIRATION OF HIS LIFE. Christ leaves Samaria,
confronts a powerful prejudice, and enters Galilee. ‘‘ What for?” To do good.
Such should be the great aim of all men, for two reasons. 1. It is the greatest work,
enlightening the intellect, liberating the will, purifying the heart, transforming the
man into the image of God’s son. 2. It is a most soul recompensing work. It
covers @ multitude of sins, wins the sympathies of immortal spirits, and secures the
approbation of conscience and God. The fruits of all other fields we leave behind
at death, but from this field we shall gather sheaves to all eternity. IV. Man’s
POWER TO DO GOOD INCREASES AS HIS PAST USEFULNESS GETS RECOGNIZED (ver. 45, see chap.
ii. 23). The Galileans had witnessed His wonders in Jerusalem. What they knew of
Him disposed them to accept Him. Man’s power of usefulness is cumulative; the
more good he does the more his capacity for usefulness increases. (D. Thomas,
D.D.) <A prophet hath no honour in his own country.—A twice verified proverb :—
I. Necativeny (ver. 44). 1. Regarded. Christ had an eye to this maxim when He
avoided settling in Nazareth; which showed—(1) Christ’s intimate acquaintance
with human nature. (2) His ability to read the signs of the times. (3) His wisdom
in selecting the most advantageous fields of labour—all of which qualities are
essential to the preacher or teacher (1 Chron. xii. 32; Matt. xvi. 3; 1 Cor. xvi. 9).
2. Exemplified (Luke iv. 29; Matt. xiii. 58). So Christ’s servants find the circles
most difficult to impress are those of one’s household and city (Luke vi. 40; Matt.
x. 25). 3. Explained. (1) Envy. His fellow-townsmen were amazed at His
superior wisdom and manifest supernatural gifts (Matt. xiii. 54). (2) Pride. (3)
Familiarity. A prophet must be something of a mystery man if he would make
his way in.the world (chap. vii. 27). Familiarity breeds contempt. II. PosrrivEny
(Matt. xiii. 57). 1. Illustrated, as in Judea (chap. ii. 23; iv. 1) and Samaria (vers.
39-41), so now in Galilee, the inhabitants accorded Him a joyous welcome. The
judgments of strangers are more to be relied on than those of friends. So with the
apostles (Acts xiii. 46; xv. 3, 7, 12; xviii. 6). 2. Justified. The behaviour of the
Galileans was not an unreasoning enthusiasm. They had witnessed Christ’s
miracles at Jerusalem nine months before (chap. ii. 23), and had apparently then
arrived at Nicodemus’s conclusion (chap. iii. 2). It was, therefore, becoming and
right that they should meet Him with acclamation. So already has the Gospel
effected such marvels that it has a right to a cordial reception. Lessons: 1, The
power of prejudice. 2. The advantage derived by the Gospelf rom publicity. 3.
The ultimate triumph of Christ’s kingdom. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.)


Vers, 46-54. There was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum. —
The second miracle at Cana :—Who shall persuade us that we have not here a true
story? I. Notice some oF ITS LESS oBvious Points. 1, Mark the word ‘‘ for”? in
ver. 44, He went into His own country because there was no honour for Him there.
2, Mark the setting of the text. A father pleads for the life of his son. Who would
not have thought that the kind Saviour would instantly say, “1 will?” Yet He
treats the application as a great error. “Except ye see.” He disregards the man
and treats him as the mouthpiece of a mistaken multitude, whose prevalent fallacy
was to make miracles the condition of belief. No ordinary man would have thought
of that answer. 3. This apparent rebuff, however, was only a trial of his constancy.
“Like the rest of your nation you set aside Divine holiness, wisdom, and love and
fasten on power, You forget how. many works of power there are which are not


coe


~


406 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP, :¥

ee lee EE Se ee ee eee

God’s, and not until you have marked the adjyncts—holiness, wisdom, love—can you
pronounce them Divine.” The nobleman responded, “‘ Come down, ere my child
die,” as thouzh he had said, ‘‘ I am not thirsting for evidences.” It is the voice of
nature, and the God of nature hears it. ‘he trial is ended and the victory is won.
Il. Novice THE WONDERFUL INTERTWINING OF NATURE AND GRACE IN THE GospEL., The
Gospel adapts itself to all that is best and beautiful in man’s heart. 1. It has been
found in some hour of mortal peril that persons of no religion will invoke the mercy
of that Being who, up to that moment, they had denied. Sceptics, no doubt, can
account for this in the survival of old prejudices. Christians naturally account for
it by supposing that a belief in God is a primary principle in man’s nature. 2. As
in individuals so in families. (1) Fathers who have made shipwreck of faith for
themselves want Christ for their children. The immoral man would fence his child
syom, vice ; the sceptic refuses to rear his child on negatives and chooses, therefore,
a Christian school. (2) And if the father sees his child stretched on a couch of pain
from which he may never rise, is there not a voice in his heart crying, ‘‘ Sir, come
down, ere my child die.”” I know the case is not rare in which the doubting or dis-
believing father has desired, has sought, for his son the spiritual healing, has called
in some man of God whose repute was highest for communication with the invisible,
has encouraged his visits, has even knelt in the corner while he prayed, and has
joined with strong cries and tears in the ‘‘ Rock of ages, cleft for me,” sung or said
in the chamber where the staying pray with the going; and has gone off from the
experience and trial strong in the Son of God, to say at last, ‘‘ Let me die the death
of the righteous ; let my last end be like His.”” Christ is marching to complete the
sum of happiness and to round the circle of being. (Dean Vaughan.) The noble-
man of Capernaum :—Notice—I. THE PROMPTITUDE WITH WHICH HE APPLIED TO CHRIST
AS SOON AS HE HEARD WHERE He was. Would that we all were as anxious for the
welfare of our own and other's souls as this man was for the health of his son’s body.
Your souls may be in like danger—at the point of death. Lose not another day. 11.
THE ADVANTAGE WE HAVE IN KNOWING THAT WHEN WE DESIRE TO SEEK THE GREAT
Puysic1an Hz 18 EVER AT HAND. The nobleman had to travel from Capernaum. III.
THE MANNER IN WHICH THE NOBLEMAN EVINCED HIS BELIEF IN CHRIST’S POWER, AND
YET THE IMPERFECT IDEA HE HAD OF THAT POWER. He felt that Christ could heal, but
only on the spot. So we are tempted to prescribe to God the place and manner of
His blessing, but God is the only judge of what is wise and best. Christ’s rebuke
had its due effect and in sending him away He required him to manifest the faith
for the feebleness of which he had been rebuked. IV. THE MANNER IN WHICH JESUS
SHOWS MERCY TO SUCH AS CALL UPON Him. 1. Pity in distress. 2. Firmness in de-
manding the proof of confidence which it becomes usto show. Christ would not
decline because of weak faith, but He would not go to Capernaum. V. Wuat 1s
THE DISPOSITION Hr REQUIRES US TO sHOW TOWARDS Him? Simple and implicit re-
liance on His word and belief in His power. ‘Go thy way.... And the man
believed and went,” without a token. 1. This disposition is the grace of the Holy
Spirit imparted to the heart. 2. This disposition honours Christ. VI. Tas REWARD
WHICH FAITH SHALL RECEIVE. ‘Thy son liveth.” A cure. 1. Instantaneous. 2.
Complete. (J. Harding.) The nobleman of Capernaum:—I. Even THE NOBLE
HAVE THEIR TROUBLE. 1. No earthly dignity lifts above the reach of trouble. In the
eye of God and in the operations of His laws all are alike. We need, therefore

never to expect to reach an estate free from trial, 2. But troubles are not alwaya
calamities. To the true hearted they are instruments of good. Nobility must
suffer that it may become more noble.. The fruitful branch must be purged that it
may become more fruitful. II, EvEN THE BELIEVING NEED UNDECEIVING. 1, Tha
nobleman was a believer. 2, There was strength and substance in his faith. I¢
was not mere sentiment. Knowledge, however accurate, opinion, however orthodox
is not faith, But this man’s faith had an active quality ; it moved him to Jesus
and to make every effort to obtain His help, True faith can never be idle (James
ii. 20). 3. But even with this living faith the nobleman laboured under miscon-
ceptions and infirmities. He located the Saviour’s power too much in the outward
It was bent on signs and wonders, And just here believers have their greatest
troubles, They go honestly and humbly to Christ, but unless they see signs they
doubt whether all is right. Some change must be felt ere they can fully rest. But
the requirement is to undoubtingly embrace Christ and leave Him to make all other
things right in His own time and way (Rom. viii. 24, 25). 4. Here is the true con-
solation of faith; not that the sick child is healed, but that we have a competent
Sayijour, and in the meantime patience is the proper exercise of faith. IT, WuHeEy


a


onap. rv.] ST. JOHN. 407


MAN DESPAIRS THE Lorp REPAIRS. 1. The manner in which he was received distressed
the nobleman. He looked for Christ to accompany him, and when no signs of
compliance appeared his heart sunk within him. 2. And yet this last flicker of
perishing expectation was the signal of the greatest triumph. It was not according
to Christ’s method that His healing should come “‘ with observation.” His restora-
tive energy is in His word, which is independent of distance or signs. Even His ‘‘Go
thy way” is a benediction. While we are being wrung with disappointment grace is
invisibly entering our house. IV. As WE BELIEVE so WE RECEIVE. A mere word had
gone out. He went his way clinging to that word, and as he believed it was done
unto him. He came believing Christ to be a, wonder worker and he found Him one.
He trusted in what the Saviour had said, and he came back to find the Saviour’s word
potent. What then if society, the Church, ourselves, our whole house are sick; if
our movements are Christwards, His seeming repulse is but a preparation for a
sublimer triumph. No honest attempt at faith is ever a mistake. (J. A. Seiss, D.D.)
The fame of Christ :—The distance of Capernaum from Cana was from twenty to
twenty-five miles. The report of Christ’s return to Galilee had spread, then, over
this wide area. (H.W. Watkins, D.D.) The nobleman’s son :—I. Jesus BEHOLD.
ING THE WOES oF MEN. 1. Jesus and His countrymen (ver, 45) (Matt. xii. 54,
xxi. 11; Mark vi. 1; Luke iv. 44; John iv. 3, vii. 41). 2. Jesus and the sorrow-
ing (ver. 47) (Isa. lili. 3; Mark v. 39; Luke vii. 13, viii. 52, xxiii. 28; John xiv. 1).
3. Jesus and the sick (ver. 47) (Matt. iv. 24, viii. 17, x. 1, xiv. 14; Mark vi. 56;
John xi. 3). II. Busrowine THE HELP oF Gop. 1. Importunate pleading (ver. 49)
(Psa. cxxx. 1; Matt. xiv. 30, xv. 22; Luke xi. 8, xxii. 44; Heb. v.7). 2. Generous
responding (ver. 50) (Matt. viii. 2, 3, 13, ix. 29; Luke, vii. 50, xviii. 42; John xiv.
13). 3. Confident believing (ver 50) (Psa. xxvii. 13, evi. 12; John iv. 53; Acts xvi.
34; Rom. xv. 13; 1 Pet.i. 8). JL]. Renizvine THE WOES OF MEN. 1. Good news
(ver. 51) (Gen. xlv. 26; Num. xxi. 8; 2 Kings xx. 5; Luke ii. 10, x. 17; John xiv. 3).
2. Convincing coincidence (ver. 53) (Exod. xiv. 27; Josh. ili, 15, 16; Dan. v. 5;
Matt. viii. 13, ix. 22, xv. 28). 3. Believing household~(ver. 53) (Acts x. 2, xvi.
15, 34, xviii. 8; Phil. iv. 22; Heb: xi. 7). (Sunday School Times.) The noble-
man’s son:—A spiritual miracle is greater than a physical one. This was of
both kinds—the healing of the boy’s body, the conversion of the father’s soul.
The nobleman is a representative man. I. Hz 18 DRIVEN TO CHRIST BY AN OUTSIDE
xeED. He takes his case to Christ as a last resort. In his selfish thought, the
Saviour of souls is overshadowed by the Healer of bodies. But. such is the love of
Christ, that those seeking a lesser good are sent away with a spiritual gift. II. His
FAITH RUNS PARALLEL WITH HIS MOTIVE. It began as a belief that Christ could work
a physical miracle by contact ; it was consummated in a faith which trusted Christ
for both physical and spiritual blessing at a distance. The father’s faith secured
the health of his child; the personal faith of the man secured his own salvation.
III. Tae Divine METHODS FOR CULTIVATING FAITH IN MEN. 1. Directness and con-
scious superiority characterize Christ’s meeting with the nobleman. Christ rebukes
his carnal mindedness and his low thought that Christ’s mission was merely to play
the doctor—a rebuke which caused him to look up into the Master’s face and feel
the subtle power of His spiritual presence. 2. Having thus made a spiritual road-
way into his heart, Christ grants his request. 3. The answer carries a test of
humility and faith with it. Christ not going with him touched his pride; but it
strengthened his faith by exercising it. IV. THE OBEDIENCE OF FAITH AND ITS REWARD.
This faith is shown by his leisurely procedure. The twenty miles’ walk could not have
been accomplished that night. The reward was bestowed not only on the sick
child, but on the whole household. Learn—1. A lesson of hope. 2. That all the
roads of human experience lead to Christ—our needs, sorrows, Joys. 3. Once in
Christ’s presence, all is well. (Sermons by the Monday Club.) __ The nobleman’s
faith :—1. Trouble led this courtly personage to Jesus. Had he lived without trial,
he might have been forgetful of his God and Saviour ; but sorrow came as an angel
in disguise. 2. The particular trial was the sickness of his child. No doubt he
had tried all remedies, and now he turns to Jesus in desperate hope. How often
does it happen that children are employed to do what angels cannot! I. THE SPARK
or FAITH. 1. The faith of the nobleman rested at first entirely on the report of
others. Evangelical faith often begins with the testimony of others that Christ
receiveth sinners. 2. This faith only concerned the healing of the sick child. The
father did not know that he wanted healing for his own heart, nor of Christ's
spiritual power. Can you believe that Christ can help you in your present trial 7
Then use the faith you have; if not of heavenly things, then earthly. 3. He


a” _ oe Oy
,) a4


408 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. Iv.


limited the power of Jesus to His local presence. Limitation of the Holy One of
Israel in children of God is sinful; but weakness of faith in seekers will be
excused. Better to have a weak faith than none atall. 4. This faith, although it
was but a spark, influenced the nobleman. Itled him to take a considerable journey
to Christ. This is the more remarkable that he was a man of position, and did not
send his servants. If you have faith enough to drive you personally to Christ, it is
of an acceptable order. 5. This man’s faith taught him to pray in the right style.
Notice his argument—the misery of his case. Not that the boy was of noble birth,
or lovely. When you pray aright, you will urge those facts which reveal your
danger and distress. This is the key which opens the door of mercy. Il. THE FIRE t
oF FAITH struggling to maintain itself. 1. It was true, as far as it went. He stood
before the Saviour, resolved not to go away. He does not get the answer at first, ;
byt he stays. So it was a real persuasion of the power of Jesus to heal. 2. It was
hindered by a desire for signs and wonders, and was therefore gently chided. So
some of you want to be converted in the extraordinary way recorded in some
religious biographies, and expect, like Naaman, Christ to do some great thing. Do
not lay down a programme and demand that the free Spirit should pay attention to
it. Let Him save you as He wills. 3. It could endure a rebuff. He answered our
Lord with still greater importunity. 4. How passionately this man pleaded, “Lord,
do not question me just now about faith; heal my child, or he will be dead.” If his
faith failed in breadth, it excelled in force. III. Tue ruame or FaitH. 1. He
believed the word of Jesus over the head of his former prejudices. He had thought
that Christ could only heal by personal contact; now he believes that Jesus can
heal with a word. Will you believe Jesus on His bare word? 2. He at once obeyed
Christ. If he had not believed, he would have remained looking for favourable
signs. When told to believe in Christ, do not say, ‘“‘ We will continue in prayer,
read the Bible, attend the means of grace.” Believe and go your way. 3. Still, it
fell somewhat short of what it might have been. He expected a gradual restora.
tion. How little we know of Christ or believe in Him. 4. He travelled with the
leisure of confidence. Anxious minds, even when they believe, are in a hurry to
see; but the nobleman’s servants met him the next day. ‘‘ He that believeth shall
not make haste.” IV. THE conFLAGRATION OF FAITH. 1. His faith was confirmed
by the answer to his prayers. 2. After inquiry, his faith was confirmed by each
detail. 38. Strengthened by faith and experience, he believes in Jesus in the fullest
sense. 4. What follows is natural; his family also believe. (C.H. Spurgeon.) The
nobleman’s faith :—I. WITH REGARD TO THIS FAITH, we must observe—l. That it
was real, or he woulll never have sought Christ. This realness was not incon-
sistent with ignorance of Christ’s nature and spiritual power. 2. Though real, im-
perfect and weak. He knew nothing of Jesus as the Healer of the soul. There
was shortcoming in both the quantity and quality of his faith. In this he presents
a strong contrast to the centurian. 3. Apply the case to ourselves. What is our
faith? Is it only a name, a theory, a confession, we have been taught to utter?
If we have acknowledged Him as Saviour in one specific point, that is real faith as
far as it goes; but it must go farther. ‘ He will not break the bruised reed.” II;
His TREATMENT BY CuRist. 1. His unbelief was rebuked, and that of others stand-
ing around. 2. No doubt many regarded this as ill-timed. But Christ saw that
spiritual admonition was the thing that was most needed. 3. We need not be sur-
prised if the first answer to our petitions is some revelation of secret sin. 4. But
delay is not denial. In bestowing one blessing he does not refuse another. 5.
There is often as much love in Christ’s method of bestowal as in His gift. The
petition is granted in the spirit, if not in the letter, Jesus did not go down, but
sent His blessing down. III. Tum vLTimare RESULT OF THE INTERVIEW. 1. The
request was granted (1) sooner than was expected, and (2) more-fully. Christ's
way is the shortest and best, after all, although we think differently. 2. His faith
was increased. He who could not brook a moment’s delay, goes away satisfied with
a simple word, leisurely proceeds home, and becomes a full believer. 3. He and his
family were converted. (P. B. Power, M.A.) A lesson for little faith :—I. Tux
PARTICULARS OF THE MIRACLE. Note—1l. The rapid reversals of feeling which all
efforts in doing good demand. His former visit to Cana was to a festival; He came
now to a scene of anxiety and affliction. Human experience is very fitful and uncer-
tain. Now the circumstances are joyous, now gloomy; and he who wants to do good
must be prepared for both. 2. Pain and trouble are common to all ranks, Capernaum’s
great dignitary is harrowed by anxiety; his money, influence, friends, cannot save
his boy, ‘‘Grief is a black camel that kneels at eyery man’s door,” 8. The value


\
\\


omar. rv.] ST. JOHN. 409


of Christianity. Sceptics say Christianity is a religion for the sorrowful only. We
reply, ‘there is surely room for one such religion in a world like this. 4. In His
first reply Christ—(1) Rebuked a faith which rested on external evidences. (2)
Showed that he cared very little for miracles as proofs of His Divine commission.
5. The nobleman’s response teaches us directness in prayer. How much time is
wasted in the formalities of devotion. 6. Such petitions as this the Lord always
hears and answers. The last word of God’s Son affords ground for implicit trust.
The nobleman knew that nothing more was needed. 7. How much men owe to the
unseen Providences of God. II. THE PARABLE oF FaItH. 1. There was intelligence.
The nobleman—(1) Reasoned. (2) Inquired. (3) Agreed. 2. Next came assent.
Sometimes this element of saving faith is called submission, sometimes surrender.
3. There came trust. Without a word he rested on the promise. He believed—(1)
In Christ’s evidences. (2) In Christ’s willingness. (3) In Christ Himself. (C. 8.
Robinson, D.D.) The faith of a nobleman:—I. Its IMPERFECT CHARACTER. 1.
Not settled on the best foundation. Excited by a report of Christ’s miracles which
Christ recognized as right (chap. v. 36, x. 37-38, xiv. 11), but not faith’s highest
form. 2. Not free from ignorance and superstition, Christ’s presence was regarded
as essential. II. Irs gracious rpucation. 1. Its radical defect was pointed out
(ver. 48). The modern counterpart is the belief that is born of excitement and rests
on feeling, 2. Its inward sincerity was tried (ver. 48). In a similar way Christ
dealt with the Syro-Phenician woman. 3. Its formal request was denied. Had
Christ gone it might have confirmed the belief that His presence was indispensable,
and that His power was of no avail beyond death. So He sometimes denies His
peoples’ entreaties, because they know not what they ask, or because the answer
would be injurious. 4. Its essential petition was granted (ver. 50). Notin the way
expected, but in one larger and better (Eph. iii. 29). III. Irs compLerE DEVELOP-
ment. The nobleman believed—1. Without a miracle. At first he only had
Christ’s word; then his servants’ testimony; lastly, the assurance of sight. 2.
Without delay—“Go thy way.” Prompt obedience one of the most reliable marks of
faith—Noah (Gen. vi. 9, 22; Heb. xi. 7), Abraham (Gen. xii. 1; Heb. xi, 8), Peter
(Luke v. 5); Paul (Acts xxvi. 19). 3. Without after regrets. None will have
occasion to repent who enter on a life of faith. Nor did he act as many do after
having been delivered from affliction. 4. Without being left to standalone. Faith
became contagious. Learn—1. The ability and willingness of Christ to save
diseased and dying souls. 2. The eagerness Christian parents should display in
bringing the cases of their children to Christ. 3. The nature of faith which is
taking Christ at His word. 4. The value and efficacy of prayer. 5. The increasing
evidence faith obtains the longer it continues. 6. The beauty and advantage of
household religion. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) The courtier’s son:—I. THE PRo-
GRESS OF FAITH. Faith, at first slender and tentative, becomes firm and influential.
The process is worthy of notice. At first it rested on external testimony, but
was backed by such anxiety to attain the object that the man came so far to
seek it. Then its tenacity is proved and strengthened by a seeming rebuff.
Another and great step is taken when Christ’s word for the cure is accepted
instead of His personal coming down. Next, it is crowned and perfected by
the incontestable proof of the miracle. What most of us need in our Chris-
tianity is not more evidence—the lamp can be choked with oil, if the oil is not
used—it is to follow with entire cordiality the light that has shone so fully on
us already. II. Curist’s EVIDENTIAL METHOD. How He connects sign and spirit,
miracle and faith. He deprecates the purely external connection—-the believing
only what is seen. Such demands for seen evidence ends usually in downright
uvbelief. His method is to lead His disciples to such inward, spiritual acquaintance
with and confidence in Himself that they trust His word, and so by and by behold


His work. When His trusting ones believe, then in due time they also see (chap.


xi. 40). Jesus accepts the loving earnestness and tenacity of a faith otherwise
slender. He will lead this man into His kingdom by the heart-strings, for He
avails Himself of every access to the souls of men. This courtier would have Jesus
go down and heal his son. Jesus healed his son and did not go down. Thus He
suited His method to the case—was the helper of the father’s faith as well as the
healer of his son’s malady. (J. Laidlaw, D.D.) Restoration of nobleman’s dying
son:—l. Tue miracuz. 1. The petitioner. A person of distinction; perhaps
Chuza, Herod’s steward. Now in affliction. Seeks Jesus, the Divine Physician.
2. The application. Shows affection for child, and respect to our Lord ; also great
earnestness, A sense of need inspires utterance. 3. The reply. The first part of


ao nee
410 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cuaP. TV
a CORE DLS cw Fa AR OOS
it evidently conveyed rebuke. Jesus said unto him, ‘‘ Except ye’’—-not only you
individually, but all who resemble you—‘‘ Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will
not believe.” You are one of those who will not admit who and what I am, unless
you see Me work a miracle. II. Irs urrecrs. 1, See them, in the first place, on
the nobleman: He “ believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he
went his way,” convinced that his application had not been made in vain, and that
his son would live. 2. The narrative relates the effect of the miracle, not only on
the nobleman himself, but also on his household, ‘‘his whole house believed.”
Their hearts were gained to the Lord Christ as well as his. Application: 1. What
are we doing for our children? Many are the anxieties and pains which parents
endure on account of their children. Can it be said of us, as of King Asa, that in
our affliction we seek not to the Lord but to the physicians. Alas! we are prone
to look to second causes, and to neglect the first Great Cause of life and health and
everything! 2. What are we doing in our affliction? It should make us serious.
It should lead us to Christ. It should subdue prejudice. It should skow us the
value of Christ’s power and grace. 3. How have we requited the Lord’s mercies?
We have influence. Have we exerted it to bring others to believe in Christ, and to
worship and serve Him? (I. Gibbs.) The second miracle in Cana—the purify-
ing and training of faitn :—The evangelist evidently intends us to connect together
the two miracles in Cana. His object may, possibly, mainly be chronological, and
to mark the epochs in our Lord’s ministry. But we cannot fail to.see huw remark-
ably these two miracles are contrasted. The one takes place at a wedding, a homely
scene of ruial festivity and gladness. But life has deeper things in it than glad-
ness, and a Saviour who preferred the house of feasting to the house of mourning
would be no Saviour for us. The second miracle, then, turns to the darker side of
human experience. It was fitting that the first miracle should deal with gladness,
for that is God’s purpose for His creatures, and that the second should deal with
sicknesses and sorrows, which are additions to that purpose made needful by sin.
Again, the first miracle was wrought without intercession, as the outcome of Christ’s
own determination that His hour for working it was come. The second miracle
was drawn from Him by the imperfect faith and the agonising pleading of the
father, But the great peculiarity of this second miracle in Canais that itis moulded
throughout so as to develop and perfect a weak faith. Notice how there are three
words in the narrative, each of which indicates a stage in the history. ‘Except ye
see signs and wonders ye will not believe.” . . . ‘* The man believed the word that
Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way.” . . . ‘‘ Himself believed and
his whole house.” We have here, then, Christ manifested as the Discerner, the
Rebuker, the Answerer, and therefore the strengthener of a very insufficient and
ignorant faith. I. First, we have here, our Lord LAMENTING OVER AN IGNORANT AND
SENSUOUS FaITH. At first sight His words, in response to the hurried eager appeal
of the father, seem to be strangely unfeeling, far away from the matter in hand.
‘«Hixcept ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe.’ ‘* What has that to do
with me and my dying boy, and my impatient agony of petition?” ‘It has every-
thing to do with you.’’ It is the revelation, first of all, of Christ’s singular calm-
ness and majestic leisure, which befitted Him who needed not to hurry because He
was conscious of absolute power. It is also an indication of what He thought of
most importance in His dealing with man. It was worthy of His care to heal the
boy; it was far more needful that He should train and lead the father to faith.
The one can wait much better than the other. And there is in the words, too,
something like a sigh of profound sorrow. Christ is not so much rebuxing as
lamenting. Why? Because to their own impoverishing, the nobleman and his
fellows were blind to all the beauty of His character. The graciousness of His
nature was nothing to them. They had no eyes for His tenderness, and no ears
for His wisdom ; but if some vulgar sign had been wrought before them, then they
would have run after Him with their worthless faith. And that struck a painful
chord in Christ’s heart when He thought of how all the lavishing of His love, all
the grace and truth which shone radiant and lambent in His life, fell upon blind
eyes, incapable of beholding His beauty; and of how the manifest revelation-of a
Godlike character had no power to do what would be done by a mere outward wonder.
Are there not plenty of us to whom sense is the only certitude? We think that the
only knowledge is the knowledge that comes to us from that which we can see and
touch and handle, and the inferences that we draw from these; and to whom all
that world of thought and beauty, all that Divine manifestation of tenderness and
grace is but mist and cloudland, Intellectually, though in a somewhat modified


ee a


CHAP. Iv.] ST. JOHN. 41)


sense, this generation has to take the rebuke: ‘‘ Except ye see, ye will not believe.”
And practically, do not the great mass of men regard the material world as all-im-
portant, and work done, or progress achieved there as alone deserving the name of
“work” or ‘“‘ progress,” while all the glories of a loving Christ are dim and unreal
to their sense-bound eyes? And on the other side, is it not sadly true about those
of us who have the purest and the loftiest faith that we feel often as if it was very
hard, almost impossible, to keep firm our grasp of One who never is manifested to
our sense? Do we not often feel, ‘‘Oh! that I could for once, for once only, hear
a voice that would speak to my outward ear, or see some movement of a Divine
-hand.” The loftiest faith still leans towards, and has an hankering after, some
external and visible manifestation, and we neel to subject ourselves to the illumi-
nating rebuke of the Master, Who says: “‘ Except ye see signs and wonders ye will
not believe.” II. And so we have here, as the next stage of the narrative, our
Lord TESTING, AND THUS STRENGTHENING, A GROWING FAITH. The nobleman’s
answer to our Lord’s strange words sounds, at first sight, as if these had passed
over him, producing no effect at all. ‘Sir, come down ere my child die.” Almost
as if he had said: ‘‘ Do not talk to me about these things at present. Come and
heal my boy. That is what I want; and we will talk about the rest some other
time.” Butitis not exactly that. Clearly enough, at all events, he did not read in
Christ’s words a reluctance to yield to his request, still less a refusal of it. Clearly,
he did not misunderstand the sad rebuke which they conveyed, else he would not
have ventured to reiterate his petition. He does not pretend to anything more
than he has, he does not seek to disclaim the condemnation that Christ brings
against him, nor to assume that he has a loftier degree, or a purer kind, of faith
than he possesses. He holds fast by so much of Christ’s character as he can appre-
hend; and that is the beginning of all progress. What he knows he knows. He
has sore need; that is something. He has come to the Master; that ismore. Ah!
any true man who has ever truly gone to Christ with a sense even of some outward
and temporal need, and has ever really prayed at all, has often to pass through
this experience, that the first result of his agonising cry shall be only the revelation
to him of the unworthiness and imperfection of his own faith, and that there shall
seem to be strange delay in the coming of the blessing so longed for. And the true
attitude for a man to take when there is unveiled before him, in his consciousness,
in answer to his cry for help the startling revelation of his own unworthiness and
imperfection, the true answer to such dealing is simply reiterate your cry. And
then the Master bends to his petition and because he sees that the second prayer
has in it less of sensuousness than the first; and that some little germ of a higher
faith is beginning to open, He yields, and yet He does not yield. “ Sir,come down
ere my child die.” Jesus saith unto him, ‘Go thy way, thy son liveth.” Why
did He not go with the man? Why, in the act of granting, does He refuse? For
the man’s sake. The whole force and beauty of the stury comes out yet more
vividly if we take the contrast between it and the other narrative, which presents
some points of similarity with it—that of the healing of the centurion’s servant at
Capernaum. There the centurion prays that Christ would but speak, and Christ
says, “I willcome.” There the centurion does not feel that His presence is neces-
sary, but that His word is enough. Here the man says, ‘‘ Come!” because it has
never entered his mind that Christ can do anything unless He stands like a doctor
by the boy’s bed. And he says, too, “ Come, ere my child die.” Because it has
never entered his mind that Christ can do anything if his boy once has passed the
dark threshold. And because his faith is thus feeble, Christ refuses its request,
because He knows that so to refuse is to strengthen. Asked but to “speak” by a
strong faith, He rewards it by more than it prays, and offers to ‘‘ come.”’ Asked to
“‘¢ome” by a weak faith, He rewards it by less, which yet is more than it had
requested ; and refuses to come, that He may heal at a distance ; and thus mani-
fests still more wondrously His power and His grace. ‘‘Go thy way; thy son
liveth.” Whatatest! Suppose the man had not gone his way; would his son
have lived? No! The son’s life and the father’s reception from Christ of what he
asked, were all suspended upon that one moment. Will he trust Him, or will he
not? Will he linger or will he depart? He departs, and in the act of trusting he
gets the blessing, and his boy is saved. And’ look how the narrative hints to us of
the perfect confidence of the father now. Cana was only a few miles from Caper-
naum. The road from the little city upon the hill down to where the waters of the
lake flashed in the sunshine by the quays of Capernaum, was a matter of only a
few hours; but it was the next day, and well on into the next day, before he met the


412 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cmar. Iv.


servants that came to him with the news of his boy’s recovery. So sure was he
that his petition was answered that he did not hurry to return home, but leisurely
and quietly went on the next day to his child. Think of the difference between the
breathless rush up to Cana, and the quiet return from it. ‘‘ He that believeth
shall not make haste.”? III. And so, lastly, we have here the absent Christ crown-
ING AND REWARDING THE FAITH WHICH HAD BEEN TESTED. We have the picture of
the man’s return. The servants meet him. Their message, which they deliver
before he has time to speak, is singularly a verbal repetition of the promise of the
Master, ‘‘ Thy son liveth.” His faith, though it be strong, has not yet reached to
the whole height of the blessing, for he inquires ‘‘ at what hour he began to amend,”
expecting some slow and gradual recovery; and he is told ‘‘that at the seventh
hour,” the hour when the master spoke, “ the fever left him.” And all at once and
completely was he cured, So, more than his faith had expected is given to him ;
and Christ, when He lays His hand upon a man, does His work thoroughly, though
not always at once. Why was the miracle wrought in that strange fashion? Why
did our Lord fling out His power as from a distance rather than go and stand at
the boy’s bedside? We have already seen the reason in the peculiar condition of
the man’s mind; but now notice what it was that he had learned by such a method
of healing, not only the fact of Christ’s healing power, but also the fact that the
bare utterance of His will, whether He were present or absent, had power. And so
a loftier conception of Christ would begin to dawn on him, A partial faith brings
experience which confirms and enlarges faith ; and they who dimly apprehend Him,
and yet humbly love Him, and imperfectly trust Him, will receive into their bosoms
such large gifts of His love and gracious Spirit that their faith will be strengthened,
and they will grow into the full stature of peaceful confidence. The way to increase
faith is to exercise faith. And the true parent of perfect faith is the experience of the
blessings that come from the crudest, rudest, narrowest, blindest, feeblest faith that
aman can exercise. (A. Maclaren, D.D.) The testing of faith which the nobleman
stands:—I, How neisTestep. 1. In his humility by a stern word which might
wound the pride of a nobleman, 2. In his faith by being required to trust a word.

II. How HE stanps THE TEST. 1. In his persistent prayer be the test of the humility
of his faith. 2. Inf his confident departure at the word of Jesus he proves the
power of Hisfaith. (J.P. Lange, D.D.) Domestic affliction :—I, THE RICH HAVE
AFFLICTIONS AS WELL AS THE PooR. There is no more mischievous error than to
suppose that the rich have no cares. The dwellers in palaces often sleep more un-
easily than dwellers in cottages. Gold may shut out debt and rags, but not disease
and death. Let the servant of God beware of desiring riches, They are certain
cares and uncertain comforts. II. StckNEss AND DEATH COME TO THE YOUNG AS WELL
AS TO THE OLD. In spite of the testimony of grave stones we are apt to speak and
act as esd people never died when young. The first grave was that of a young
man. e is wise that will never confidently reckon on a long life. The only true
wisdom is to be always prepared to meet God. So living it matters little whether
we die young or old. III. WHat BENEFITS AFFLICTION CAN CONFER ON THE SOUL.
Anxiety about a son led this nobleman to Christ, and eventually his whole house,
By affliction God often teaches lessons that can be learned in no other way. By it
He often draws souls away from sin who would otherwise have perished (Psa. cxix.
71). Let us beware of murmuring (Heb, xii. 11). IV. Curisy’s worp Is AS GOOD 4s
Curist’s preseNcE. This fact gives enormous value to the promises. (Bp. Ryle.)
Domestic affliction a messenger of God:—No one is spared this. Not even the
nobility, I. Hxar (ver. 47). Up to this time the courtier had not heard; very
likely did not care to hear. But now his child lies at death’s door he hears that
Jesus was come, Thy domestic affliction calls out to thee that thou hast a Saviour
who has come for thee. II. Go (ver. 47). The noble had gone no doubt to this
and to that one, but there was no help. Now he goes to One who can help. Go
thou in a right way at once to, Jesus, who always says *“*Come.” III. BrsrecH
(ver. 47). The man of rank becomes unwontedly humble. Nothing offends him

not even the seemingly negative answer of ver. 48. IV. Brxteve (vers. 50-54).
He believes (ver. 50) and finds everything fulfilled (vers. 51-53), and his whole
household believe (ver. 54). Believe Him, thou and thy family, and ye shall be
blessed. (G. Hermann.) He went to Him and besought Him—The uses of
trouble:—I. Ir HUMBLES PRIDE—‘ He (the nobleman) went.” II. Iv arves FAITH—
“He went.” III. Ir reaches prayer—“ Besought.” IV. Iv stimunares FAITH—
That he would heal,” &c. Physicians in the East :—No one is more sought after
in the East than the hakeem or physician. Let it be known that one of a travelling


:
5)
:


CHAP. t1v.] ST. JOHN. 413


party of Europeans is a doctor, and all the sick persons in the neighbourhood make
their way to his tent for free treatment. A Kuropean doctor in the Hast may have
to complain of lack of fees, but he certainly will not have to complain of lack of
patients. The invalids, or those who have persuaded themselves that they are
invalids, will troop to his tent in the early morning, and squat there until evening,
or until they are treated; and well persons will pretend that they are sick for the
purpose of getting possession of the magicial powders which they value so highly.
The European doctor who knows what is before him generally supplies himself, ere
he starts for the East, with a plentiful supply of bread-pills, ingeniously coloured
with tincture of iodine or similar chemicals, so that he may be able to keep his real
remedies for real diseases. The lack of adequate medical facilities in the East is
noted by every traveller; and it would hardly be possible to overestimate the
amount of suffering caused by this lack. That is the reason why the Frankish
hakeem can go safely where no other Frank dare go; and it may be said reverently
that it is also one of the reasons why our Lord took upon Himself the character of
a hakeem or healer. Those whom no other appeal would bring flocked to Him
because they believed Him to be a powerful hakeem. It is also one of the reasons
for the success of medical missions. The men and women who would curse the
ordinary missionary as ‘‘a dog and the son of a female dog,” will come humbiy tc
the medical mission for healing, and will listen to the message which they would
not listen to under any other circumstances. (H. C. Trumbull, D.D.) Except
ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe.—Signs and wonders :—I, Our Lorp
DID NOT PUT FORWARD THE MERE POWER OF HIS MIRACLES AS THE CHIEF SIGN oF His
Divine Sonsurp. He declared His Almighty power chiefly by showing mercy and
pity. He used His miraculous power—1. Sparingly, almost entirely in curing the
diseases of poor people. 2. Secretly, for it was almost entirely in remote places.
For even Jerusalem was remote compared with the great cities of the Roman
Empire. Had He intended to convert the world by miracles He would have gone
to Rome, the centre of the world. But as He wished for the obedience not of men’s
lips but of their hearts, that they might love Him and be loyal to Him for His
goodness; and not fear and tremble because of His power. II. Because Crrist
WAS LORD OF HEAVEN AND EARTH HE INTERFERED AS LITTLE AS POSSIBLE WITH THE
LAWS OF NATURE. He did not offer, as the magicians did, to change the courses of
the elements, to bring down tempests and thunderbolts. Why should He? All
the physical forces were fulfilling His will already, and He had no need to disturb
them. Rather He loved to tell men to look at them, and see how they went well
because His Father cared for them, III. Bur men wound nor BELIEVE. They
craved after signs and wonders. They saw God’s hand, not in the common sights
of this beautiful world, but only in strange portents, absurd and lying miracles, and
so built up a literature of unreason which remains till this day a doleful monument
of human folly and superstition. 1. This is true of some now. They regard what-
ever is strange and inexplicable as coming immediately from God; but whatever
they are accustomed to as coming in the course of nature. If a man drops down
dead he died ‘‘ by the visitation of God”; as if any created thing could die or live
either save by the will and presence of God. If an earthquake were to swallow up
half London it would be a Divine visitation, yet they will not see the true visitation
in every drop of rain. 2. Contrast this with the sentiments of the men who wrote
psas. exxxix., xix.,civ. Let usall pray for the spirit which inspired these men. IY.
WHEN ALL THINGS GO ON IN A COMMONPLACE WAY WITH US, HOW APT WE ARE TO
ForGET Gop; but when sorrow comes how changed we are all of asudden! How
we cry to God and feel the need of prayer! If He will do this thing for us we will
believe. Andif He treated usin adversity as we have treated Him in prosperity, what
could we say? But He will not, because He is pitiful. So we can have hope. (C.
Kingsley, M.A.) The universal passion for mtracles:—I. Desire for special pxTRa-
ORDINARY FORTUNE to befall us, while we do not exert ourselves to obtain that which
satisfies. II. Waiting for EXTRAORDINARY HELP in exigency, when we will not
earnestly use the right means. III. Yearning for EXTRAORDINARY FRUITS OF OUR
LABouR, when we will not sow, hoping in faith. IV. Desire of EXTRAORDINARY
VIOLENT ASSISTANCE when we wish to get rid of faults, while we ourselves do not lift
a hand. V. Expectation of Honour, &c., while yet we have done or sacrificed
nothing for the glory of God. (Heubner.) Characteristics of faith -—I. FarrH IN
THREE OF ITS STAGES. 1. When faith begins in a soul it is but as a grain of mustard
seed. God’s people are babes at first. ‘The first stage of faith is a seeking faith.
This faith—-(1) Excites activity. There is no, more idleness in religion. The


~


414 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (crap. IV
ef
means of grace are used and the Bible read, &c. (2) Although weak in some thinga
it gives great power in prayer. How earnest was the nobleman. ‘Come down,”
&c. In this stage a man has not power to say, “ My sins are forgiven; ”’ to that,
Christ can forgive. A thousand difficulties will be surmounted. (3) It gives
importunity in prayer. It will not give over at an apparent rebuff. (4) This faith
can do much, but it makes mistakes. It knows too little. It knows not that Christ
can work a miracle without coming down, and expects that Christ will work in its
way. 2. In the second stage faith takes Christ at His word, and the believer
realizes the happiness of believing. He is saved. (1) It dares to believe without
sensible evidence. (2) It brings quietness and peace of mind. The nobleman was
satisfied and was in no violent hurry to return. 3. Faith blossoms in assurance
and usefulness. (1) Doubts are dispelled. (2) His household believes. When the
Father believes He ought not to rest satisfied until his children are saved. II.
Diseases to which faith is subject. 1. With regard to seeking faith. We are very
likely when we are seeking to begin to suspend prayerfulness. 2. Those who are
trusting implicitly are in danger of wanting to see signs and wonders. Do not place
reliance on anything you have dreamed, or seen, or heard, but on Christ. So many
Christians want the signs of a revival in noisy demonstrations and not in God’s way.
3. The disease which lies in the way of our attaining full assurance is want of
observation. The nobleman made careful inquiries. Hethat looks for provyidences
will never lack a providence to look at. III. THrex QUESTIONS ABOUT FAITH. 1.
Thou sayest ‘I have faith.” Beit so. Many a man says he has gold, but has it
not. Does thy faith make thee pray? 2. Does that faith make thee obedient?
3. Has it led thee to bless thy household? (C. H. Spurgeon.) Except ye
see signs and wonders, ye will not believe:—Let us dismiss the idea that these
words had any special reference to the courtier, and let us regard them as an
exclamation wrung from Jesus by a deep feeling in His own mind, in which He
apostrophized the whole multitude of His countrymen. The courtier’s urgent
request was not the cause, but the occasion, of the exclamation—I. No doubt our
LorD MEANT TO COMPLAIN Of SOMETHING WHICH SADDENED AND VEXED Him; and
that something was the necessity of doing miracles in order to attract the children
of men, and to keep them when attracted. If we ask why He disliked the necessity
of doing signs and wonders, the answer is twofold. 1. Because the character
which He gained by such means was in great measure hateful to Him. He was
looked upon by very many as a very successful magician or conjurer. Was it not
odious to have everybody talking about Him, running after Him, asking Him to do
a miracle to gratify their curiosity, saying that He did miracles by the power of
Satan? 2. Signs and wonders are in themselves useless, if not objectionable. All
interferences with the course of nature are undesirable in themselves. God has
made the outward order of things to suit the general character and needs given.
The sorrows of life are just as needful for us as its joys; its poverty is as whole-
some as its wealth; death is quite as good a friend as life. Nothing could be more
disastrous than that the common balance of joy and grief, of life and death, should
be seriously disarranged. Christ did not come to do “‘ miracles’; He did not come
to thwart and undo the work of suffering, disease, and death; He came to bless
and sanctify their work; not to change the ordinary conditions of human life, but
to help us to live better, holier, happier, under those conditions. It was a mistake
then, but not His mistake. It was the mistake of the people. They would come
to Him, and beg Him to do this or that outward thing for them, and pray Him so
earnestly, so humbly, so trustfully, that He could not help Himself—having the
power, He had not the heart to refuse. II. I can only see one valid objection to
this position, viz., THAT GoD WOULD NOT HAVE GiveEN His SERVANT THESE GIFTS
HAD THEY BEEN 80 LITTLE GOOD IN THEMSELVES. But God ‘has ever, in the whole
process of revelation, accommodated Himself to the moral and spiritual condition of
His people at the time being. That Christ should do signs and wonders in the age
and in the land in which He appeared was inevitable because it was necessary to
place Him in strict harmony with His spiritual surroundings. Miracles have
practically ceased long ago, not because the Lord’s arm is shortened, but because
the faith and piety of Christians have outgrown the craving for miracles while a
larger knowledge has led men to doubt their usefulness. Did not our Lord possess
that larger knowledge? Did He not desire to find that higher faith and piety ?
(R. Winterbotham, M.A.) Signs and wonders :—These words (répag onuivor,
civapic, évdokov, mapddotov, Savudoiov) have this in gommon, that "they are
all used to characterize the supernatural works wrought by Christ in the days


{
i
i
+


CHAP. Iv.] ST. JOHN, 415


of His flesh: thus onuiiv (John ii. 11; Acts ii. 19), répag (Acts ii. 22; John
iv. 48), dvvayic (Mark vi. 2; Acts ii. 22), fvdofov (Luke xiii. 17), wapdadozov
(Luke v. 26), Qavudcioy (Mark xxi. 15); while the first three, which are far
the most usual, are in like manner employed of the same supernatural works
wrought in the power of Christ by His apostles (2 Cor. xii. 12). They will be
found, on examination, not so much to represent different kinds of miracles, as
miracles contemplated under different aspects and from different points of view.
Tépac and onpétoy are often linked together in the New Testament (John iv. 48;
Acts ii. 22, iv. 30; 2 Cor. xii. 12), and times out of number in the Septuagint.
The same miracle is upon one side a répac, on another a ojpueorv, and the words
must often refer, not to different classes of miracles, but to different qualities in the
same miracles, _ Origen long ago called attention to the fact that the name répara
is never in the New Testament applied to these works of wonder except in associa-
tion with some other name. ‘They are often called onpéta, often duvapéiic, often
tépara kai onueia, more than once répara, onpiva, cai dvvapeic, but never répara
alone. The observation was well worth making; for the fact which we are thus
bidden to note is indeed eminently characteristic of the miracles of the New Testa-
ment, viz., that a title by which more than any other these might seem to hold on
to the prodigies and portents of the heathen world, and to have something akin to
them, should thus never be permitted to appear except in company of some other
necessarily suggesting higher thoughts about them. But miracles are also onpia,
which name brings out their ethical end with the greatest, as repag with the least
distinctness. It is declared in the very word that the prime object and end of the
miracle is to lead to something out of and beyond itself: that, so to speak, it isa kind
of finger-post of God; valuable not so much for what it is as for what it indicates of
the grace and power of the doer, or of the connection with a higher world in which he
stands (Mark xvi. 20; Acts xiv. 3; Heb. ii. 4; Exod. vii. 9, 10; 1 Kings ili. 3). It
is to be regretted that onuéoy is not always rendered “sign” in our version; that
in St. John it too often gives place to the vaguer ‘“‘ miracle”; and sometimes not
without serious loss ; thus see John iii. 2; vii. 31; x. 41; and above all, John vi. 26.
(Abp. Trench.) The human tendency to make a difficulty of believing :—Charles
Wesley had been for years groping in spiritual darkness,


* Without one cheering beam of hope,
Or spark of glimmering day.”


On a bright morning in May, 1738, he awoke, wearied and sick at heart, but in high
expectation of the coming blessing. He lay on his bed “ full of tossings to and fro,”
erying out, ‘‘O Jesus, Thou hast said, ‘I will come unto you’; Thou hast said, ‘1
will send the Comforter unto you’; Thou hast said, ‘My Father and I will come
unto you, and make Our abode with you.’ Thou art God who canst not lie. I
wholly rely upon Thy promise. Accomplish it in Thy time and manner.” A poor
woman, Mrs. Turner, heard his groaning, and, constrained by an impulse never felt
before, put her head into his room and gently said, ‘‘In the name of Jesus of
Nazareth, arise and believe, and thou shalt be healed of all thine infirmities.” He
listened, and then exclaimed, ‘* Oh that Christ would but thus speak tome!” He
inquired who it was that had whispered in his ear these life-giving words, A great
struggle agitated his whole man, and in another moment he exclaimed, ‘I believe!
I believe!” He then found redemption in the blood of the Lamb, experiencing the
forgiveness of sins, and could look up and


“ Behold, without a cloud between,
The Godhead reconciled.”


The hymn he wrote to commemorate the anniversary of his spiritual birth shows
the mighty change that had taken place, and is best expressed in his own language—


‘Oh, for a thousand tongues to sing!”


(New Cyclopedia of Anecdote.) Sir, come down ere my child die.—The Christian
calls his Saviour to his sick ;—I. Hz cauus Hm. II. In pure time. III. In THe
RIGHT spirit, IV. WITH THE MOST BLESSED RESULT. (Bachmann.) Prayer :—
I. Irs opsect. Christ as—l1. Human—sympathizing. 2. Divine—helpful. II.
Irs mopE oF appress. 1. Respectful. ‘Sir.’ All true prayer should begin with


416 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAr. tv.


adoration. The urgency of our case sometimes leads us to forget this. 2. Entreating
as inspired by consciousness of real need. 3. Importunate as evidencing earnest-
ness. III. Irs supsnct mattER. “My child.” The first object of a parent’s
desire is his child’s—1. Life. 2. Support. 3. Salvation, IV. Irs motive. 1.
Unselfish. It seeks the good of others. 2. And yet selfish, for the father’s happi-
ness was wrapped up in his child. So the well-being of others will re-act upon us.
To give is unselfish, but it re-acts on self because it is more blessed than to receive.
V. Irs necessrry. See this in family trials. Directness in prayer :—A Scotch-
man’s wife besought him to pray that the life of their dying baby might be spared.
True to his old instincts, the good man kneeled down devoutly, and went out on the
well-worn track, as he was wont to do in the prayer-meetings at the kirk. Through
and through the-routine petitions he wandered along helplessly, until he reached at
last the honoured quotation: ‘‘Lord, remember Thine ancient people, and turn
again the captivity of Zion!” A mother’s heart could hold its patience no longer.
“Eh, man!” the woman broke forth impetuously ; ‘‘ you are aye drawn out for the
Jews, but it’s our bairn that’s a-deein’.” Then, clasping her hands, she cried:
‘©Oh! help us, Lord, and give our darling back to us if it be Thy holy will; but if
he is to be taken away from us, make us know Thou wilt have him to Thyself!”
That wife knew what it was to pray a real prayer; and to the throne of grace she
went, asking directly what she wanted-most. (James Hamilton, D.D.) Prayers
of a father :—Philip James Spener had a son of eminent talents, but perverse and
extremely vicious, All means of love and persuasion were without success. The
father could only pray, which he continued to do, that the Lord might yet be
pleased to save his son at any time and in any way. The son fell sick ; and while
lying on his bed in great distress of, mind, nearly past the power of speech or
motion, he suddenly started up, clasped his hands, and exclaimed: ‘‘ My father’s
prayers, like mountains, surround me!” Soon after his anxiety ceased a sweet
peace spread over his face, his malady came to a crisis, and the son was saved in
body and soul. He became another man. Spener lived to see his son a respect-
able man, in public office, and happily married. Such was the change of his life
after his conyersion. (N. E. Puritan.) Jesus the Saviour of the children :—
General H. used to take his little son into his arms and talk with him about
Jesus. The little boy never grew tired of that ‘‘ sweet story.” It was always new
to him. One day, while sitting in his father’s lap, his papa said to him, “‘ Would
my little son like to go to heaven?”  ‘‘ Yes, papa,’ he answered. ‘‘ But,” said
the father, “‘ how can you go to heaven? Your little heart is full of sin. How
can you expect to go where God is?” ‘But all are sinners, papa,” the little
fellow answered. ‘‘ That is true,” replied the father ; ‘‘and yet God has said that
only the pure in heart shall see Him. How, then, can my little boy expect to go
there?’ The dear little fellow’s face grew very sad. His heart seemed full, and,
bursting into tears, he laid his head on his father’s bosom and sobbed out, ‘Papa,
Jesus can saveme.” (New Cyclopedia.) The man believed the word that Jesus
spake.—From faith to faith:—I. Faith prompreD HIM TO coME To Curist. He
felt his need and knew Jesus could help. A lesser form of faith—elementary.
II. Faith prompreD HIS PRAYER TO Cunist. III. Faith rmmpxiciriy accerTrp THE
worD oF Curist. IV. Faith was coNSUMMATED BY THE FULFILMENT OF THE WORD
or Curist. (Family Churchman.) Taking God at His Word :—This appears to
be the easiest of rules. But practically none is harder; certainly none is so little
kept. I. Between man and man THE SOCIAL LAW OF FAITH IS SO STRICT THAT IF
YOU DO NOT BELIEVE WHAT A MAN SAYS YOU ARE HELD TO COMMIT THE GREATEST
WRONG YOU CAN INFLICT UpoN HIM, And God has the same sense of jealousy for
His own truthfulness, and the same indignant feeling of wrong and outrage when
His Word is questioned. Unbelief is giving God the lie. It is no light thing to
treat any word of God as an unreality ; it is an insult thrown in Hisface. II. Wuo
DOES TAKE Gop aT His worp? The timid man? the unhappy man? the loiterer ?
the man who has no peace? the man who doubts his interest? the man who puts
away the promises? Can any one of these escape the condemnation? III, Aru
we TAKING Gop at His worp? 1. God says, ‘‘ All have sinned.’ Do you realize
yourself a helpless sinner? 2. Jesus said, “ It is finished.” “Have you accepted
your salvation as a finished thing, or are you thinking “‘I must do something to
secure my salvation?” 3. He says, ‘‘ He that cometh unto Me,” &c. Do you say

‘‘T fear He will not receive me.”’ 4, He says ‘the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth
from all sin.” But you say, ‘‘ No, not quiteall.” 5. He says to penitents, ‘* You
are forgiven now ;” but you read it, “I shall be forgiven by and by.” 6. He says,


es ae


CHAP. 1v.] ST. JOHN. 417


“Take no thought—I will provide.” But.you are anxious. Is all this taking God
at His word? IV. THe MEANS OF CULTIVATING THE BLESSED ART. 1. You must


go back to the simplicities of childhood. If its confidence has not been abused a


little child takes everybody at his word, and never suspects anybody. 2. You must
take honouring views of what God’s Word is. The Spirit of God Himself is in that
Word. 3. You must acquaint yourself with the Speaker. How shall we trust the
Word if we do not trust the Speaker? (J. Vaughan, M.A.) The obedience of
faith :—It is an incident of the life of Napoleon that one day, while reviewing his
troops in Paris, he let fall the bridle reins upon his horse’s neck, when the spirited
animal at once dashed down the line. Before Napoleon could recover his seat and
check the horse, a common soldier sprang from the ranks, caught the reins,
stopped the excited horse, and placed the bridle in the hands of the emperor, who
took it and said, ‘“‘Much obliged to you, captain.” The soldier immediately
answered, ‘‘Of what regiment, sire?” Napoleon, delighted with his quick
perception and ready faith, replied, “Of my guards,” and rode away. The soldier
laid down his musket, saying, ‘‘ He may take it who will,” and started at once for
the officers’ tent, where he was duly installed as captain of the guard. With an
obedience and a faith equally prompt the Jewish nobleman went his way.
(Sermons by the Monday Club.) _ Benefits of apious parentage :—‘* Thy son liveth.”
So the son was restored by his father’s faith. It is a benefit to be born of good
parents. Personal goodness is profitable to posterity. (J. Trapp.) True faith:—
A father was once amusing his children with an electric machine, and after one or
two had received the shock they drew back from the apparatus with evident dread.
The father presently held out the jar uncharged, and consequently harmless, and
said, ‘‘If you touch it now, you will feel nothing. Will you try?” The children
drew back with their hands behind them. ‘Don’t you believe me?” asked he.
‘© Yes, sir,” and the hands were held out to prove their faith, but were quickly
withdrawn before they reached the dangerous knob. One alone, a timid little girl,
had that kind of confidence which really led her to trust her father. The rest
believed, but had not heartfelt faith. Even the little believer’s faith was not
unwavering. You could see on her face, when the little knuckle approached the
harmless brass ball, a slight expression of anxiety, showing she had some doubts
and fears after all; and there was an evident feeling of relief when, from actual
trial, she experienced the case to be as her father represented it. The fever left
him.—lIn Palestine, as in all other Oriental countries, fevers are very prevalent ;
but the fatality varies greatly according to the locality, The commonest form is a
low kind of intermittent fever, malarial in character, and accompanied by a
dangerous flux. This leads to a great nervous weakness and exhaustion; and the
fever has a tendency to hang on for an indefinite period of time. Among the Arabs
of the Sinaitic peninsula this intermittent fever is very prevalent, but a fatal
termination is comparatively rare. It is specially interesting, in connection with
this lesson, in which the nobleman’s son lies sick at Capernaum, to remember that
the site of Capernaum is famous to this day for the number and the malignancy of its
fevers. The country lies low, and the land round about is marshy; so that during
the hot season the conditions are favourable for producing fevers of the worst sort.
There was a natural reason, therefore, why the nobleman’s son should lie sick at
Capernaum. (H. C. Trumbull, D.D.) Here is a clear and beautiful illustration
of the apostle’s words, that ‘‘ God is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that
we ask or think” (Eph. iii. 20). The nobleman expected an amendment, or begin-
ning to amend. Christ bestowed at once perfect health: “The fever left him.”
Numberless are the instances of God’s overflowing grace in this respect, as we have
before noted (Jl. Mark viii. 23, x. 13, 16; Luke i. 67, xviii. 14, xix. 4, xxiii. 43),
(J. Ford, M.A.) Himself believed and his whole house.—The house of the
Christian when God visits it with trouble. The trouble—I. UNITES THE MEMBERS
IN TENDERER LOVE. II. Directs THEIR HEARTS MORE TRUSTFULLY To THE Lop.
III. AWAKENS THEM TO IMPORTUNATE PRAYER AND INTERCESSION. IV. PRopucEs aT
LAST A JOYFUL AND THANKFUL FAITH. (Lisco.) Family religion :—In a family
where religion is known and God devoutly worshipped there is a conscientious tie
on every one to discharge the duties that belong to his station; a tie strengthened
by eternal rewards and punishments, and laid on the very soul. ‘The parent and
master consider themselves as accountable for the principles and, in a great measure,
for the salvation of their children and their servants. The children and servants
consider that they are to honour their parents as the representatives of God, and
not to render only an eye-service, but so to obey and serve as those who in even


ae


418 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. v,


an nnSinnannnmee


the most secret thought and action lie apen to the eyes of God. This produces
a mutual discharge of duty on both sides; and that gives peace, order, and
happiness to the whole family (Psa. ci; exviii. 15). (P. Skelton.) The same
hour.—We also sometimes meet with voices on our way which come to us as an.
echo of our faith. I have heard of a Colonel von M—— who on account of treason
to his king and country was sentenced to a long imprisonment, and who, in his
solitary cell at Galatz, in Silesia, began at last to seek the living God whose image had
been for so long almost obliterated within him. He was allowed to have no book except
his Bible, and though at first in reading it his only feeling was inward rage and
gnashing of teeth, yet by degrees he felt the soothing of God’s tender hand on his
desolate and comfortless heart. During a sleepless night he suddenly feels for
the first time since his childhood as if he could pray. He opens the Bible, and
reads these words: ‘‘ Call upon Me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and
thou shalt glorify Me” (Bsa. 1. 15). Wherefore he calls upon God: “Lord,
reveal Thyself to me, and deliver me from the misery of my unbelief.” And it
was granted to him to believe the word which God was speaking to him; the
tender and unspeakably indulgent Lord who despises not the faintest movement
of faith, had seen and rewarded the coming to Him of this miserable man. He
rises from his knees comforted, convinced in his conscience that a contact had
taken place between his soul and the living God, and that, further, he should get
to be able to glorify God. In that same night, the king of this colonel lay on his
bed tormented with pain. He prayed God for an hour of quiet sleep; he slept,
and when he awoke again refreshed, he said to his wife: ‘‘God has looked upon
me very graciously, and I would fain be thankful to Him for it. Who is the man
in my dominions who has the most deeply.injured me ?—this day I will forgive that
man.’ He considered a moment, and then he exclaimed, ‘‘ Colonel M——. Let
him be pardoned!’? When the news of his release reached the prisoner, and
the doubly-pardoned man inquired the hour in which God had softened the king’s
heart, it was found that the same God still lives as of old, and that He still
performs through His outstretched right arm what we read in. (R. Besser, D.D.)
The second miracle.—We should cownt our mercies :—God keeps count of what He
doth for us, and will call for a reckoning. Should not we keep a register? write
up the noble acts of the Lord? make a catalogue of them, such an one as was that
in Judges x. 11, 12. According to this term, and many the like in sacred Scripture,
we should polish and garnish, embroider and embellish, the great works of God, or
else we undervalue them, which He will not bear with. (J. Trapp.)


CHAPTER V.


Vers. 1-18. After this there was a feast of the Jews.—The Pool of Bethesda, a
type of favoured localities in a religious community in which the highest miraculous
aid has not yet appeared:—The miraculous aid is—I. Eniemarican: An angel
troubling the water. II. Occastonan: At a certain season. III, Exrremeny
LimiTED; To the one who steps in first. IV. To many unavarLaBLE: The impotent.
(J. P. Lange, D.D.) Lhe working of God in the medicinal spring an emblem of
the saving work of God in general:—I, In irs rorms. 1. The saving operation
of the Father in the kingdom of nature. 2. That of the Son in the kingdom of
grace. Il. In irs sraces, 1. Cbrist’s miraculous healing and raising of dead in
general. 2, The spiritual awakening and the organic unfolding of salvation in the
New Testament dispensation, 38. The finished work of salvation in the general
resurrection. (Ibid.) Lhe sins of summer watering-places :—Outside Jerusalem
there was a watering-place, the popular resort for invalids. At a certain season an
angel troubled the water. That angel has his counterpart in the angel of healing
thet in our day steps into the mineral springs or into the salt sea, where multitudes
who are worn out with commercial or professional anxieties, as well as those who
are affected with disease, go and are cured. These Bethesda’s are scattered all up
and down our country, thank God. Let not the merchant begrudge the employé
or the patient the physician, or the Church its pastor, a season of inoceupation.
But I have to declare the truth that our fashionable watering-places are the temporal
and eternal destruction of thousands. I: The first temptation that hovers in this


ca
ee


“+, * oe a.


CHAP, V.] ST. JOHN. 419


direction is To LEAVE YOUR PIETY AT HomME, Elders and deacons and ministers, who
are entirely consistent ai home sometimes when the Sabbath dawn., take it all to
themselves. On the other days the air is bewitched with the world, the flesh, and the
devil, and the toughest thing is to keep religion. II. Another temptation is the Hors
RACING BUSINESS. I never knew a man who could give himself to the pleasures of
the turf and not be batteredin morals, And the betting, drunkenness, and financial
ruin associated with it everywhere cluster round it under a pleasant pseudonym at
the watering-place. III. The temptation to sacRIFICE PHYSICAL STRENGTH. Instead
of recuperating their health many lose it. Families accustomed to retire early
gossip until one or two in the morning, and dyspeptics take strange liberties with
viands they would be afraid to touch at home. IV. THE FORMATION OF HASTY AND
UNDESIRABLE ALLIANCES. Watering-places are responsible for more of the domestic
infelicities of this country than all other things combined. You might as well go
among the gaily-painted yachts of a summer regatta to find war vessels, as to go
among the light spray of the summer watering-place to find character that can
stand the test of the great struggle of human life. Ah! in the battle of life you
want a stronger weapon than a lace fan or a croquet mallet! The load of life is so
heavy that in order to draw it you want a team stronger than one made up of a
masculine grasshopper and a feminine butterfly. V. The temptation to BANEFUL
LITERATURE. ‘There is more pestiferous waste read by the intelligent classes in July
and August than in the other ten months of the year. Men and women, who at
home would not be satisfied with a book that was not really sensible, read those
which ought to make them blush. ‘Oh, you must have intellectual recreation.”
Yes, there is no need to take books on metaphysics. But you might as well say,
‘I propose now to give a little rest to my digestive organs, and instead of eating
heavy meat and vegetables, I will, for a little while, take lighter food—a little
strychnine and a few grains of ratsbane.” Literary poison in August is as bad as
literary poison in December. VI. The temptation to INTOXICATING BEVERAGE. The
watering-place is full of this temptation ; after the bath, the game, the dinner, in
the morning and at night the custom is to tipple. VII. Concxusion: 1. The grace
of God is the only safe shelter. 2. There are spiritual watering-places accessible
toall. (I. De Witt Talmage, D.D.) The house of mercy :—Bethesda means house
of mercy, and we have sucha House and such a pool in the Church of God and the
water of salvation. The pool was a crowded spot, and the poor crippled man had
been all these years without findinga place init. I, But THERE Is Room IN CHRIST’s
House or MERCY, AND IT IS THE BEST PLACE For ALL. 1, For little children, 2. For
young men and maidens. 3. For the old, II. God’s House is the best place for
all WHO HAVE SINNED AND REPENTED. Very often people who have gone wrong cease
to come to Church. They feel unfit. But let them repent and come homelike the
prodigal. Then they will find pardon and peace. III. God’s House is the best
place for those WHO CAME TO JESUS, BUT HAVE GONE BACK AGAIN. Can that companion
of drunkards and bad women be the same who used to say, “Our Father” with
innocent lips, and was ashamed to tella lie? Are you happier for going back from
Jesus? Well, there is room for even you in the House of Mercy, and cleansing for
you in the Blood of Jesus. IV. How MANY OF US ARE LYING LIKE THESE MEN AT
Beruespa? 1. Some of us are paralyzed by sin, evil habits, worldliness. 2.
Some are dumb who babble in the world but never speak to God. 3. Some are deaf
who hear the offers of the market, yet cannot hear the offers of God. 4, Here in
God’s House of mercy there is a hospital for all manner of disease. (H. J. W.
Buaton, M.A.) Waiting in mercy’s house:—1. Who wonders that a place which
had such a history as that described in this chapter should be called mercy’s house?
We should not have been surprised if we had heard of it as being near the Temple ;
put, as if God would teach us that His mercy is to be got wherever sought, the house
of mercy is close by the place where. money is made. 2. How came the five
porches to be built? Had some of those which had found health built them
for the comfort of seekers for mercy, and thus shown their appreciation of what
they had received? Let those who find grace to help in the means provided see
that others have the chance of getting the same privileges. Let us write on the
walls of these porches—I, Iv 1s NEVER TOO LATE TO MEND. It is evident this man
thought so. Thirty-eight years hoping for a cure. How often he had been dis-
appointed! One can see him as he smiles a sickly smile, and whispers, ‘6 Better
luck next time.” Some need to be encouraged to hope that it is not too late to be
cured of the malady which threatens their soul. Do not despair. Satan could not
wish for anything better than that your hopes should die, and your prayers cease.


Zs
420 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. omar.


ee LEE EIU Dvn Sunes aI SESS SSS
II. On the second porch, write, wAITING oN THE LorD Is TRUE wisDom. If you don’t
wish to grow worse, keep in mercy’s house. Do not be persuaded to give up going
to Church, How pleased the enemy of your soul would be if he could but persuade
you to spend the whole of your life away from God. “ Faith cometh by hearing.”
Some convinced of sin, never able to rejoice in God our Saviour, are tempted to
giveup. People might have said to this man, “ Why keep going to the pool?” “If
I die without salvation, I will die at the feet of the Saviour.” III. On the third
porch, write, CHRIst 18 THE SHORT WAY TO comForT. The pool was called the house
of mercy, but Christ was mercy itself. All mere human instrumentalities are to
Jesus what the house is to the Master. We have an indication of Christ’s plan of
saving men, The poor man did not ask Jesus to heal him. It was mercy who took
the initiative. Christ gave a command as wellas askeda question. ‘‘Take up thy
bed and walk.” This was something that was a physical impossibility ; yet the
man made the effort, and was helped of God, and so was made whole. Jesus says
to you, who are willing to be saved, ‘Believe on Me.” Why say you cannot
believe? God’s commandments are promises. He never commands what He will
not help us to do. IV. In the next of the porches we will write up, THE NEWLY
SAVED MAY EXPECT A CHECK. The man was met as he was going down the street by
those who objected to his carrying his bed. Do not be surprised if some one tries
to rob you of your new-found joy. Let not any one stop you from joy in the Lord,
it is your strength. V. There is yet one porch on which we will write, sin witL
HURT YOU MORE THAN DISEASE. ‘“ Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.”
(T. Champness.) Scripture a record of human sorrow :—What a scene of misery
Bethesda must have presented. JI. THE BrstE Is FULL OF SUCH DESCRIPTIONS OF
HUMAN MISERY. It begins with the history of the curse, and ends with predictions
of judgments. II. And, further, 1r SEEMS TO DROP WHAT MIGHT BE SAID IN FAVOUR
OF THIS LIFE, and enlarges on the unpleasant side of it. Little does it say on the
pleasures of life. But then human tales and poems make things better than they
are. Scripture tells the truth, ‘‘Man is born to trouble.’ IJ. Tuis view Is THE
ULTIMATE AND TRUE VIEW OF HUMAN LIFE, AND A VIEW WHICH IT CONCERNS US MUCH
TO KNOW, else we shall be obliged to learn it by sad experience; whereas if we are
forewarned we shall unlearn false notions of its excellence and be saved from dis-
appointment, and learn to bear a sober and calm heart under a smiling cheerful
countenance. IV. ConsmpER WHAT IS THE CONSEQUENCE OF IGNORANCE OR DISTRUST
or GoD’s WARNING voice. For a while all will be enjoyment: health is good, spirit
high, troubles easily mastered; but as years roll on it is discovered that substantial
good is wanting. Then a man will get restless and discontented, for he dces
not know how to amuse himself. He has made no effort to change his heart,
strengthen his faith, or subdue his passions. Now their day is come, and they
begin to domineer. He had no habitual thought of God in the former time, and
now he dreads Him. Where shall he look for succour? To those around him he is
a burden. And so he will lie year after year by Bethesda no one helping him, and
unable from long habits of sin to advance towards a cure. V. THERE IS A MORE
SOLEMN CONSIDERATION STILL—THAT TAUGHT BY Lazarus AND Dives. Suppose the
world to remain a faithful friend till the last, its vanity will be disclosed after death.
These disclosures of Scripture, then, are intended to save us pain by preventing the
unreserved enjoyment of the world. Let this not seem to make life melancholy,
The true Christian rejoices in those earthly things which give joy, but in
such a way as not to care for them when they go. VI. Our Saviour aives
US A PATTERN WHICH WE ARE BOUND TO FoLLow. ‘True, such self-command
composure and inward faith are not to be learned in a day; if they were why should
this life be given us? It is given us as a preparation time for obtaining them. Its
sights and sorrows are to calm you, and its pleasant sights to try you. Learn to be
as the angel who could descend among the miseries of Bethesda without losing his
purity or happiness. Gain healing from troubled waters. Be light-hearted and
contented because you are a member of Christ’s pilgrim Church. (J. H. Newman,
D.D.) An old Jerusalem infirmary :—I. THE wosprrau (vers. 2,3). 1. Its site.
Where God has a temple His worshippers should found a hospital (Isa. lvii. 7;
Matt. xxv. 35-40). 2. Itsform. It was not the five porches of man’s construction

but the water of God’s providing that healed; but the former enabled patients to
take advantage of the latter. In nature and grace man is permitted to be God’s
fellow-worker (Deut. viii. 3, viii. 18; Psa. xxiii. 1, lxvii. 6; Hosea ii. 21; 2 Cor.
xi. 1; Phil. ii, 13), but in both He is ‘‘ Jehovah Rophi” (Exod. xv. 26; Deut. xxxii.
39: Psa. cili. 3). 3. Its name: House of Grace, than which none could be more


a a a


CHAP. v.] ST. JOHN. 421


appropiate for an institution whose origin was love and whose end was healing, and
to which Christ came. 4. Its inmates: specimens of the poor creatures who still
crowd the world’s infirmaries, and emblems of spiritual invalids. II. Tue patient
(ver. 5). 1. A great sufferer for half a lifetime. 2. A friendless outcast, touching


the lowest deep of human wretchedness (Psa. ‘cxlii. 4). Many such in the lazar


house of humanity. 3. Adisappointed seeker. One wonders that his heart was not
broken by his endless disappointments (Prov. xiii. 12, xviii.14). But ‘“ hope springs
eternal in the human breast” (Rom. viii. 24). What a comfort there are no such
disappointed seekers after spiritual health (Isa. xlv. 19; Matt. vii.7,8; Zech. xiii.
1; Tit. iii. 5). III. Tae Puysicran (ver. 6), 1. His quick observation. Christ’s
people should cultivate the ‘“‘ seeing eye,” for there is no lack of opportunities (Eccl.
ix. 10; Heb. xiii. 6). 2. His perfect diagnosis. Christ apprehends both the man
and his malady in every instance (Psa. vii. 9, cxix. 168, exxxix. 14; Prov. xv. 11;
John i, 48, ii. 24,25, iv. 29; Rev. ii. 23). 3. His tender compassion, implied if not
expressed. He distinguished between the sinner and his sin (ver. 14). So in
imitation of Matt. v. 45 Christian philanthropy should embrace the criminal classes
within its care (Gal. vi. 10). 4. His hopeful inquiry. 5. His extraordinary pre-
scription equivalent to Eph. v. 14; Marki. 15. Christian duty transcends natural
ability, but what Christ commands He is willing to supply (chap. i.12). IV. Tue
curE. 1. Instantaneous, like all His cures physical and spiritual. 2. Complete.
(I. Whitelaw, D.D.) A hospital sermon:—I. CHRIST ALWAYS HONOURED THE
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES OF His pay. He shows us—l. The advantage of church
institutions. 2. The relative value of religious ritual. 3. The duty of public worship.
II. Near tHe Tempe was A HospiTan. The connection between the Church and
benevolent institutions (and between the philanthropist and the Christian) is vital.
Show one and you will find—1, That Christian love has started it. 2. That
Christian liberality has supported it. 3. That Christian charity has been its daily
guardian, III], WHat HAVE THE SYSTEMS OF INFIDELITY DONE FOR THE POOR AND
SICK OF OUR LAND? Did Voltaire ever endow an almshouse? What have Tom
Paine, Rousseau, Hume, Gibbon, &c., done for the amelioration of the race? What
building stands to commemorate the sympathy, heroism, and liberality of the
secularism of our day? It was the Christian in Howard that made him a religious
reformer; in Wilberforce that made him a slave emancipator; that inspired
Florence Nightingale, &e. The Church is the poor man’s refuge; the Bible the
sorrowing man’s hope; Christ the world’s great need ; heaven the weary man’s rest.
(G. Minkle.) Bethesda:—I. Tux poou. 1. In Jerusalem, typical of the Church
into which you have been introduced by baptism. 2. The poolitself isemblematical
of that “‘ Fountain opened in the house of David,” &c. It is full, not of water, but
of Spirit, and His baptism is life to the soul and healing and power to its injured
and enfeebled faculties. 8. The five porches set forth the five springs in the Rock
of Ages, hands, feet, side, each yielding its separate stream of blessing. II. Tuosz
WHO LAY ROUND THE PooL. 1. Representatives of the unconverted citizens of the
Spiritual Jerusalem. (1) The blind, unable to discern the right hand from the left,
nay, incapable of seeing any hand to the soul at all. (2) The halt, divested of
faculty for every motion. (3) The withered, incompetent “as paralytics are” to
move the limbs or organs of the soul. Why, if the powers of the congregation were
suddenly let loose, the results would arouse the whole world: there would not be a
house in the district, however poor and sinful ; however rich and worldly, that
would not be beset, as it were, by a host of inspired apostles. Attempt to move men
in their ordinary state to Sunday-school teaching, missionary exertion, or hearty
contribution towards religious objects: some will say, We cannot see the matter as
you do; others will say, We approve of the object, but cannot move in it ; we are
bound by such special bonds that we cannot stir in the case, or if we went and
followed your advice, we should be helpless as the dead. What is this but being
blind, halt, withered? 2. Take the case of an actual believer. He may feel himself
providentially impeded; his way may be hidden, his powers confined, fast bound
with bonds invisible. The thought of what a neighbour, or a newspaper, or an enemy,
or a dignitary may say, ties him as within: gates of brass. He would speak, but
invisible ligatures fasten histongue. He willsay, “ For thatI should have a higher
position, a larger fortune, more vigorous powers.” Well, this may be true; yet an
energetic grasp of the Hand that moves the universe might remove all these restric-
tions. III. THe TROUBLING or THE PooL. 1. The day: the Sabbath. The pool is
always troubled, but the Lord’s day is the day for finding it out. Abolish Sunday
and not only would the pool be neglected, but it would become dry. 2. The place;


™


~~


499 THE BIBLICAL tLLUSTRATOR. fonar. °,

EE ES ES AS
God’s House, not exclusively of course, for it is everywhere accessible But here
dre unusual facilities. 8. The troublers: God’s ministers as His agents. (1) By
prayer. (2) By preaching. (3) By sacraments. (7. D. Gregg, D.D.) ‘Bethesda:
—I. How EAGER WERE THESE FOLE To BE cuRED! Would that there were the same
earnestness for the healing of the soul. II. Gop causeED THE TROUBLING OF THE
WATERS, BUT LEFT THE SICK TO GET THEMSELVES IN. As Matthew Henry says, ‘‘ God
has put virtue into Scripture and ordinances, and if we do not make a due im-
provement of them, it is our own fault. III. THis man’s INFIRMITY WAS OF THIRTY-
EIGHT YEARS’ STANDING ; SHALL WE COMPLAIN OF ONE WEARISOME NIGHT. We should
visit hospitals sometimes that we may learn to be thankful for our own blessings
and to pity the sufferings of others. IV. Hr szzMs TO HAVE HAD NO FRIEND. Some
day troubles may come upon us which no earthly friend can alleviate or understand.
But Jesus knows, He can sympathize and heal. V. LEARN PATIENCE AND HOPE FROM
THE PERSEVERANCE OF THIS MAN (Heb. ii. 3; Luke xviii. 1). (G.J. Brown, M.A.)
Bethesda :—The porches were once places of luxurious indulgence for the rich. In
the process of time they became hospitals for the poor. I. THE woRLD’s PAIN Is
SCATTERED OVER A VAST SUBFACE, BUT THERE ARE GATHERING PLACES, FOCUSSES OF SUFFER-
inc. It will do us good to go into the back street or infirmary where it hides itself.
Il. THe PEOPLE WERE AGREAT MULTITUDE. 1. Sorrow has always been in a majority.
2. The great multitude represented a great variety of diseases. There are some
thousands to which the human frame is subject. Think of a thousand ways of
taking a man to pieces; of God having a thousand scourges by which He can lay
His hand of punishment and trial on the sinner. Ican run away from fire and
water; but who can escape God? 3. The man who is, popularly speaking, in the
robustest health to-day may be smitten before the setting of the sun with a fatal
disease. In the midst of life we are indeath. Therefore, ‘‘ Whatsoever thy hand,”
&c. 4, All the people were waiting. We are all doing the same. ‘‘ Man never is,
but always to be blest.” There are two methods of waiting. (1). The method which
means patience, hope, assurance that God will in His own time redeem His
promises; (2) the method of impatience and distrust and complaining that wears
the soul out. JII. Every LIFE HAS SOME OPPORTUNITY GIvENIT. ‘‘ There is a tide
in the affairs of man,” &c. Every onehashadadoor opened. The angel is present
to-day. 1. You may heal the disease of selfishness by timely generosity. 2. You
may heal the disease of indolence by Christian work. IV. TrouBLED WATERS ARE
OFTEN HEALING waTERS. Not the little puddles you make with your own foot; but
the troubles that God makes by His angels and a thousand ministries by which He
interposes. You may take hold of trouble by the wrong end and abuse it, or you
may make it a place for thought and vow. VV. IN ALL CLASSES THERE IS A SPECIAL
man. I am groaning over something I have had for ten years, and there is a man
that has had something for five and twenty and never made half the noise about it.
I have only one loaf; another man says he has not tasted for three days. There is
always someone worse off than you are. VI. WE CANNOT GET USED TO PAIN, BUT WE
GET ACCUSTOMED TO THE SIN THAT MAKESIT. VII. THe PHysIcIAN IS SENT NOT TO
THE WHOLE BUT TO THE sick, The very asking of His question has healing in it.
Some people ask about our sickness but make us worse; others ask us how we are
and the kind inquiry makes us feel better. VIII. Tux smnrisuness or pain. Here
again we come on the subtle working of sin. Does any one say to the man who has
been lying in pain for thirty-eight years, ‘ You are worse than I, I shall give you a
turn this time.” Great numbers of people had been healed, but no one offered help.
Blessing unsanctified may increase our selfishness. IX. Curist’s POWER IS NOT
SECONDARY BUT PRIMARY. He speaks and it stands fast. X. Ler us apPLy THE
WHOLE THING TO THE MATTER OF SALVATION. 1. It was an angel who troubled the
water; it is the Son of God who opens the fountain for sin. 2. The water was
moved at a certain time only; the atonement of the Son of God is open to our
approaches night and day. 3. Whosoever first stepped in was cured at
Bethesda; here the whole world may all go in at once. 4. Go to the fountain
and one thing you will never find there—one dead man. (J. Parker, D.D.)
Bethesda :—Christ was eminently a public man. Wherever most people were con-
gregated, there was He; not induced by curiosity, pleasure, or desire for admiration
but to fulfil His mission. Here wefind Him after a fifty-six miles’ walk. The pros:
pect of usefulness made it worth the trouble. I. Taz narrative, 1. The hospital
and its bath. The cloisters were designed for ordinary bathers, but since it had
become medicinal, they were filled with the diseased. 2. The patients avd their
diseases. (1) The blind with all manner of ophthalmic complaints. (2) Halt,


i


CHA?. Y.] ST, JOHN. 423


persons lame from accident, disease, or eruptions. (3) Withered, those whose
sinews had shrunk, and power of movement had become impossible. 3. The
angel and his operations. 4. The impotent man and his special infirmity. He
was deprived of the power of rapid motion, and laid expecting help; but helpful
friends are only found at feasts, not in hospitals. 5. The Physician and His cure.
(1) What a question He asked! The doctor generaliy says, ‘‘ Tell me your disease,
its symptoms; let me feel your pulse.” This Physician knew more than the
patient. (2) Power came with the healing word, and the man instantly became
vigorous. 6. The objectors and their cavils, 7 The restored man and his lesson.
(1) The miracle had a beneficial effect, for he went into the Temple to express his
gratitude, (2) Christ gave him a caution. A worse evil might accrue through
sin than thirty-eight years’ affliction. And so now: a guilty conscience, loss of
God’s friendship, hell. 8. The communication and its effects. Who can blame
the man for his effusive testimony to his benefactor? Yet it was scarcely prudent,
a fact that should be borne in mind by the over-zealous, for ‘‘ the Jews sought to
kill Jesus.”? II. Tae rstruction. 1. Sickness is often God’s discipline to prepare
the mind to welcome Christ. ‘‘ Blessed is the man whom Thou chastenest.’’ The
Thessalonians ‘‘ received the Word in much affliction.” 2. If we would be healed
of our spiritual maladies we must be found where that healing is ordinarily be-
stowed. (1) This may be a work of difficulty, as in the case before us. (2) There
are special seasons in which God vouchsafes signal blessings to the Church. 3.
The most desperate and lengthened cases are not beyond the reach of Christ’s
powers. (1) Those who have reached the age of this man and whose sin seems
inveterate. (2) Backsliders. 4. Copy the sympathy of Christ to the afflicted. We
cannot help them as-He did, but we can help and comfort them. Visit the father-
less and widows, the sick, &. (J. Sherman.) The pool of Bethesda:—This is a
picture in miniature of the world. I. The world is creatty arriicrnp. 1. Effects
of sin. 2. Often the meansofsalvation. II. The world has ALLEVIATING ELEMENTS.
1. Medicinal properties of the earth. 2. Soothing influences of nature. 3. Offices
of social love. 4. The Gospel of Christ. III. The world is sapty senrisH. 1.
The injustice of selfishness. 2. Its impiety. 3. Its misery. IV. The world has a
eLorrious Saviour. 1. He enres the greatest of sufferers. 2. By His own Word.
8. At the earnest desire of the patient. (W.H. Van Doren, D.D.) The pool of
Bethesda:—I. Some PROBABLE ACCOUNT OF WHAT IS MYSTERIOUS HERE, This pool
is placed near the sheep market or gate. You read of this sheep gate in Nehemiah.
Josephus tells us that near one of the gates which corresponds with this was
Solomon’s pool, which we may conclude to be Bethesda. But the pool of Solomon
derived its waters from the fountain of Siloam or Shiloh, which also fed the pool
of Siloam. Isaiah uses the waters of Siloam “that go softly” to represent the
kingdom of David, which is emblematic of the kingdom of Christ. Accordingly,
the Jews attached a sacred character to them, applying to them during the feast
of Tabernacles the words, ‘* With joy shall ye draw water,” &c. May we not think,
therefore, that as those waters foreshadowed the kingdom of Christ, God was pleased
when that kingdom was near to endue those waters with a healing power, as
though to give notice of the restorative virtue that Christ wouldexert? A long and
dreary season, without prophecy and miracles, had elapsed since Malachi; but
when the time of Christ was at hand prodigies began again, and prophecy recom-
menced. Why not add to other attestions that one furnished by the text? Here an
angel descended in token of the return of intercourse between earth and heaven.
The cripple had lain for thirty-eight years, and attendance probably commenced
when the waters became healing. This would place the first advent of the angel
about 7 8.c., just when the heraldy of approach was likely to begin. IL. Con-
SIDER THE NARRATIVE AS SIGNIFICATIVE. 1. It was only at certain seasons that the
angel descended, and only he who was instantly upon the alert became healed.
The fountain opened for sin is ever equally efficacious, but there are precious
opportunities in every man’s life, on the taking advantage of which may depend
his final salvation. There is too much ground to believe that Sunday assemblings
are seasons to many of the troubling of the waters, and nevertheless not seasons
of the restoration of health, because the agitation is allowed to subside. ; 2. The
condition of cure was personal willingness. The man might have found it profit-
able to be maimed. Many a cripple prefers begging with one arm to working with
two. (1) Wilt thou be made whole, oh young man, who art the slave of thy pas-
sions, and whose god is pleasure? Think what it is to be made whole, to mortify
thy passions, to deny thyself, ‘‘ to live soberly,” &e. (2) Wilt thou, oh man of am


a 7 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fomar. ¥.


bition? (3) Wilt thou, oh woman of frivolous tastes ? There is a secret unwilling-
ness which frustrates the ordinances of grace, and keeps Bethesda still crowded.
Men dread the stirring of the waters, and whenever they find them agitated pour
upon them the oil of flattering deceit. 3. The man was not wearied out by repeated
disappointments. Men now wait upon the means week after week without apparent
benefit, and are tempted to give up. But you may be giving up at the very moment
when God, having duly exercised your patience, is about to interpose. The greatest }
promises are to those who wait upon the Lord. (H. Melvill, B.D.) Jesus at 4
Bethesda:—I, Tue Divine HELPER. 1. He saw him. It is something for a man to :
look on wretchedness. Men’s eyes, as a rule, are turned the other way. The
Christian rule is, “Look not.every man on his own things,” &c. 2. He knew the
circumstances of this patient, and He knows ours. 3. He pitied this poor man.
‘‘Man’s inhumanity to man makes countless thousands mourn.” But Jesus is a
high priest that “can be touched.” 4. He addressed him. He made the first
advances, and awoke new hope within him. 5. He healed him. But not until
the arm of flesh had failed. ‘Sir, I have no man,” &c. Il. THE FAULTFINDERS.
Surely a life so beneficent should have been left alone. But the faultfinders are
everywhere, and are never at a loss for a text or pretext. They are dogs in the
manger. They sneer at foreign missions, protesting that ‘Charity begins at
home,’ but when beggars pass by mutter, “This is a fine sight in a Christian
country.” How shall we behave towards such people? Let them alone, and go
on with our own business as Jesus did. IIL THe new convert. 1. He was
obedient. 2. He was found in the Temple, doubtless to give praise to God. But
“thanksliving is better than thanksgiving”; therefore our Lord says, ‘Sin no
more” (Job xx. 11). The ruin of the soul is worse than thirty-eight years of palsy
(Heb. vi. 4-9). 3. He testified of Jesus. Witness-bearing is the best preaching.
(D. J. Burrell, D.D.) Jesus at Bethesda :—I. THe patient. 1. He was fully
aware of his sickness, and owned it- de was not like those who are lost by nature,
who do not know it or will not confess it. 2. He waited by the pool expecting
some sign and wonder. This, too, is how many wait, persevering in ordinances
and unbelief, expecting some great thing, that on a sudden they will experience
strange emotions and remarkable impressions, or see a vision or hear a supernatural
voice. No one will deny that a few have been thus favoured—Col. Gardiner, e.g.—
but such interpositions are not to be looked for. Jesus Himself is the greatest of
wonders. In regard to this matter of waiting remark—(1) That it is not the way
which God has bidden His servants preach. The gospel of our salvation is
‘*Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.” (2) This ungospel-like gospel of waiting is
immensely popular. Why? Because it administers laudanum to the conscience,
When the minister preaches with power and men’s hearts are touched, the devil
says ‘‘ Wait.” (3) Is not this waiting a very hopeless business? Of those who
waited how few were healed? What right have you to expect that if you wait
another thirty years you will be different? (4) There lies our poor friend. I do
not blame him for waiting, for Jesus had not been there before. (5) Having been
s0 often disappointed he was growing in deep despair. Moreover he was getting
old; and life is wearing away with you. You have waited all this while in vain,
sinfully waited. You have seen others saved, your child, your wife; but you are
not. If. Tux Puysicran. 1. He made anelection. This man was possibly selected
because his was the worst case and had waited longest of all. 2. Jesus said, “ Wilt
thou be made whole?” not for information, but to arouse attention. 3. He gave
the word of command, 4, There is nothing said in the text about faith, but the
whole incident shows that the man must have had faith. 5. The cure which
Christ wrought was—(1) Perfect. The man could carry his bed. (2) Immediate
The man was not carried home by friends and gradually nursed into vital energy,
III, Appiy THE INSTANCE TO THE PRESENT occasion. Why should we not on this very
spot have instantaneous cures of sick souls? Man fell in a moment; why should
not Christ restore in a moment? 1. Look at the Biblical illustrations of what
salvation is. Noah built an ark, the type of salvation. When was Noah saved ?
After he had been in the ark a week or two? No; the moment Noah went through
the door and the Lord shut him in he was safe. Take the case of the Passover -
the moment the blood was sprinkled the house was secured. When the brazen
serpent was lifted up were the wounded told to wait till it was pushed in their
faces, or until the venom showed certain symptoms? No, they were commanded
to look. _ Were they healed in six months’ time? 2. Take Biblical instances. The
dying thief, the 3,000 at Pentecost, the Philippian jailer. 3. The work of salva.


| cmar. Vv.) St. JOHN. 495


tion is all done. You want washing, but the fountain does not need filling. You
want clothing, but the robe is ready. 4. Regeneration cannot be a work of a long
time. There must bea line, we cannot always see it but God must, between life
and death. 5. For God to say, ‘I forgive thee,” takes not a century or a year.
The Judge pronounces the sentence and the criminal is acquitted. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
The miracle at Bethesda :—I. THE PORCHES WERE FULL OF SICK FOLK. The world is
full of the spiritually sick—thieves, drunkards, harlots, proud, covetous, &. II.
THESE SICK FOLK WERE FULL OF EXPECTANCY ALL THE TIME, So are many now, but
their expectancy is misdirected. ‘As soon as I get out of my present business I
will reform”; “Iam going to church oftener”; “Next week is my birthday; I
will then turn over a new leaf”; “I will repent on my death-bed”; “I expect to
be healed in the next revival.” III. Tue sick MAN’s HEALING DEPENDED ON HIS
TURNING FROM THE POOL TO JESUS. IV. HeanED THE MAN WAS; NOW JESUS BIDS
HIMBE HOLY. Christ our physician:—I. WE ARE ALL LABOURING UNDER THE MALADY
oF sin. This malady is—l. Universal. 2. It pervades our whole nature. 3: It
is attended by—(1) Degradation; (2) suffering; (3) loss of power. 4. It will
issue if not arrested in eternal death. II. No man can cURE HIMSELF, This
is proved—1. By consciousness. 2. By experience. All efforts at self-cure result
in failure or self-deception, or, at best, in mitigation of the symptoms. III. No
MAN OR SET OF MEN CAN CURE OTHERS. This has been attempted—l. By educators.
2. By philosophers. 3. By ascetics. 4. By ritualists. The world is filled by
spiritual charlatans. IV. Curist 18 THE onLY Puysician. 1. He secures the right
of applying the only effectual remedy by propitiating the justice of God, and
securing liberty of access to the soul for the Holy Spirit. 2. He sends that Spirit
as the Spirit of life and.strength. As the constitution is radically affected, a radical
cure is necessary, which can only be effected by a life-giving Spirit. 3. The cure
is certain and permanent. It results in immortal vigour, beauty, and strength. 4.
This Physician is accessible to every one at alltimes. He requires no preparation,
and will receive no recompense. Inferences: 1. The duty of every one to apply to
Him for cure. 2. The reason why any are not cured must be in them, not in Him.
3. The duty of making this Physician known to others. (C. Hodge, D.D.) Con-
version as illustrated by the miracle:—1. The utterly lost, hopeless state of every
sinner sitting by the waters of salvation (ver. 5). 2. The offer of help addressed
to each man’s free will for his personal acceptance (ver. 6). 3. The first phase of
conflict that pride is apt to make in blaming others and excusing self (ver.7). 4.
The peremptoriness of the gospel demand: Do something, and God will help (vers.
8, 9). 5. The next phase of conflict which external opposition makes discouraging
the soul with mere cavils (ver. 10). 6. The full and honest justification of con-
duct: The One that healed me told me what to do (ver.11). 7. The salutary
experience of solicitude against old besetting sin (ver.14). 8. The happy obedience
of active confession of Christ before others; say openly and everywhere, ‘It was
Jesus that made me whole!” (ver. 15) (C. S. Robinson, D.D.) Jesus went
up to Jerusalem.—Jesus never, as a rule, let a feast go by without visiting Jeru-
salem. 1. To fulfil the duty of an Israelite. 2. To use the opportunity of
preaching to the largest multitudes. 3. To testify the truths then to the leaders
at a time when He might appear before them without their venturing to lay
hands upon Him. Evangelical clergymen should use the high Christian festivals
with conscientious fidelity. 1. Because then larger congregations are attracted,
and many are present then who come at no other time. 2. Because souls are
then in a more solemn mood than at other times. (Heuwbner.) Now there is
at Jerusalem by the sheep-market a pool—The water supply of Jerusalem was
one of the most wonderful things in that wonderful city. The cisterns, in what is
now called the Sanctuary, appear to have been connected by a system of channels
cut out of the rock, so that when one was full the surplus water ran into the next,
and so on until the final overflow was carried off by a channel into the Kedron.
One of the cisterns, that known as the Great Sea, would contain two million
gallons ; and the total number of gallons which could be stored probably exceeded
ten millions. This supply of water appears to have been obtained from springs,
wells, the collection of rain in pools and cisterns, and water brought from
a distance by aqueducts. The extensive remains of cisterns, pools, and aqueducts
show that little dependence was placed on any natural springs existing in or near
the city ; and, indeed, from the formation of the ground it is doubtful whether any
existed besides the Fountain of the Virgin in the Kedron Valley. There may have
been a source in the Tyropeon Valley, but it could only have been a small and not


ie le |
426 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cmar. ¥.


very lasting one. Water was brought into the city by two aqueducts, the ‘ low
level’? and the “high level”; but the course of the former can alone be traced
within the wallsof the city. (Recovery of Jerusalem.) Bethesda.—The most natural
etymology of the word is ‘‘ House of Mercy.” Whether the name alludes to the
munificence of some pious Jew who had constructed the porches as a shelter for the
sick, or whether it relates to the goodness of God, from whom this healing spring pro-
ceeded is uncertain. Delitsch supposes that the etymology was Beth-estaw, peristyle.
Others have taken it from Beth Aschada, place of out-pouring (perhaps of the blood
of victims). It might be supposed that the porches were five isolated buildings
arranged in a circle round the pool. But it is more natural to consider it one single
edifice, forming a peritagonal peristyle, in the centre of which was the reservoir.
Some springs of mineral water are known at the present day at the east of the city;
among others the baths of Ain-es-Schefa. Tobler has proved that this spring is
fed by the large chamber of water situated under the mosque which has replaced the
Temple. Another better known spring is found at the foot of the south-eastern slope of
Moriah, called the Virgin Spring. It is very intermittent. The basin is quite dry;
then the water is seen springing up among the stones. On one occasion Tobler
saw it rise four and a half inches with a gentle undulation ; on another it rose for
more than twenty-two minutes to a height of six or seven inches, and came down
again in two minutes to its previous level. Robinson saw it rise a foot in five
minutes. He was assured that this movement is repeated at certain times twice
or thrice a day, but that in summer it is seldom observed more than once in two
or three days. These phenomena present a certain analogy to what is related of
the Bethesda spring. Eusebius speaks also of springs in this locality, the water
of which was reddish, evidently due to mineral elements, but, according to him,
to the filtering of the blood of victims into it. Tradition places Bethesda in a
great square hollow, surrounded by walls, at the north of the Haram, south from
the street which leads from the St. Stephen’s Gate. It is called Birket-Israil, and
is about twenty-three yards deep, forty-four yards. broad, and more than double in
length. The bottom is dry, filled with grass and shrubs. Bethesda must have
been in this vicinity, for here the sheep-gate was situated. As it is impossible to
identify the pool, it may have been covered with débris or have disappeared, as so
often happens in the case of intermittent springs. Those which are found at the
present day prove only how favourable the soil is to this sort of phenomena. (F.
Godet, D.D.) The identity with Bethesda of the deep reservoir in Jerusalem,
which to-day bears its name, Robinson regards as improbable, and is more inclined
to find it in the intermittent fountain of the virgin on the south-east slope of the
Temple Mount. From ver. 7 and the close of ver. 8, it appears that this spring
probably was gaseous, and bubbled at intervals. There is a spring of this kind at
Kissengen, which, after a rushing sound about the same time every day, commences
to bubble, and is most efficacious at the very time the gas is making its escape.
This spring is especially used in diseases of the eye. (Tholuck.) For an angel
went down at a certain season.—Textual criticism :—This verse has undoubtedly
no right to a place in the text. That fourth verse the most important Greele and
Latin copies are without, and most of the early versions. In other MSS. which
retain this verse, the obelus which hints suspicion, or the asterisk which marks
rejection, is attached to it; while those in which it appears unquestioned belong
mostly, as Griesbach shows, to a later recension of the text. And this fourth verse
spreads the suspicion of its own spuriousness over the last clause of the verse pre-
ceding, which, though it has not so great a body of evidence against it, has yet, in
a less degree, the same notes of suspicion about it. Doubtless whatever here is
addition, whether only the fourth verse, or the last clause also of the third, found
very early its way into the text; we have it as early as Tertullian, the first
witness for its presence... . At first probably a marginal note, expressing the
popular notion of the Jewish Christians concerning the origin of the healing power
which from time to time these waters possessed, by degrees it assumed the shape
in which now we have it: for there are marks of growth about it, betraying them-
selves in a great variety of readings—some copies omitting one part, and some
another, of the verse—all which is generally the sign of a later addition; thus, little
by little, it procured admission into the text, probably at Alexandria at first, the
birthplace of other similar additions. . . , The statement rests upon that religious
view of the world, which in all nature sees something beyond nature, which does
not believe that it has discovered causes, when, in fact, it has only traced the
sequence of phenomena, and which everywhere recognizes a going forth of the


_—


— =. —- ow


omar. v.] 7 ST. JOHN. 427


immediate power of God, invisible agencies of His, whether personal or otherwise,
pecomplishing His will. (Archbishop Trench.) The other side :—The verse is
not found in “Sin,” s.c. 0, nor in a few cursive MSS., nor in the Cureton Syriac,
but they were in copies of this Gospel in the time of Tertullian, and are quoted by
Chrysostum, Cyril, Augustine, and others, and they exist in important MSS.
As to the question why it is inserted, the reply is to assign a cause for the
phenomenon. But, on the other hand, reasons no less valid may account for its
omission. Who had seen the angel? What Jewish writer had recorded his
appearance and operation? These are questions which might have been urged by
sceptics of old as now, and the easiest way of removing objections might seem to
be to omit the words. We know that this feeling operated so strongly with critics of
old as to lead them to omit, not only a few words, but entire books. (Bp. Words-
worth.) Jewish legends about healing waters :—The Jews themselves had several
legends of the healing waters. Thus the “Fount of Miriam,” from which the
Israelites drank in the desert, was said to flow, after the conquest of Canaan, into
the lake of Galilee; and it was believed that, at the end of every Sabbath, its
waters flowed out and mingled with the waters of all fountains. Whoever had the
good fortune to draw from a fountain at the moment when the waters of the ‘‘ Fount
of Miriam ’? mingled with it, and bathed himself with that water, would be cured
of all his diseases—even if these were of the most loathsome description. Light-
foot cites an instance of a man suffering from a grievous disease who went down to
the lake of Galilee to swim, Now, it happened to be the time when the Fount of
Miriam was flowing, so that, when he came out of the water, he found that he was
healed. The same author instances a case from the rabbins. of a fountain that
was inhabited by two spirits—one evil and one good. When Abba Joses sat at this
fountain, there ‘‘ appeared to him the spirit that resided there, and said, ‘You
know well enough how many years I have dwelt in this place, and how yourselves
and your wives have come and returned without any damage done to you. But
now you must know that an evil spirit endeavours to supply my room, who would
prove very mischievous to you.’ He saith to him, ‘What must we do then?’ He
answered him and said, ‘Go and tell the townspeople that whoever hath a hammer
and an iron pin or bolt, let him come hither to-morrow morning, and have his eye
intent upon the waters, and when you see the waters troubled, then let. them knock
with the iron, and say, ‘‘The victory is ours’’; and so let them not go back till
they see thick drops of blood upon the face of the waters.’” To which the gloss
adds, “‘ By this sign it will appear that the spirit was conquered and killed.” The
reader who is concerned about the result of this stratagem may be glad to know
that it proved quite successful. In connection with this general subject it is
interesting to note the belief, among primitive peoples all over the world, in the
waters of life. In a legend found among the Modern Greeks the water of life flows
within a hollow rock, and is inaccessible except to a favoured few; in another case
where the waters are concealed in the same way, the rock opens at noon, and
discloses several springs, each of which calls out, ‘‘ Come, draw from me,” but
only-one is the spring of the water of life; and this true spring is pointed out by
a bee which flies directly to it. Whoever draws this water of life can sprinkle a
few drops of it upon any dead animal or man, and immediately the dead will spring
to life. Even when the dead have been hacked to pieces, the water of life sprinkled
over the parts will bring them together, and unite them into a new and youthful
life. In some cases, two springs are said to flow side by side, one giving forth the
water of life, the other giving forth the water of death. If the water of death is
taken instead of the water of life, the opposite effect is produced. A drop or two
will kill a living man at once. There are also legends throughout the whole world
concerning the waters of strength. ‘These are generally fabled to be guarded by
some mythical monster—snake or dragon—but whoever eludes the vigilance of
these guardians, and possesses himself of the water, has the means of endow-
ing himself with superhuman strength. To swallow a few drops is to make
one’s self, according to the legend, more than a match for any mortal foe.
The significance of the angel’s action:—What St. John affirms is that a certain
invisible angel or minister was the instrument of making the water beneficial to
the persons who went down into it. He accounts in this way for its operation
being more useful at one time than another. That assertion, you say, interferes
with the doctrine that there were certain properties in the water itself which
affected the condition of human beings. How does it interfere? You hold that
the vaccine matter has in itself the property of counteracting the virus of the small.


428 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. Vv.


Si EEC PS bie in ie a SR see a
pox. But you hold also that the intelligence of Jenner had something to do with
making this vaccine matter available for actual cure; you hold that the intelli-
gence of different medical men has something to do with bringing the preventive
power to bear on particular cases. You know this for a fact, but physical science
tells you nothing of the way in which the intelligence co-operates with the natural
agent. The notion that it does is a fallacy. In no instance whatever can the mere
study of physics help you to determine anything respecting moral or intellectual
forces, though at every turn the study of physics compels you to the acknowledg-
ment of such forces. It will save us from innumerable confusions if we take this
proposition in the length and breadth of it, Through neglect of it the physician
‘and the metaphysician are perpetually stumbling against each other when they
might be the greatest helpers of each other. (F. D. Maurice, D.D.) It seems a
worthy exercise of Divine revelation to lead human philosophy to regard what are
called physical phenomena as being not produced by natural laws, though they may
be regulated according to them, but as effected by Divine agency; in a word, to
elevate the human mind from the lower level of material mechanics to the higher
region of spiritual dynamics. (Bp. Wordsworth.) The troubling of the water.—
In every excited fear of the vengeance of God, in every impulse which would send
you to your knees, in every brief aspiration after holiness and heaven, you have
tokens that the angel has been with you, summoning you to be heedful, and not to
lose the opportunity which may, perhavs, be the last. And if you take not advan-
tage of the troubling of the waters, if, that is, when you feel prompted to pray you
omit to pray ; when made conscious of the evil of a practice, you do not forthwith
set yourselves to correct that practice; and when moved to the study of the Scrip-
tures, you defer that study to a more conyenient season, why, there is more than a
probability that you will not soon again be visited with the desire after salvation,
and that, even when so visited, it will be in less measure; for the Spirit of God,
who is the actual agent, whatever the instrumentality employed in troubling the
waters, is grieved and provoked by resistance to His influences, and may be tempted
altogether to withdraw, when He has striven with you, and agitated you in vain.
(H. Melvill, B.D.) An infirmity thirty and eight years.—The gospel equal to
the most inveterate cases :—There is a city missionary traversing this district, who
finds in a room a woman ninety-eight years of age, and begins to tell her about
Christ and salvation ; and the poor old woman receives it, and comes to this table,
at ninety-eight years of age, for the first time, avowing her faith in Christ, and
linking in her hand a little girl fourteen years old, who was received into the
Church with herself. Aged and young can be cured by Christ’s power. There sat
in a country village a poor old diseased woman, who with the greatest difficulty
got into the kitchen of a butcher, in whose house some itinerants used to go and
preach, to listen to the Word; and she is seventy-two years of age; but the Word
goes into her mind, she receives it, and not only becomes a devoted follower of
Christ, but one of the most useful women in the village. There is hope for you!
When I was at Bath I heard of a gentleman who had retired from business, sur-
rounded with the bounties of Providence, but had not sought Christ. His wife was
very anxious, good woman! about him. One day she prevailed upon him to come
with her to God’s house; and as she went she prayed that God would give the
minister some text that would be likely to impress her poor thoughtless, witty,
indifferent husband’s mind ; and when the minister gave out his text, it was this,
‘*My Beloved is mine, and I am His,” ‘I thought,” she said, “I should sink in
the pew; I knew what fun he would be likely to make of the passage.” However
the Word went home to him, and his thought was this—‘‘ I know my wife can say
that Christ is her Beloved, and that she is His beloved, but He is not mine ”. and
from that moment he became a devoted follower of the Lamb, used his property for
the service of Christ, and went to heaven rejoicing in His favour. (J. Sherman.)
Wilt thou be made whole 7—The Physician’s inquiry :—I, A MARK OF AFFECTIONATE
souiciruDE. II. AN INSTANCE OF GRacrous InviraTION. III. Tur nxpression or
conscious POWER. The question is still asked——How many refuse the offer !
(Preacher’s Analyst.) The Good Physician's question :—I. AssuMES THAT THEY TO
WHOM IT IS ADDRESSED ART NOT WHOLE. II. Suaausts THAT NEVERTHELESS THEY
MAY BE MADE WHOLE. III. Impuims THAT IT DEPENDS UPON THEIR OWN WILLS
WHETHER OR NOT THEY SHALL BE MADE WHOLE, IV. PRoFFERS THE NEEDED WHOLE-
NESS TO ALL WHO ARE WILLING TO RECEIVE IT. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) A singular
but needful question:—It seems a strange question. Who would not be made
whole? Would the poor man have been lying at the pool had he not been anxious


a en


cHaP. v.] ST. JOHN. 429


for healing? Yet, as our Lord spake no superfluous words, it may be perceived
that the paralysis was mental as well as physical. He had waited until despondency
had dried up his spirits, and he scarcely cared whether he was made whole or not.
The Saviour touched a chord that needed to vibrate; He aroused a dormant faculty
whose exercise was essential to cure, Are there not those here who, through having
waited so long, are beginning to get paralyzed in their once earnest desires to come
to occupy this seat as a mere matter of custom. I. This question is needful,
because IT IS NOT ALWAYS UNDERSTOOD. 1. It is not fhe same as “ Wilt thou be
saved from going to hell ?””—every one'‘answers ‘‘Aye” to that; but ‘‘ Wilt thou
be saved from sin?” 2. To help you, let me remind you that there never were but
two men perfectly whole. (1) The first Adam. We should all be willing to be in
paradise with him; but are we willing to walk with God as he did? (2) The second
Adam. ‘“ Holy, harmless, undefiled,” &c. Whole towards God, man, holiness. Do
you wish to be like Him? 3. When a man is whole there are certain evil propen-
sities which are expelled, and certain moral qualities which he is sure to possess—
(1) Honesty ; (2) sobriety ; (3) truthfulness ; (4) generosity in giving and forgiving.
4. He will have spiritual graces also—(1) Humility ; (2) prayerfulness; (3) conse-
eration. II. THis QUESTION IS CAPABLE OF A GOOD MANY REPLIES, and therefore it
is the more necessary that it should be asked and answered. 1. There are some
whose only reply is no answer at all. They don’t want to consider anything of the
sort. (1) ‘* Weare young, and have plenty of time.” (2) ‘‘ We are business people,
and have something else to do.” (3) ‘‘ We are wealthy and cultured, and must not
be expected to look at these things as coarse-minded people do.” (4) ‘‘ We are too
ill to trouble about it.” But there is another class, who once had a religious concern,
whose answer is not very earnest. They have become habituated to unbelieving
misery, and persist in carrying a burden of which their Saviour wants to relieve
them. 2. Too many give evasive replies to the question—(1) “ How am I to know
whether I am God’s elect or not?” That is not the question at this stage. It will
be answered by and by. (2) “I have not the power to cease from sin.” God will
give the power in proportion as He gives the will. (3) ‘‘I have been so guilty in the
past.’? ‘The question is not, “How sick art thou?” but “ Wilt thou be made
whole?’ 3. There are a good many persons who practically say ‘‘ No.” (1) One
says, ‘‘I would be made whole,” and yet when Divine service is over he goes back
to his sin. (2) Those say ‘‘ No” who neglect the house of God. (3) So do those
who hear the Word inattentively ; and (4) those who fear lest their being made
whole would involve the loss of social position, gains, or companions. III.
WHEREVER AN HONEST AFFIRMATIVE ANSWER IS GIVEN TO THIS QUESTION WE MAY
CONCLUDE THAT THERE IS A WORK OF GRACE COMMENCED IN THE souL. IV. WHERE
THIS QUESTION IS ANSWERED IN THE NEGATIVE IT INVOLVES MOST FEARFUL SIN. You
prefer yourself to God, sin to holiness, This is your deliberate choice. When you
come to die, and when you live in another state, you will curse yourself for having
made such a choice as this. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The cure of spiritual disease :—
I. WHAT IS SUPPOSED IN THE CONDITION OF THE PERSON ADDRESSED. A state of
disorder and disease, or the question would be absurd. You often hear of the
dignity of human nature. 1. Physically and intellectually it is dignified when
we see man, in his capacity for boundless improvement, ‘‘a little lower than the
angels.” 2. But how lamentable it is to find his fine powers misapplied and abused !
What is man morally and religiously ?- (1) His body has become mortal and
subject to every calamity. (2) His soul is alienated from the life of God. (3) He
has no spiritual health. II. War 1s mPLIED IN THE QUESTION? 1. That the
disease is curable. But not by man; (1) not by government; (2) philosophy ; (3)
the law; (4) morality; (5) but only by the Cross of Jesus Christ, the efficacy of
whose cure is attested by millions. 2. That willingness to be cured is essential to
recovery. The cure is not forced upon you, nor is it accomplished by an insen-
sible process, nor bya charm, nor by chance. A Divine influence makes us sensible
of our need, and of the importance of the blessing; then we have to choose the
good part. III. How are you TO RETURN AN ANSWER TO THIS question? 1. By
inquiring after the way and the means. 2. By applying to the Physician. 3. By
submission to the prescription without murmuring or complaint. Not like Naaman,
but like the blind man who went to the pool of Siloam. 4. By the eagerness with
which you look after convalescence. IV. WHAT SHOULD URGE YOU TO AVAIL YOUR-
SELVES OF THIS PROPOSAL? 1. The nature of the complaint, than which nothing
is more dreadful. 2. The Physician who addresses you. He has everything to
recommend Him. He is able; willing. He demands no fee. 3. The brevity and


eo


™


430 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Vv.
eg ee ee eee
uncertainty of the time in which the cure must be effected. 4. The fact that
rejection will be the greatest aggravation of the misery by which it will be ended.
V. WHat Is THE DUTY OF THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN ENABLED TO ANSWER THE QUESTION
IN THE AFFIRMATIVE. 1. To avoid the sins which led to the injury. 2. Gratitude.
3. Consecration of renewed spiritual health to the Physician. 4. To recommend
the cure to others, (W. Jay.) Hindrances to Christian development :—I. Many
are hindered by a VAGUE SENSE WORKING THROUGH VENERATION AND THE IMAGINATION
OF THE MAGNITUDE AND IMPORTANCE OF RELIGION. ‘They have the impression that
they are to carry the world on their shoulders, They are cautious, timid, con-
scientious, and feel that their strength and resolution are not adequate to so great
a thing as the amplitude of religious life. ‘his would be valid if religion called
men at first to take the service of Jesus Christ in its perfected form. But it is not
so. The Master bids us become as little children, and go on step by step. The
question is whether you are willing to take the child’s step towards the consum-
mation, II. There are others. who are caught IN MORBID INTELLECTUALISM, AND
ARE STUCK UPON THE SPIRES AND THORNS OF SOME DOCTRINAL SystEM. They fail to
separate between religion and its doctrines. With one it is election, with another
reprobation. They have not learned to let such things alone. They are insoluble,
most ofthem. Christ says, ‘“‘ Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His ’’—not cate-
chism, confession of faith, doctrine, but ‘‘righteousness.” Let life, practice, experi-
ence, precede, and they wil! shape theory and philosophy. III. Others are hindered
by THE FRAGMENTS AND RUINS OF PasT ATTEMPTS. 1, There are many who have entered
on a religious life under such miseonceptions we have been buffeted by such infiu-
ences that sentiment, honour, conscience, taste, or pride, has been almost fatally
wounded, 2, Others become torpid or dead. In youth, while enthusiasm was
strong, they felt that there was a reality in religion ; but it having proved a mockery
to them they come to have the impression that there is nothing init. 3. But there
are a great ntany who do not fall so far. They hoped to be saved, but are without
any definite purposes. But the mistakes that have been made are no reason why
you should not with better light and ampler experience regain the lost ground. No
man can afford to throw himself away because he has madea mistake in attempting
to be healed. The woman with the issue of blood did notdo so. Forget, then, the
things that are behind. If you would be made whole, remember that failure is no
reason for not striving again. IV. Many are hindered by THE INSPECTION OF THE
Lives OF CHRISTIAN MEN. This is ignoble, and has nothing to do with your own
ease. However others may be cowardly and false, that is no reason why you should
not be courageous and true. This is no excuse, it is the plea of a man who is in
search of one. V. THE DEBILITATING EFFECT OF SCEPTICAL DOUBTS UPON THE MORAL
seNsz. Such is the nature of things that we live by faith and not by sight in
respect to the whole realm of the invisible from which the power is to be
derived, by which the soul is to be rectified. Once let a man doubt, and
it will break the power of his believing. And many people are so moved that
their moral root isimpaired. Is not this so? To you, then, Christ comes and asks
this question. There is healing in Him for those who are impotent from doubt. VI.
THERE ARE THOSE THE HABIT OF WHOSE MIND CONVERTS MORAL IMPRESSIONS INTO
IDEAS RATHER THAN INTO actions. 1. Some are so familiar with their Bible that
it is worn smooth. Their wheels slip-on the track. 2. Others never break into
flame. They are compacted of thoughts and feelings which are so covered up and
smothered that they never have disclosure. They are given to revive. The work
of the world is not accomplished in this way, nor is that of Christianity. Don’t

then, think about the poetry of religion, but brace yourself for its activities. Con-
clusion: 1. Every man, whatever his hindrances, should be faithful to the inward
yearning to be made whole, If that lives there is hope. 2. To such Christ
will come. There is a way when there is a will. (H. W. Beecher.) God’s
pool and man’s porches :—All the healing work of the pool was God’s work, and
His alone; but in our text we have man’s work side by side with God’s, There
were five porches. In all probability these porches were built by some charitable
people in the city of Jerusalem, who had argued something «after this sort—“ We
have no power to heal the sick, but we can at all events build a shelter for them
when they come seeking a cure, It is not in us to move the water into an all-heal-
ing pool, but we can build a place so near the water that when the sufferers come
after many a weary mile, they will ke able to rest there, secured from the sun, and
sheltered from the tempest, and wait in comfort until the angel of mercy atirs it
with his wing.” Thus, I think, you will see we have in our text the union of God’g


— ae


a


a a


cmap. Y.| | ST. JOHN. 431 .


work and human agency. God digs the pool and man buildstheporches. IL. Lut us
LOOK AT BETHESDA, WITH ITS PORCHES, AS ILLUSTRATING SPIRITUAL WoRE. It is a high
honour, beloved, to be a co-worker with God, no matter in how humble a capacity.
God can do without us. The pool could do without the porches, and do as well
without them. It had none of its healing qualities from them. No poor sufferer
was ever eased of his pain because of the influence of the porches upon the pool,
It was the pool alone that did the work and had all the glory of the cure. But
remember, on the other hand, that God so ordered it that the porches should be
built by man. God digging the pool does not exonerate man from building the
porches. Let us for a moment look and see how this may be applied in many ways,
This blessed book is all of Him. No human hand dug its deep well of truth.
From Genesis to Revelations it makes one glorious Bethesda. It is a house of
mercy, and in its chapters and verses there is latent healing power, that needs but
the moving of the Spirit to heal any. To write this book, and make it a power of
healing unto souls, is God’s work, and His work alone. But you and I can place
this book into the hands of different people, and that is our work. God writes
the book, but it is for us to print it, and scatter it on every hand. He makes this
pool of Bethesda; but you and I, perhaps through the agency of a Bible Society,
have to help build the five porches. Man can neither give himself nor anyone else
faith ; but man can build the sanctuaries for the gospel to be preached in. There-
fore God does not build any chapels by miracles. If men want to have houses to
worship in, God says, “ that is your work: you must toil, and you must collect, and
you must. give, and you must pay for it. You can build the brick porch, but it is
for Me to make it a Bethesda, a house of mercy unto thousands.” It has occurred
to me that in many ways Bethesda makes a very beautiful illustration of what a
sanctuary ought to be. I will briefly notice one or two points. 1. The first thing
we observe is—that those porches were only built for the sake of the pool. You
cannot imagine any gentleman in Jerusalem having built them merely for the sake
of an architectural display. Most certainly they were not-built for lounges and as
equally certain is it they were not built for people to sleep in. They were simply
built to help men to get to the water that could heal them. Every sanctuary that
is built aright is built from the same motive. It is built simply to lead men unto
Christ. 2. But observe, secondly, that the porches were only of value as they led to


‘the pool. In other words, the porch was no good to any man except he went beyond


it. Do you observe, too, that those who filled the porches were just the very ones
we want to see filling our sanctuaries? They were not only sick ones in those
porches. They were something better. They were those who knew themselves to
be sick. They came there with a special purpose, and that purpose was to be
healed. That preacher has delightful work who preaches to a congregation drawn
by the same desire. And then you observe that they were poor people that were
there, people that could not any way afford to have a doctor. I would that we
could see more of the poor and penniless helping to fill our sanctuaries. And
observe, lastly here, that there were plenty of them. It is said, ‘In these lay a
great multitude.” There is nothing easier than to sneer at numbers when they
come to hear the preaching of the Word, though I never heard them despised when
the meeting is of a political or secular nature. May God make every porch in this
great east end of London too straight for the throngs of the poor and the sick and
the spiritually diseased that shall crowd into them. II. And now, lastly, I desire
to use this text as illustrating THE WORK WE MAY DO IN CONJUNCTION WITH Gop FOR
THE ALLEVIATION AND HEALING OF BODILY sickness. Alas, that group at Bethesda is
but a very small sample of a great multitude—a multitude seeking health. Mark
you the means are nothing of themselves. The water was nothing until the
angel touched it. The medicine is ‘nothing until God blesses it. The physician
of himself is powerless, let him be never so clever in his profession. What is it
then that is needed? It is the blessing of the angel of the covenant resting on the
means that are used—it is God commanding health through their instrumentality.
But you and I may say, ‘‘ Brother, we cannot make you whole, we wish we could,
but there isa Bethesda which, by the Lord’s blessing, may, and we can build a porch
to help you get and stay there. We know you are poor and cannot afford to have a
long doctor’s bill come in, and your poverty only deepens our sympathy, go we will
build you a porch which shall be free of all expense. We will build you a place
where you can obtain just the care, and just the nursing, and just the medicine
that you need, without it costing you a penny. (A. G. Brown.) “ Wilt thou be
made whole?””—Do you think it a strange question? Do you take it for granted


Vrs ©
»¥


. 432 : THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. v.
that a man must long to be freed from the tyranny of sin. Ah! I would to God it
were so. Butitis not. 1. One desires to be saved only from the consequences of
sin, and from the eternal death which is the bitter wages of sin; but not—noet
to “be made whole! ”? No! To be made whole would mean giving up some
practice which has become second nature. It would mean making new rules of
life which would stand in the way of present prosperity. 2. If this one were to
say straight out what is in his heart, he would answer the question, “ Wilt thou be
made whole? ”—thus, ‘Ah, Lord Jesus, leave me asI am! Only—in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment, good Lord, deliver me!” 3. Another, does
desire to be released from his sin. But this one is so slothful that he cannot rouse
himself and look that sin in the face, like a man, and close with it, determined to
overcome it once and forall. And so he gets into a way of taking his statefor granted.
He uses prayer, and the means of grace, in a limp, perfunctory manner, hoping
for nothing, expecting nothing, in fact believing nothing, and so getting nothing.
His answer would be something like this—“It is no use now. It might have been
once. I am too far gone.” My brethren, if we do not desire it, then our blood
be on our own heads. God does not save men against their wills, and in spite of
their wills. But if we are in earnest, let us arise at Christ’s bidding and do His
commands. (I. B. C. Murphy, B.A.) The force of the question :—Jesus says
to the man not ‘Dost thou desire?” but “Art thou really determined? ”
For the desire is not doubtful, but energy of will seems wanting. It can only
be restored by means of faith. On the one hand Jesus draws the sufferer
from the dark despondency into which his long and useless waiting had plunged
him, and revives his hopes; on the other, he withdraws his mind from the
source of cure to which it was exclusively attached, and puts him in moral connec-
tion with the true Bethesda. (F. Godet, D.D.) Wilt thou be made whole ?—A super-
fluous question, it might seem, for who would not be made whole if he might? But
the question has its purpose. This poor man had been so often defeated of a
cure, that hope was dead, or well-nigh dead, within him, and the question is asked
to awaken in him anew a yearning after the benefit, which the Saviour, pitying his
hopeless case, was about to impart. (Archbishop Trench.) Sir, Ihavenoman when
the water is troubled to put me into the pool.— Supplementary ministries: —This child
of pain suffered a double martyrdom—that of being incapable of reaching the pool, and
that of seeing others less needy snatch the boon from before his very eyes. A mul-
titude of various crippled people wait for chances of social, intellectual, and moral
improvement, who for the want of a helping hand have the mortification of seeing less
encumbered folks step into the opening. I. TH worLp Is FULL OF THOSE THAT WAIT
FOR THE TROUBLING OF THE WATER BY THE ANGELS OF LIFE. 1. These are paralysed by
the lack of friends, funds, or facilities. 2. In gracious response to this expectancy
angels of life frequently stir the water. In our day the spirit of change is abroad.
3. The ever-recurring changes of life contribute to the good of mankind. Stagna-
tion is the curse of life; revolution is its salvation. II. WHEN THE Poot Is STIRRED
THE ABSENCE OF A FRIEND I8 OFTEN FATAL TO succESS. 1, The Bible may fall into
the hands of an illiterate person, and thus the fourtain of all good may be sealed.
Self-help is a note frequently sounded, but a great section of the race have little
power of self-help. No doubt they are cognizant of chances, but are constitu-
tionally or circumstantially incapable of seizing them. 2. With an energeiic helper
a fair proportion might rear themselves, Artists, preachers, &c., long for fame, but
having no helper, live and die in obscurity. 3. All through life supplementary
ministries are in requisition. Wanted: (1) In the scientific world the missing link!
(2) In the political world the man for the hour! (3) In the Christian world souls not
too absorbed to care for others! III. WHEN THE WATER IS STIRRED THE SELF-SUFFI-
CIENT ARE OFT FOUND TO AVAIL THEMSELVES OF THE PRECIOUS OPPORTUNITY. 1. The
world comprises that class who attain by sheer audacity, and are deterred by no
modesty or charity. Many, however, collapse, which saves us much bitterness of
soul, 2. God is our law and pattern. Let usbe merciful as He is. We require to
be careful, lest in the race of life we grow callous and unsympathetic. Turner
when the hanging committee could find no place for an obscure painter’s picture,
took down one of his own magnificent productions and hung the stranger’s there in
the very forefront of publicity. That was compassion likea man. IV. TuE ony
RESOURCE OF NEGLECTED MEN Is Curist. We hail Him as the One mighty to save
in all the provinces of life. 1, He loves to take the world by surprise. The most
this unfortunate expected was a promise to assist him to the pool some day. 2.
Take up thy bed, &c., suggests to us ‘‘ strike out for yourself.” Christ the Author


ctr. v.] PWR ST MIOHN: 438


of faith communicates to us who will receive it the capacity to think, act, pray, &.,
which is infinitely superior to the habit of dependence on the services, modes,
doctrines of others. (W.J. Acomb.) The universal cry of humanity is one of—I.
Misery. II. Heupressness, III. Hoprnessnzss, (Van Doren.) Irresolution
and impotence the worst part of any malady (in melancholy, hypochondria, &c.) :-—
I. Ir 1s rrsELF pisEAsE. II. Iv acGRavaTEs THE OTHER DISEASES, III, Iv HINDERS
THE CURE, IV. IT CAN MAKE THE CURE UNCERTAIN AGAIN (“lest a worse thing come
unto thee”), (J. P. Lange, D.D.) Helpfulness :—One wintry day Hawthorne,
the American author, went home with a heavy heart, having lost his government
appointment. He cast himself down, as men generally do under similar circum-
stances, and assumed the very attitude of despondency. His wife soon discovers
the cause of his distress, But instead of indulging in irrational hysterics, she
kindles a bright fire, brings pen, ink, and paper, and then, lovingly laying her hand
on his shoulder, exclaims, as she gazes cheerfully in his face, ‘* Now you can write
your book.” The word wrought like a magic spell. He set to work, forgot his loss,
wrote his book, made his reputation, and amassed a fortune. God-fearing women,
go and do likewise! (W. J. Acomb.) Perseverance :—It is said of Bruce, that,
in prison, and discouraged with the heat of his campaign for the liberties of his
country, he in moody thoughts meditated giving up the struggle; but as he lay and
thought, a spider, spinning down, caught his web upon some point, and almost fell
to the floor. Not daunted, it crept up and back, and started again; and missed
again. And again it tried, and fell again. It went through seven trials, and finally,
on the eighth, caught and established itself. And then, with a base-line laid, it
formed its web. Bruce took heart from that, through rebuke, and determined never
to give up the struggle. And at last victory came. (H. W. Beecher.) Christ's
method of salvation varied :—He looked that Christ should have done him that good
office (of putting him into the pool), and could not think of any other way of cure.
How easy it is of us to measure God by our model, to cast Him into our moulds, to
think He must needs go our way to work. (J. Trapp.) Help must be opportune :—
I had a friend who stood by the rail-track at Carlisle, Penn., when the ammunition
had given out at Antietam, and he saw the train from Harrisburg, freighted with
shot and'shell, as it went thundering down towards the battlefield. He said that it
stopped not for any crossing. They put down the brakes for no grade. They held
up for no peril. ‘The wheels were on fire with the speed as they dashed past. If
the train did not come up in time with the ammunition, it might as well not come
at all. So, my friends, there are times in our lives when we must have help imme-
diately or perish. (Dr. Talmage.) When men are willing to be saved we must
help them :—A poor fellow in Exeter Hall signed the temperance pledge some twenty
or thirty years ago, He was a prize-fighter—a miserable, debauched, degraded,
ignorant creature. A gentleman stood by his side, a builder in London, employing
some hundreds of men, and he said to him—what did he say? ‘* Stick to it?” No!
‘‘T hope you will stick to it, my friend?” No! ‘It will be a good thing for you
if you stick to it?” No! He said this—‘‘ Where do you sleep to-right?”
‘‘ Where I slept last night.” ‘‘ And where is that?” ‘‘In the streets.” ‘No you
won’t; you have signed this pledge, and you belong to this society, and you are
going home with me.” (J. B. Gough.) The value of help to seeking souls :—
Christian was left to tumble in the Slough of Despond alone; but still he endea-
voured to struggle to that side of the slough which was furthest from his own house,
and next to the wicket gate: the which he did, but could not get out by reason of
the burden that was upon his back; but I beheld in my dream, that a man came to
him whose name was Help. Then said he, “ Give me thine hand.” So he gave him
his hand, and he drew him out and set him upon sound ground, and bid him go on
his way. (J. Bunyan.) Take up: thy bed and walk.—The hospital of waiters
visited by the gospel:—It was the Sabbath day and a feast. Where and how would
Jesus spend it? Not in any trifling manner, He would do good; so He spent it
amongst the afflicted, and not even among His friends, I. First we will go down to
Bzruespa, the hospital of waiters. There was nothing else that they could do


before the troubling of the waters. There are enough waiters to-day to fill all the


five porches. 1. Some are waiting for a more convenient season—on a sick-bed,
possibly, or a dying-bed. How many years have you been waiting? The wise man
lives to-day. 2. In the second porch a crowd is waiting for dreams and visions like
those with which some ancient prophet was favoured. What is this but insulting
unbelief? Is not Christ to be believed until a sign or wonder corroborates his
testimony? 3. The third is full of people who are waiting for a sort of compulsion,


a
~


434 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fouar. Vv.
They have heard about the drawing of the Spirit of God. But He acts upon the
will by enlightening the understanding. The gospel, which says ‘‘ Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ” is His, and to reject that is to reject Him. 4. In the fourth are
people who are waiting for a revival. But the gospel command is not suspended
until revival comes: that says, ‘*fo-day, if ye will hear His voice,” and if a revival
should come it is very unlikely to affect procrastinators. 5. Many are waiting in
the porch of expected impression. They want the minister to preach a sermon that
touches them. But he has done so, again and again, and yet they are waiting. The
people in the narrative were waiting for the moving waters, and not for Jesus, and
that is what you are doing; and I want to teach you better. (1) They attach great
importance to the place. So do you, but Jesus can save as readily in your place of
business on Monday as in your chapel on Sunday. Get ye to Him and not to the
Church. (2) They waited for an influence that was intermittent, and you are thinking
of special seasons, whereas ‘‘ Now is the accepted time.’’ (3) They were waiting for
an influence that was very limited to certain persons, and so many regard salvation
as a privilege of a few, the moral, the well circumstanced, &c. But in the gospel
there is room for all. 6. Some like the poor man placed reliance on others, and many
now rest on the prayers of others rather than on Christ Himself. II. Curist picks
OUT THE MOST HELPLESS MAN IN THE WHOLE woRLD. He was not only impotent in
body, but in mind, for instead of saying ‘‘ yes” at once, he went on with a rambling
story ; and when healed he never asked Christ’s name. There are people like that
now, who scarcely know their own mind, irresolute, unstable. But Christ pities
them as He did him. III. How Jrsus praur with aim. If Christ had belonged
to a certain class of ministers He would have said, ‘‘ Right, my man ; you are lying
at the pool of ordinances, and there you had better lie,” or—‘* You had better pray.”
But, on the contrary, 1. He gave him a command. But to rise was impossible.
Never mind, there was the command. It was a command which implied faith,
and which had to prove itself by practical works. The man did believe, and
rose, &c. Now, if you believe in Jesus, vou will rise up and walk immediately.
2. The way faith came was very remarkable. He did not know Jesus: but you
do, and His atonement for sin. 3. His faith, proved by rising, settled the matter.
4.There is life in a look at the crucified One here and at once. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
The third miracle in John’s Gospel—Christ giving power to the powerless :—This
third of the miracles recorded in John's Gospel finds a place there, as it would
appear, for two reasons—first, because it marks the beginning of the angry unbelief
on the part of the Jewish rulers, the development of which it is one part of the pur-
pose of this Gospel to trace; second, because it is the occasion for that great utterance
of our Lord’s about His Sonship and His Divine working as the Father also works,
which occupies the whole of the rest of the chapter, and is the foundation of much
which follows in the Gospel. Christ comes to this impotent man, and says, “ Wilt
thou be made whole?” meaning thereby to say, ‘I will heal thee if thou wilt.”
And there comes the weary answer, as if the man had said, *“‘ Will I be made
whole? What have I been lying here all these years for? I have nobody to put
me into the pool.” Yes! It is a hopeful prospect to hold out to a man whose
disease is inability to walk, that if he will walk to the water he will get cured, and
be able to walk afterwards. Why, he could not even roll himself into the pond,
and so there he had lain, a type of the hopeless efforts at self-healing which we
sick men put forth, a type of the tantalizing gospels which the world preaches to
its subjects when it says to a paralyzed man, “ Walk that you may be healed; keep
the commandments that you may enter into life.” I fix upon these words, the
actual words in which the cure was conveyed, as communicating to us some very
important lessons and thoughts about Christ and our relation to Him. I. Curist
MANIFESTING HIMSELF 48 THE GIVER OF POWER TO THE POWERLESS THAT TRUST Him.
His words may seem at first hearing to partake of the very same almost eruel irony
as the condition of cure which had already proved hopelessly impracticable. He
too, says, ‘‘ Walk that you may be cured”; and he says it to a paralyzed and
impotent man. But the two things are very different, for before this cripple could
attempt to drag his impotent limbs into an upright position, and take up the
little light couch and sling it over his shoulders, he must have had some kind of
trust in the person that told him to do so. A very ignorant trust, no doubt, it was :
but all that wac set before him about Jesus Christ he grasped and rested upon. He
only knew Him as a Healer, and he trusted Him as such. So it is no spiritual-
izing of this story, or reading into it a deeper and more religious meaning than
belongs to it, to say that what passed in that man’s heart and mind before He


cmar. vi] ST. JOHN. 435


caught up his little bed and walked away with it, was essentially the same action
of mind and heart by which a sinful man, who knows that Christ is his Re-
deemer, grasps His Cross and trust his soul to Him. In the one case, as in the
other, there is confidence in the person ; only in the one case the person is only
known as a Healer, and in the other the person is known asa Saviour. But the
faith is the same whatever it apprehends. Christ comes and says to him, ‘“ Rise !
take up thy bed and walk.” There is a movement of confidence in the man’s
heart; he tries to obey, and in the act of obedience the power comes to him.
All Christ’s commandments are gifts. When He says to you, ‘Do this!” He
pledges Himself to give you power to doit. II. WE HAVEIN THIS MIRACLE oUR LoRD
BET FORTH AS THE ABSOLUTE MasrTEr, BECAUSE He 1s THE Heater. The Pharisees
and their friends had no eyes for the miracle; but if they found a man carrying
his light couch on the Sabbath Day, that was a thing that excited their interest,
and must be seen to immediately. And so, paying no attention to the fact that it
was a paralyzed man that was doing this, with the true, narrow instinct of the
formalist, they lay hold only of the fact of the broken rabbinical restrictions, and try
to stop him with it. “It isthe Sabbath Day! Itis not lawful for thee to carry thy
bed.” And they got an answer which goes a great deal deeper than the speaker
knew, and puts the whole subject of Christian obedience on its right footing.
He answered them, ‘‘He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up thy
bed and walk.” As if He had said, ‘‘ He gave me the power, had He not aright to
tell me what to do withit? It was His gift that I could lift my bed; was I not
bound to walk when and where He that had made me able to walk at all chose to
bid me?” And if you generalize that it just comes to this: the only person that
has a right to command you is the Christ that saves you. He has the absolute
authority to do as He will with your restored spiritual powers, because He has
bestowed them all upon you. His dominion is built upon His benefits. He is
the King because He is the Saviour. It is joy to know and to do the will of One
to Whom the whole heart turns with gratitude and affection. And Christ blesses
and privileges us by the communication to us of his pleasure concerning us, that
we may have the gladness of yielding to His desires, and so meeting the love which
commands with the happy love which obeys. III. Wz wave HERE OUR LorD SETTING
HimseLF ForRtH AS THE Divine SON, WHOSE WORKING NEEDS AND KNOWS NO REST.
“Father worketh hitherto, and I work.” The rest, which the old story in Genesis
attributed to the Creator after the Creation, was not to be construed as if it meant
the rest of inactivity. But it was the rest of continuous action. God’s rest and
God’s work are one. Throughout all the ages preservation is a continuous creation.
The Divine energy is streaming out for evermore; as the bush that burns uncon-
sumed, as the sun that flames undiminished for ever, pouring out from the depth
of that Divine nature; and for ever sustaining a universe. So that there is no
Sa bath, in the sense of a cessation from action, proper to the Divine nature;
because all His action is repose, and “‘e’en in His very motion there is rest.”
And this Divine coincidence of activity and of repose belongs to the Divine Son in
His Divine human nature. With that arrogance which is the very audacity of
blasphemy, if it be not the simplicity of a Divine consciousness, He puts His
own work side by side with the Father’s work, as the same in principle, the
same in method, the same in purpose, the same in its majestic coincidence of
repose and of energy—‘' My Father worketh hitherto, and I work. Therefore for
Me, as for Him, there is no need of a Sabbath of repose.” Human activity is dis-
sipated by toil, human energy is exhausted by expenditure. Man works and is
weary; man works and is distracted. For the recovery of the serenity of his spirit,
and for the renewal of his physical strength, repose of body, and gathering in of
mind, such as the Sabbath brought, were needed; but neither is needed for Him
who toils unwearied in the heavens ; and neither is needed for the Divine nature
of Him who labours in labours parallel with the Father’s here upon the earth.
IV. WE HAVE IN THIS INCIDENT THE HEALER, WHO IS ALSO THE JUDGE, WARNING THE
HEALED OF THE POSSIBILITIES OF A RELAPSE (ver. 14). The man’s eight-and-thirty
years of illness had apparently been brought on by dissipation. It was a sin of
flesh, avenged in the flesh, that had given him that miserable life. One would
have thought he had got warning enough, but we all know the old proverb about what
happened when the devil was ill, and what befell his resolutions when he got better.
And so Christ comes to him again with this solemn warning. ‘There is a worse
thing than eight-and-thirty years of paralysis. You fell once, and sore was your
punishment. If you fall twice, your punishment will be sorer.” Why? ‘ Because


5


436 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHar. v.
the first one has done you no good.” (A. Maclaren, D.D.) The rising life:—I.
Wao arn to rise. 1. The sinful. 2. The spiritually depressed. 3. Declining Chris-
tians, for (1) Their prayers have got low, (2) their Bible reading, (3) their attendance
at Church and Holy Communion. (4) Their intercourse with their familyand theworld. .
(5) Theircharities and general usefulness. II. ABovE WHAT ARETHEY TO RISE? 1. Sin. 2.
Self. 8. Theworld. 4. Theirretrospects. 5. Their hopes. 6. Theirsorrows. III.'To
wat are they to rise? 1. To Christ. 2. Toduty. 3. To heaven. (J. Vaughan,
M.A.) Reasons for rising :—I. To procuamm THE cuRE. II. To ExcITE ATTEN-
tion. III. To pRorTEsT AGAINST suPERSTITION. IV. To prove His Divinity. 1.
As a Worker of miracles. 2. As Lord of the Sabbath. V. To TEST THE FAITH
AND OBEDIENCE OF THE HEALED. (JV. H. Van Doren, D.D.) The bed which the
man was commanded to take up was neither a walnut bedstead, nor an iron bedstead,
nor any other of the bed-structures to which we are accustomed in the West. The
bed of a low-class Oriental may consist of anything from a rag to a rug. The
poorer classes have often no other bed than the garment which they wear by day,
which thus serves for a cloak by day and a bed by night. The bed which the infirm
man was commanded to take up was, in all probability, simply the ordinary
Oriental mat or rug, which could easily be rolled up and carried under the arm.
(S. S. Times.) Faith and works:—Paul and James seem, to some, to take
different views of faith and works. John here combines the views of the two
inspired writers. It is faith that is demanded in this miracle; itis works that are
called for. The man is to take up his bed and walk, as a proof that he believes
that Jesus is able and ready to cure him. The reward is not of works as works,
nor yet of faith without works, but of faith that is shown in works, and of works
that are a proof of faith. And thus it is in every call on us for faith or for works.
- Our works must be in evidence of our faith; our faith must be of the sort that
shows itself in works. (H. OC. Trumbull, D.D.) The significance of the man’s
act :—For thirty-eight years had his bed borne the sick man, now the healed man
bears his bed of infirmity away: in like manner do converted sinners take the
materials of their former conversation, and at the same time with joy and shame
bear them as trophies of victory, but as reminders too; thus does the converted
miser, for example, say to mammon, ‘Formerly thou hadst me, but now I have
thee;”’ he takes his possessions and goes away ready to lay out all that he has to
God’s honour and service. But the bed of sickness, when it is turned into the
restored man’s trophy of victory, should also preach of the healing work of God.
(R. Besser, D.D.) The same day was the Sabbath. The Sabbath:—I. ALL THE
Oup TESTAMENT INSTITUTIONS HAD A SPECIAL FOUNDATION. 1. Those which have a
foundation in the common necessities of man and the common relation of men to
God. These were not peculiar to the Jews, but were incorporated into thcir system
because they were men. To this class belong all moral precepts and the Sabbath.
2. Those which had respect to the peculiar circumstances of the Jews; such as
distinction between clean and unclean meats, circumcision, &c, These bound the
Jews as Jews and them only. 3. Those which were designed to be typical of the
Messiah, His work and Kingdom. These were mostly incorporations of prior
institutions with the Mosiac law. IJ. TaHatr roe SasBpaTH BELONGS TO THE CLASS oF
UNIVERSAL Laws, binding all men and ages is evident. 1. Because it was instituted
before the Law. 2. Because the ground of its observances was a general ground
one in which all nations were concerned. 3. Because it was predicted that it
would be observed under the reign of the Messiah. 4. Because its observance has
been, in fact, continued as a Divine injunction by the whole Christian Church.
5. It is incorporated in the decalogue. JI. Reasons FoR THE INSTITUTION.
1. Special. (1) The reason why the seventh day was appointed was to com-
memorate the work of creation. This is the foundation of all religion, and it is of
universal importance that it shoutd be remembered. (2) The special reason for the
observance of the first day was the commemoration of the Resurrection, on which
rested the truth of the gospel. If Christ rose then the gospel is true. If the
world was created then there is a personal God, the Maker, Preserver and Ruler of
the universe. 2. Reasons why one day in seven should be observed. (1) The
necessity of rest for man and beast, for mind and body. (2) To afford time for
public worship. (a) This is essential for the preservation and diffusion of truth:
without it the people would sink into ignorance. (b) It is necessary as a means of
conversion, as it is by the preaching of the gospel that men are saved. (c) Asa
means of edification when attendance is not possible. A Sabbath-neglecting people
are notoriously irreligious. (d) As the only opportunity of rendering God that


<a a a os


CHAP. v.] ST. JOHN. 437


‘public worship which is the duty of every community as such, as well as of every


individual. (3) To arrest the tide of worldliness; to cause men to stop and
remember that this world is not all nor greatest. Without this we should not be
aware of our progress toward eternity. IV. THe moDE oF OBSERVANCE IS DETER-
MINED BY THE OBJECT OF THE DAY. 1. It includes rest from all worldly avocations
and amusements. 2. The cultivation of a religious spirit and the discharge of
religious duties. The Pharisaic mode is one extreme, the latitudinarian is another.
The latter is the tendency now. (C. Hodge, D.D.) Sabbath work :—Christ
healed men on all sorts of days: but Sabbaths were high days of grace. Six
special cases are recorded. 1. The evil spirit cast out (Luke iv, 31-35). 2. The
withered hand restored (Luke vi. 6-10). 3. The crooked woman made straight
(Luke xiii. 10-17). 4. The man with the dropsy cured (Luke xiv, 1-6). 5. The
impotent man made whole (text). 6. The blind man’s eyes opened (John ix. 1-14),
As God rested on the Sabbath and hallowed it; so as God it was rest for Jesus to
heal, and thus He hallowed the day. As Man also He rested His heart, exercised a
holy ministry, glorified God, and hallowed the day. I. Turse currs MET MANY
casEs, 1. Those under satanic influence. Many are in this case. 2. Those
conscious of spiritual inability. 3. Those bowed down with great distress,
despondency and despair. This poor woman had been infirm for eighteen years,
4, Those smitten with mortal disease, which typifies the deadly character of sin.
5. Those altogether paralyzed. This man was impotent for thirty-eight years.
6. Those in total darkness as to all spiritual truth. II. Tues curEs REPRESENT
USUAL PRocEssES, 1. A word addressed to the devil. Satan feels the power of
the Word of God, but cares for nothing else. 2. A word personal to the sufferer.
He was unable, and yet he was commanded; and he obeyed. This is the
gospel method. 3. A word accepted as done. Faith turns promise into fact,
gospel-teaching into actual salvation. 4. Power without a word. 5. A word
arousing and commanding. Many are saved by being stirred up from long
inactivity and lethargy. 6. A word associated with other means. The whole
miracle is deeply instructive on this point. In these varied forms and fashions,
Jesus works on the Sabbath. III. THesz cures WERE BOTH IN AND OUT OF THE
Synacocur. 1. There, and misbehaving. 2. There and singled out from the
crowd. 38. There and called to Jesus. 4. After the synagogue service. 5. Too
feeble to get there. 6. Too poor to be there. IV. THESE CURES WERE ALL
uNsoucHT. This is one special feature about them all. 1. The possessed man en-
treated Christ to leave him alone. 2. The man with the withered hand did not think
of cure. 3. The infirm woman did not hope for healing. 4. The man with the
dropsy did not ask for the blessing. 5. The infirm man was too paralyzed to seek
Christ. 6. It was an unheard-of thing that the eyes of a man born blind should
be opened, and therefore he did not expect it. This also is the Sabbath; let us
look to the Lord of the Sabbath. Will He not this day bless those who are
seekers? Will He not bless those whom we bring to Him? Will He not bless
those for whom we pray? (C. H. Spurgeon.) The arrest of a (so-called)
Sabbath-breaker :--I. AN ACCUSATION PREFERRED (ver. 10), 1. Certainly strange.
Congratulation might have been expected towards the man and gratitude towards
Jesus. 2. Seemingly just. The action violated Rabbinical prescription and the
letter of Scripture. But an action may contravene the literal sense and yet be in
accordance with the Spirit (Matt. xii. 4, 5), and vice versa (Matt. xv. 3-6),
8. Essentially false. Christ repudiated the ordinance which renders criminal a
natural and necessary action. II. AN EXPLANATION OFFERED (ver. 11). 1. Trans-
parently simple (Eph. iv. 25; Col. iii. 9; Matt. v. 37; James v.12). 2. Perfectly
natural. To the unsophisticated mind it seemed obvious that One who could heal
him should bid him take up his bed. 3. Wholly insufficient. The defence was an
aggravation. He had obeyed a Sabbath-breaker. His physician was a greater
sinner than himself. So men who from good motives at the outset begin to deviate
from the laws of heaven by addition or subtraction, and by confounding moral
distinctions, end by turning vice and virtue upside down (Matt. xvii. 12). III. A
VINDICATION GIVEN (ver. 17). 1. Startlingly bold. Based on three facts—(1) That
the supreme Lawegiver ceased not from Sabbath activity. (2) That He (Christ) stood
towards that Supreme Sabbath Worker in the relation of Son. (3) That He, as such,
was co-worker with God in all that.God did. Hence, whatever He as Father’s Son did
was that Father’s working itself. 2. Completely unanswerable. Hence they accused
Him of blasphemy. 3. Fatally decisive. They resolved on His destruction. Learn:
j. To sanctify the Sabbath by doing good to the bodies and souls of men, 2. To


ae


438 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP, V.
ee Se eee
help Christ’s cause by telling what great things He hath done. 3. That people do
not always know who their best benefactors are. 4, That those whom Christ has
healed should be found in the sanctuary. 5. That the best prophylactic against
physical disease is to fear God, and keep His commandments. 6, That Christ is
perfectly able to vindicate His ways. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) He that made
me whole, the same said unto me, take up thy bed and walk.—The prin-
ciple here is grand and far reaching, it applies to the whole life. He that
saves has the right to command. I. SaLvaTIon, HEALING OF SOUL, IS THE FOUNDA-
TION AND STARTING POINT OF THE TRUE CHRISTIAN LIFE. We must be before we
can do, II. Way po I rive as A Curistian? 1. Is it because it is safe, or
prudent, because the evidence seems predominantly in favour of Christianity,
because others are Christians? There may be something in these motives, but—2.
No Christianity can live and flourish which is not more deeply rooted. 3. What,
then, is the root? Gratitude, not fear, custom, or calculation. This animated the
apostles—‘‘ We love Him because He first loved us;” the glorified ‘‘ Unto Him that
loved us,”&c. 4. This motive of gratitude is the deepest, strongest, most con-
straining and abiding. If this ever dies Christianity dies with it. III, Curisr’s
RIGHT [0 RULE IS GROUNDED ON His satvaTion. He gives the life; surely, then,
it is His to control and direct. He cannot have saved us that we may do as we like
with ourselves. That is just what we did before we were saved, When we are
saved, we are saved from our self-will. The man took up his bed and walked
because he had been made whole, and that he might show that he was made whole,
It was both obedience and evidence, and there is no Christian life that is not the
same. IV. How DOES OUR LIFE BEAR THIS TEST, that He who is the healer of the
soul is also the authority for our life. We are challenged again and again as this
man was challenged. Themen of custom meet us as they met Him. 1. It is well not
wantonly to defy a practice which is not foolish or mischievous. Many established
practices should be respected because they exist and do no harm, and render inter-
course possible and pleasant. Many of them Christ respected. 2. But the customs
which seek to govern us with all the authority of a Divine claim when they have no
such claim, eating with unwashed hands, &c., should be resisted as He resisted
them. They make men slaves, turn religion into a torture, and quench the light of
the sabbath. We are under the law to Christ. V. It is a glorious thing to
remember that wHat CHRIST COMMANDS IS RIGHT, whether we understand His
reasons or not. We must grow into the knowledge of them little by little. VI.
WHATEVER CHRIST COMMANDS HE GIVES US POWER TO DO. He never separates duty
from power. ‘My grace is sufficient.” (H. Mellor, D.D.) The work of grace
the warrant for obedience :—I. A sustirtcation, This poor man could not defend
his action, for his enemies were learned in the law and he was not, but he did what
you and I must always do when we are at all puzzled—he hid himself behind Christ
and pleaded, ‘‘ He that made me whole,” &c. I may not find in my own knowledge
and ability an authority equal to that of learned unbelievers, but my personal
experience of the power of grace will stand mein as good a stead as this man’s cure
was tohim. He argued that the cure made the healer an authority above that of
the greatest rabbi. 1. There are certain ordinances about which the world raises a
storm of questions. The world does not take notice that a man who was once a
drunkard has become sober, &c. It lets that miracle pass by unheeded; but he is
going to be baptized and they at once object to the ordinance, or he is going to join
the church and straightway they jeer at him asa Presbyterian or a Methodist. Blind
creatures to despise the medicine which heals because of the bottle or the label! We
seek no justification but this—‘‘He that made us whole” gave us the command,
The same with the Lord’s supper. 2. The same apology applies to the doctrines of
the gospel. Justification by faith is quarrelled with. ‘ They will lead loose lives;
they will sin that grace may abound.” A complete answer to the calumny may be
found in the fact that believers in justification are among the best and purest; but
we prefer to remind our adversaries that He who has regenerated us has taught us
that ‘* Whoscever believeth in Him shall be saved,” &c., that by the works of the
law no flesh shall be justified. 3. The same applies to Christ’s precepts. If the
Christian is true to his colours he keeps himself aloof from the sinful pleasures
practices, and policies of the world, consequently he is told that he is precise,
singular, and self-opinioned. The text is the answer for all Christians. II. An
OBLIGATION, 1. The argument takes this form: If He made me whole Heis Divine
or at least must be divinely authorized, andI am therefore bound to obey. J esus,
who has saved us, is our God—shall we not obey Him? 2. There was also goodness


CHAP. V.] ST. JOHN. 439


as well as power, and this touched the poor man’s heart—‘ I must do what my great
Deliverer bids me.” 3. If youhave been saved you are under an obligation to do
what Jesus bids you. (1) Are you redeemed? Then henceforth ye are not your
own. (2) Are you forgiven? Does not pardon demand amendment? ‘“* Whatsoever
He saith unto you doit.” Pray, love your brethren; be perfect. III. A consrrarnt,
It was not an ordinary word, but one with power. Not unwillingly did the restored
man carry his bed, yet he did it of constraint, for the same power made him obe-
dient. Do you feel reluctant in duty? Surely you need to draw near to the Lord
again and hear His voice anew. ‘The love of Christ constraineth us,” (C. H.
Spurgeon.) Willing obedience :—We do not want to destroy willinghood, but we
would have it quickened into entire subservience to the will of the Lord. Like
Noah’s ark on dry land, the will keeps its place by its own dead weight. Oh! fora
flood of grace to move, to lift, to upbear it; to carry it away by a mighty current!
We would be borne before the love of Christ as a tiny piece of wood is drifted by
the gulf-stream, or as one of the specks which dance in the sunbeam would be
carried by a rushing wind, As the impulse, which begins with Jesus, found the poor
man passive because utterly unable to be otherwise, and then impelled him on to
active movements as with a rush of power, so may it ever be with us throughout
life. May we for ever yield to the Divine impulse. To be passive in the Lord’s
hands is a good desire, but to be what I would call actively passive, to be cheerfully
submissive, willingly to give up our will, this is a higher spiritual mood. We
must live, and yet not we, but Christ in us. We must act, and yet we must say,
He that made me whole bade me do this holy deed, and I do it because His power
moves me thereunto. (JIbid.) The highest authority must be obeyed:—In
Michelet’s “* Joan of Arc” it is related that the two authorities, the paternal and the
celestial, enjoined her two opposite commands. The one ordered her to remain
obscure, modest and labouring; the other, to set out and save the kingdom. The
angel bade her arm herself. Her father, rough and honest peasant as he was,
swore that rather than his daughter should go away with men-at-arms he would
drown her with his own hands. One or other disobey she must. Beyond a doubt
thie was the greatest battle she was called upon to fight; those against the English
were play in comparison. What man is that which said unto thee.—Tendencies
of society :—I. To sTIR UP AND STRENGTHEN THE IMPULSES OF OUR ANIMAL NATURE.
II. To PRODUCE HABITS OF SUPERFICIAL THOUGHT. III. To DESTROY THE SENSE OF
INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY. IV. To PROMOTE FORGETFULNESS oF Gop. (H. W.
Van Doren, D.D.) Winter worship :—1. If the first power of Christianity was
embodied in miracle it was miracle distinctly expressive of its spirit. The gift of
tongues and of healing represent the two grand functions of our religion to bear per-
suasion to the minds and bring mercy to the physical ills of men. When the men of
Galilee stood forth to preach the first glad tidings to that multitude of many
tongues, what better symbol could there be of that religion whose spirit is intelligible
to all because it addresses itself to the universal human heart? And when the
crowd of weary sufferers thronged the apostles’ steps, how better could be repre.
sented the character of that faith which has lessened age after age the stripes
wherewith humanity is stricken. In the spirit of these acts of Providence we may
participate. 2. But nothing could be more unostentatious than the diffusion of
Christ’s mercy by the missionaries in the days of old. We feel an idle pride in
Paul’s conspicuous adventures; but watch him even in Rome, He was not one to
pass through its scenes of magnificence with stupid indifference. But his noblest
dignity was not that he paced the forum, but that he lingered in the dens of
wretchedness, and shed on the darkest lot alight of hope. And the true dignity
of onr religion is that it has gone about doing good, and so silently that “he that
was healed wist not who it was.” 3. It can never be unreasonable for those who
bear Christ’s name to imitate His Spirit, but winter brings with it a peculiar call
to mercy, for, however constant the visitations of sickness and bereavement, the
fall of the year is most thickly strewn with the fall of human life. How shall
we render the fitting service of the season? I, By thinking of human ills in the
SPIRIT OF RELIGION; regarding them in their relation to the Great Will, and
recognizing their position in a system of universal Providence, and being moved by
them to reverence and trust. II. In the spirit OF SELF-APPLICATION, This is
difficult, and it is asked, “‘ Why should it be otherwise? Why forestall the in-
evitable day?” I grant that to think of death in an abject and melancholy spirit
is no act of wisdom or duty. Futurity is not to mar but to mend our duty. But it
is a fact, and the sense of it breaks up the superficial crust of life and stirs the


440 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. omar. ¥.


deeper affections. III. In the sprarr or Humanity. It were selfish to gather round
our firesides without a thought or deed of pity for the poor sufferers outside. Oh,
could we but see the dead gripe of misery, the only difficulty would be, not to
stimulate our generosity, but to persuade it to work wisely. 1. This is indeed a
difficulty how to relieve the want and raise the man; how to combine the deed of
condescension with the helpful recognition and inspiration of human brotherhood.
2. Another difficulty; we form our good intentions too late. We rarely better
ourselves till evils get well ahead, and by no effort can we well ts overtaken. We
permit a generation to grow up neglected, and then consider how it is to be reclaimed.
3. But, taking facts as they are, you cannot mechanize benevolence, nor put
Christian love into an Act of Parliament or a subscription list. However necessary
may be the remedial action of laws and institutions, the ties between man and
man can be drawn closer, and common ills remedied only by personal agency. (J.
Martineau, D.D.) The malignity of the questioners reveals itself in the very
shape which their question assumes. They do not take up the man’s words on
their more favourable side, which also would have been the more natural: nor ask,
“‘ What man is that which made thee whole?” But probably, themselves at least,
guessing who his Healer was, they insinuate that He could not be from God, who
gave acommand which they, the interpreters of God’s law, esteemed so grievous
an outrage against it. So will they weaken and undermine any influence which
Christ must have obtained over this simple man—an influence already manifest in
his finding our Lord’s authority sufficient to justify him in the transgression of
their commandment. (Abp. Trench.) Jesus had conveyed Himself away.—
There is something beautifully significant in this word as here applied to Christ.
He emerged, glided, dived forth invisibly from the waves of the crowd, and re-
appeared in the quiet harbour of the house of God. Our Lord has now withdrawn
His bodily presence from the crowd of this world in order that we may see Him
with the eye of faith. He has dived through the clouds of this lower world of sin
and sorrow, and has emerged into the pure, crystal, empyrian of heaven. (Bp.
Wordsworth.) A metaphor from swimming; the multitude like water closing
behind Him. We have no word in our poor tongue to express the retiring of Deity
(Prov. xxv. 2). The secret descent of the nightly dew, and the noiseless movement
of the mighty orbs of heaven illustrate this. No one hears the sunlight, or the
operation of those laws that bind atoms and worlds, (H. W. Van Doren, D.D.)
Thou art made whole: Sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee.— Sin
and Judgment :—I. WE HAVE ALL SINNED. 1. What is sin? (1) Its Scriptural
appellations. Injustice (Heb. viii. 12; Jer. xxxi. 34). Error (Heb. viii. 12; Jer.
xxxi, 34; Judg. xx. 16). Unlawfulness (Heb. viii. 12; Exod. xxxiv. 7). (2) Its
nature (1 John iii. 4), (a) Contrarity to God’s law, either habitual or actual.
(b) Provocation of His anger (Psa. xcv. 8, 10; cvi. 29, 32). (c) A separation from
God (Isa. lix. 2). (d) A loss of innocency or righteousness. (e) A staining or
defiling of the soul (Titusi. 15). (jf) Guilt or obligation to the penalty denounced
(Gal. iii, 10). Hence all sins are called debts (Matt vi 12). 2. How does it
appear that all have sinned? (1) From Scripture (1 Kings viii. 46; Eccles. vii. 20;
1 Johni, 8). (2) From reason, because all descend from Adam (Rom. v. 12; 1 Cor.
xv. 22; Psa. li. 5; Eph. ii, 3). (3) From experience, 3. Uses. Hence we may
learn—(1) The sad effects of the first sin (Rom. v.19). (2) That we have no reason
to complain of any of God’s judgments (Lam. iii. 39). (3) That no salvation can
be expected from ourselves (Gal. ii, 10; iii. 10). (4) That it highly concerns us to
search our own hearts, and view our lives, and find out our sins, and 10 condemn
ourselves for them, II. Sin 1s THe cause or Gop’s JupamEenTs 1. What are
judgments? The effects of God’s anger. 2. How are sins the cause of God’s
judgments (Ezra ix. 13; Job. xi. 6; Psa. evii. 17; Lam. i. 5-8; v. 10). 3. How does
it appear that sins are thus the cause of judgments? (1) Sin brought misery in
general upon mankind at first (Gen. iii. 16-19); for man at first was made ag
upright, so happy (Gen. i. 26 ; Eccles. vii. 29); yet he was mutable. Hence God, to
awe him to obedience, threatened death if he sinned (Gen. ii. 17). But man
notwithstanding this, sinned, and God therefore could not but in justice inflict the
punishment (Gen. xviii. 25). Hence all mankind became liable to all the judgments
of God. (2) Sin is the cause also of particular judgments; as appears—(a) From
Scripture (Psa. cvii, 17; Ezra ix. 13, &.). (b) From reason for all judgments
came from an offended God (Lam. i. 12), and nothing offends God but sin. (c)
From experience : the old world, Sodom, &c. 4. Uses. (1) Therefore, in time of
adversity, consider (Eccles, vii. 14) our sinfulness, God’s sovereignty and power


CS a ae
- “ 1 4 by


onap. v.] ST. JOHN. 441


(Isa. xlv. 7; Amos iii. 6), and the danger of incurring His displeasure. (2) Rend
your hearts and turn to the Lord (Joel ii. 12, 13). III. How arg we To BEHAVE
WHEN DELIVERED FROM ANY JUDGMENT? 1. Resort to public ordinances—(1) To
make public confession of our sins in offending God (2 Chron. vii. 13, 14), and of
God’s justice in afflicting us (Psa. li. 4). (2) Make public acknowledgment of our
thankfulness to God for His power and mercy (Lam. iii. 2). (3) Make our public
prayers to God—(a) For the pardon of those sins whereby we have deserved His
Judgments. (b) For a blessing upon His judgments. (c) For grace to live like
those who have been under the rod. 2. It must be our greatest study and endeavour
to sin no more. (1) How sin no more. Not with love to sin, nor delight in it
(Psa. cxix. 113; Rom. vii. 22), nor with allowance of it; but do our utmost to
avoid commission of it. (2) What must we do to keep ourselves from sin. Search
the Scriptures ; frequent ordinances (Rom. x. 17); avoid occasion of sin, such as
vain thoughts, idle words, loose company, &c. IV. Gop Has YET worsE judgments
in store for us if we still go on sinning (Lev. xxvi. 15,16). 1. Temporal, and these—
(1) National—a worse plague (Numb. xvi. 49; 2 Sam. xxiv. 15); a worse fire (Gen.
xix. 24) ; a worse sword, civil war or invasion (Lev. xxvi. 37; Lam. i. 1-3); a worse
famine (2 Kings vi. 25). (2) Or personal, for He can curse our remaining blessings
(Mal. ii. 2), or deprive us of them, or send a disease upon us (Acts xii. 23), 2.
Spiritual. (1) He can remove His ordinances (Rev. il. 5). (2) Withdraw His
blessings (Matt. xxi. 43). (3) Blind our eyes (Isa. vi. 9,10). (4) Suffer us to be
led into heresies (2 Thess. ii. 11). (5) Withhold His restraining grace (Rom. i.
24-27). (6) Let us alone in our sins without control (Hos, iv. 17; Isa. i. 5). (7)
Harden our hearts (Exod. iv. 21; 2 Kings vi. 33). (8) Startle and affright our
conscience into despair. 3. Eternal (Matt. xxv. 41). (Bp. Beveridge.) Sin and
suffering :—This is the parting advice of a physician. Itis not ordinary medical
advice. It utters no warning against the night air, exposure to infection, irregular
habits, or indigestible food. Let us inquire into—I. THE PRINCIPLE ON WHICH THIS
WARNING IS FOUNDED. ‘This; that we are under the moral government of God.
1. Evils are divinely inflicted on men on account of sin. God is holy, which means
that He hates sin and seeks to destroy it; that He is good, and delights in the
happiness of His subjects; that He is wise, and contemplates the highest ends, and
selects the most effectual method to carry them into effect. But there are no
purposes higher than those of perfect holiness and infinite love, and there are no
means more effectual than to link sin with suffering, and purity with happiness.
2. When one stroke of God’s hand is not followed by the end desired, He may
inflict a heavier; just as human governments have graduated punishments. God is
in no want of resources. All the agencies of nature are at His command, and if
His first stroke has been too light, the second will be heavier; and if gentleness
has failed, severity will be tried. II. Irs practical BEARING ON OURSELVES. What
his sin was we are not informed; but possibly it was just what many of you young
people are guilty of every day, a general godlessness of heart and life. And so


the stroke came as much as to say, ‘If that is the use you are going to make of


your powers, it is well that they should be for a while taken from you.” In long
weary years he learnt the lesson, and the gifts of God were restored, So some of
you have been blessed by a curse; take care that you are not cursed by means of a
blessing. 1. It is a shame if we should need a worse thing to come upon us. (1)
In the course of our affliction we were made to feel the connection of our suffering
with our sin. Then is it not shameful that, having been taught this once, we
should need to learn it again in still deeper sorrow? (2) Our souls have also been
touched by the lovingkindness of God—then ought not the current of our grateful
impulses to carry us in a course of duty? 2. Are we prepared for this worse thing?
God has given His people a succession of calamities as an example of what He
can do in this way—Amos iv., Pharaoh, &c. 3. There is not only a worse,
but a worst thing impending over the impenitent sinner—the final loss of the soul.
(Prof. Chariton.) The pardon of sin :—Pardon is an essential stage in the subjuga-
tion of sin. 1. There are those who place it last, but this is counter to Rom. vii.
where forgiveness is assumed, and yet the conflict is maintained. 2. Others, again,
make pardon to cover all future delinquencies, which contradicts St. John (1 John. i.).
But pardon goes a great way to the conquest of sin. I, THE CONDEMNATION OF SIN
CANNOT GO WITHOUT SOMETHING OF THE SIN GOING Too. ‘The Lamb of God taketh
away’? not the punishment, but the ‘‘sin of the world.” “The blood of Jesus
Christ cleanseth from all sin,” actual sin. What would it avail us that results were
taken away while the first cause remained in its strength? JI. Tu MAN wHo Has


/,


442 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cuaP. ¥.


TASTED oF GoD’s FORGIVENESS IS IN A MUCH BETTER CONDITION TO OVERCOM# THE COR-
RUPTIONS OF HIS OWN HEART. His weakness is linked on to God’s omnipotence.
III. A SPRING OF ACTION IS SET AT WORK IN THE HEART WITH WHICH NOTHING ELSE CAN
compaRE. The love of Christ. We can all see what a difference it is to fightin the
light of a smile or to fight in the darkness of a frown. The Saviour’s method with
the impotent man was analogous; pardon was a part of expulsion; and having for-
given him, connected his first calamity with his sin, and his future happiness with
his future goodness, This gave him a reason, a capacity for good. (J. Vaughan, M.A.)
In the temple :—Not in the market; and there Jesus met him who had not known
Him in the crowd. Jesus escapes from the crowd, but He finds us and is found by
us in the temple. God is seen in solitude; the multitude makes a din around us
and hides Him from us. The Divine vision demands religious retirement and holy
peace in His house, apart from the strife of tongues. (Bp. Wordsworth.) Retribu-
tion :—A worse thing even in this life might befall him. His sickness had found
him a youth, and left him an old man; it had withered up all his manhood, and
yet a worse thing than this is threatened him, shonld he sin again. Let no man,
however miserable, count that he has exhausted the power of God’s wrath. The
arrows that have pierced him may have been keen ; but there are keener yet, if only
he provoke them, in the quiver from whence these were drawn. What the past sin was
we do not know, but the man knew, and Christ connected the man’s suffering with
his sin. As some eagle, pierced with ashaft feathered from its own wing, so many
a sufferer, even in this present time, sees, and is compelled to acknowledge, that his
own sin fledged the arrow which has pierced him and brought himdown. And lest
he should miss the connection, oftentimes he is punished, it may be is sinned
against by his fellow man in the very kind wherein he has sinned against others
(Judg. i. 6, 7; Gen. xlii. 21; Exod. xxxv. 6, 15; Jer. li. 49; Hab. ii. 8; Rev. xvi.
6). The deceiver is deceived as was Jacob (Gen. xxvii. 19, 24; xxix. 23; xxxi. 7;
XXxXVil. 32): the violater of the sanctities of family life is himself wounded and out-
raged in his nearest and tenderest relations as was David (2 Sam. xi. 4; xiii. 14;
xvi. 22); the troubler is troubled (Josh. vii. 25). He has no choice but to say, like
Edmund in “ King Lear,” “ The wheel has come full circle, Iam here.” And manya
sinner who cannot thus read his own doom, for itis a final and fatal one, yet
declares in that doom to others that there is indeed a coming back upon men of
their sins. The grandson of Ahab is himself treacherously slain in the portion of
Naboth (2 Kings ix. 23); William Rufus perishes, himself the third of his family
who does so, in the New Forest, a chief scene of the sacrilege and the crimes of his
race. (Abp. Trench.) Apostasy dangerous :—A person who suspected that a
minister of his acquaintance was not truly orthodox went to him and said, “ Sir, I
am told that you are against the perseverance of the saints.” ‘ Not I, indeed,”
answered he; ‘it isthe perseverance of sinners that I oppose.” The other replied,
‘‘But that is not a satisfactory answer. Do you think that a child of God cannot
fall very low, and yet be restored?” The minister answered, ‘‘I think it will be
very dangerous to make the experiment.” (E. Foster.) Penalty of apostasy :—
Richard Denton, an English blacksmith, who apostatized to avoid martyrdom,
perished, shortly after, in the flames of his own dwelling. (Ibid.) A warning
to the restored :—We are not told what the effect was of this warning; whether
it restrained the man, as it was intended to do, to a moderate enjoyment of
bis restored health. But, for the sake of illustration, let us suppose that he
did not profit by Christ’s warning, but that he made the most, as it would be
called, of his newly acquired health and strength ; that he let himself loose in the
enjoyment of everything that came within his reach; that he gave free play to the
long pent-up desires of his youth, just like one who has unexpectedly come into
the possession of a large fortune which he sees no bounds to, and accordingly
determines to enjoy to the uttermost, so that he comes again to the old disease

And now let us compare his second illness with his first. As far as his mere
bodily state is concerned, we may imagine him to be in much the same condition
as when he lay by the side of the pool of Bethesda, waiting for the stirring of the
waters. But what must be the state of his feelings now in this second stage of his
infirmity, compared with what they were before? What a use to have made of
Jesus Christ’s great kindness to him and of His words of warning; what an end
to bring himself to after having thus come close to his Deliverer ; how bitterly
would he repent of ever having been healed; how he would wish with all his
heart that he had gone through life the impotent cripple that he was when Jesus
Christ first met with him! I may seem to be putting an unlikely cace, but, indeed


CHAP. V.] ST. JOHN. 443
Dae etre eae ee ee
it is a far too common one. Some of us have had occasion to thank God for a
recovery from a bad accident or dangerous illness ; after weeks, or perhaps months,
of pain or weakness, we have, by God’s blessing, got quite strong and well again,
and have gone about our old occupations and amusements as before; we have felt
an increased delight in everything, from the very fact of having been for a time
deprived of it all. Well, then, on every such occasion Jesus Christ meets us with
the same warning which He addressed to this man, ‘‘Behold, thou are made
whole; sin no more, lest,” &c. He has given you your health again, or rather,
He has lent it to you again, on certain conditions, And the chief of these is, that
you should make a better use of your powers than you did before, that you should
spend them more freely and heartily in His service. He sent you your sickness
because He saw you making a bad use of your health; He sends you health again,
that you may have an opportunity of showing that you have learned the lesson
which your sickness was sent to teach you. But if you go on after your recovery
just as you did before, if you still go on living to yourself and to your sins, and
not to God, then you must expect this worse thing to come to you, of which your
Saviour has warned you. And it will be well for you if God, in His mercy, sends
you a still severer sickness, or still heavier misfortune, to force you away from
your sinful enjoyment of this life, and to make you at least, give the days of your
sickness to God, since you will not give Him the days of your health. But there
is a worse thing still in store for us, if we neglect to hear Jesus Christ when He
calls us. We may go through life with all our powers of body and mind in their
full strength ; we may enjoy all that this world has to give us, down to the very
dregs; we may go down at last to the grave with no sign of the fulfilment of
Christ’s warning; and then it is reserved for the warning to fulfil itself in all its
awfulness in another world than this. Oh, may none of us have to wait for this
worst thing of all to happen to us; let us beseech God to visit us with every kind
of suffering here, rather than leave us to bear the accumulated weight of our sins
in eternity. (H. Harris, B.D.) Christian fear of relapse into sin :—Consider,
first, what awful notions our Saviour would here impress on us concerning the
future end and sure punishment of sin. ‘ A worse thing ’’—worse, that is, than a
palsy of thirty and eight years: worse than lying, helpless and weary, day after
day in sight of relief, and seeing one after another step down into the pool and be
made whole, while he was himself unable to stir, and had no friend to lift him:
yet, says Christ, if you fall again into wilful sin, you are to expect worse than
this, Here, then, you at once discern one most merciful purpose of Almighty
God, in sending upon men pain and calamity. It may serve effectually, as a kind
of sample, to teach them, feelingly as it were, somewhat of the wrath and justice of
God. It may serve to awaken a wholesome fear of falling into His hands without
a Mediator to speak for them. And happy indeed will that man prove, whose
severe bodily pains shall have taught him in time to recollect and fear the torments
of hell. But where things unhappily turn out otherwise; where the caution of
our Lord is slighted, and the evil habit, suspended only by the affliction, returns
and grows over the man anew; or he falls into fresh transgressions; that man’s
case is worse in many respects than if he had never been visited at all. 1. First,
his wickedness is greatly aggravated by his ingratitude for God’s especial mercies,
“The goodness of God,” says an Apostle, “‘leadeth to repentance ;” i.e., the very
purpose of the Almighty Father in sparing such disobedient children, was to melt
them as it were by His mercy, and make them feel pained and ashamed at the
thought of displeasing Him any longer. 2. Again, as such a case is very bad in
itself, so it has the worst possible effect. It sears and deadens the heart and
conscience, rendering it more and more difficult for any good advice, either of God
or man, to find its way into our thoughts. If you reflect on such a relapse at all,
you must own it to be mere wickedness of heart, settled ingratitude to your best
friend; and that is a thought so painful, that impenitent souls, in order to avoid
it, shrink from serious reflection altogether. Thus every day their bad habits
strengthen, while their chance of repenting grows less and less. 3. Observe by
what steps and degrees that wretched decay comes on, which makes the redeemed
of the Son of God first unthankful and then, unholy; and do you, by the blessing
of God, resolve to set yourself against every one of them. Thus; there can be no
doubt that the first step in most men’s corruption and degeneracy is their wilful
neglect of private prayer ; of reading and meditating on holy things. Again: it is
a perilous step towards relapsing, when a man finds himself content to stand still,
and taking no pains to get forward. There are some hills so steep, that he whe


a


444 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. v.
pice er EE SUPER SEs TD eh Se
would climb them must keep urging himself upwards, else he is sure to fall back:
he cannot stop and breathe where he will. (Plain Sermons by Contributors to
“Tracts for the Times.’’) The man departed and told the Jews.—Confes-
sion of Christ:—I. Irs narors, “Told.” Some think a healed life a suf-
ficient testimony. So it is when the author of the healing is known, but not
otherwise. When a man is cured of a dangerous disease his health is a testi-
mony to some one’s medical skill; but who’s? The restored patient must “tell”
to bear testimony to the physician. So the life of arenovated Christian is a witness
to some power. But who has exercised the power? Himself: by thought and
resolution? His friends: by advice and infiuence? No, Jesus Himself. Then let
the renovated Christian say so. II. Its susstance. ‘“ That it was Jesus which had
made him whole.” 1. It avoids controversial matters. The man declined to say
anything about taking up his bed; probably he could not discuss the Sabbath
question; anyhow it was jrrelevant. Let the confessor of Christ not be tempted
into disputes. 2. It keeps to the point. (1) The person of Jesus. (2) The work
of Jesus—personal, miraculous, complete. III. Irs Basis. 1. Experience. As in
the case of conversion it was not a fancy, but a felt fact. He knew that he was
made whole by the use of his limbs. The Christian knows that he has been made
whole by the employment of his regenerated powers. 2. Revelation (ver. 14). It
was not a speculation, but a statement-grounded on Christ’s information. So the
Holy Spirit of Christ bears witness with our spirits. IV. Irs isprration. 1.
Certainly not a desire to injure Jesus by revealing Him to His enemies. Such a
thought could hardly have entered the man’s mind. 2. But gratitude desiring to
make widely known the source by which he was healed. What is ours? Personal
display or self-abnegating thankfulness? V. Irs opsects, ‘‘ The Jews.” Probably
the Sanhedrim, for so the expression seems to mean in John (cf. i. 19; vii. 1; ix. 22;
xviii. 12,14). 1. Whoever asks for it. The Jews challenged it, and the man took
up the challenge. Be always ready to give an answer for the hope that is in you to
every man. 2. The most influential. The Sanhedrim’s acknowledgment of Jesus
would have carried the nation. How helpful to his Master the Christian in high
places, in the court or parliament. Let him not hide his light under a bushel.
VI. Irs cHaRacteRistics. 1. Courage. The poor man bore his testimony before
the rich, powerful, learned. ‘*God hath not given us the spirit of fear.” 2. Self-
abnegation. It was to Jesus alone, not to his co-operation with Jesus, ‘* Made him
whole,” not ‘‘ by whom he walked.”” 3. Beneficent. By this means the sick might
know the healer. VII. Irs nrrects. 1. Unstudied by the man. How it would be
received he knew not. The Christian is to do his duty regardless of consequences,
‘¢ Whether they will bear or forbear.” 2. Apparently disastrous. The Jews sought
to slay Jesus. Let the man who fears to bear witness before infidels and scoffers
remember this. Augmented antagonism must not discourage duty. 3. Eventually
glorious. This was the first act in the drama of redemption. The Jews slew Jesus,
but by that He became the Saviour of the world. The preaching of Christ in the
early centuries and more recently, e.g., in Madagascar, led to terrible persecution,
but eventually to the triumph of the gospel. (J. W. Burn.) Therefore did the
Jews persecute Jesus. The fickleness of popularity :—On the 25th of July, 1553,
Northumberland and Lord Ambrose Dudley were brought in from Cambridge

escorted by Grey and Arundel with four hundred of the Guards. Detachments of
troops were posted all along the streets from Bishopsgate, where the Duke would
enter, to the Tower to prevent the mob from tearing him to pieces. It was but
twelve days since he had ridden out from that gate in the splendour of his power;
he was now assailed from all sides with yells and execrations, bareheaded, with
cap in hand, he bowed to the crowd as he rode on, as if to win some compassion
from them; but so recent a humility could find no favour. His scarlet cloak was
plucked from his back; the only sounds which greeted his ears were, ‘‘ Death to
the traitor,” and he hid his face, sick at heart, and Lord Ambrose burst into
tears. (J. A. Froude.) My Father worketh hitherto andI work. The best
workers :—God the Father and God the Son are the best workers, because they
work. I. So mxtensivery. To do anything extensively is to do it on a large scale.
If you had a flower-garden which covered twenty acres of ground, that would be an
extensive garden. If you were a carpenter, or a printer, and giving work to four or
five hundred men, then you would. be carrying on that business extensively. If I
could preach in all the churches of this city at the same time, then I should be
preaching extensively. But I can only preach in one place at a time. And s0 it is
with a carpenter, or 4 mason, or any other human worker. But it is very different


-


a


=


ee ee ite,


CHaP. Y.] ST. JOHN. 445
with these heavenly workers. They can work in all places at the same time—in
heaven, directing the angels and making them happy; in this world; in this
church ; in all our homes; on the sea as well as on the land; upon the sky. II.
So quiztiy. It is very pleasant to have things done quietly, but it is very hard for
some to do anything in this way. Many children get into a noisy habit of doing
things. They are like alarum-clocks, going off all the time. But God works very
differently,e.g. 1. When the sun rises, it is to give light to thousands and millions
of people, and yet how softly, how quietly it rises! Nobody ever heard it. We
make more noise in lighting a match. 2. The dew is falling on the grass, the flowers,


-and trees. Their growth and beauty all depend upon the dew. But no noise


attends the falling. 3. The farmer has sowed his wheat; the rains have moistened
it; the sun has warmed it. Itis just beginning to grow. There are millions of
grains all bursting. But did any one ever hear them growing? This is the way in
which these heavenly workers carry on most of their works. Il. So powERFuULLy.
‘All things are possible with God.’ Look at some of the servants they employ.
Who can resist them? There is the wind, e.g.; the sea; the earthquake ; the
angels (Isa. xxxvii. 36). IV. So carerunty. When God had finished the work of
creating the world, He said it was ‘‘ very good.” When Jesus was on earth, the
people who saw Him working so many miracles, cried out in astonishment, ‘Ha
hath done all things well!” And what was true of the miracles, is true of every-
thing else that He does. Everything which He does is done in the very best way.
The works of man were not half as good in old times as they are now. But it is
very different with the works of God. The sunshine which the people in old times
used to have, was just as good as what we have now. And so it was with the air,
and the rain, and the dew. So it was with the seasons, &c. Godis just as careful
about the least things He has made as He is about the greatest. V. So wisEny.
God’s wisdom is illustrated in—1. Our bodies. Suppose our hands had been
put where the feet are, of what use would either of them have been tous? And
suppose the eyes put at the back of the head, and the nose on one side of it, how
awkward and inconvenient it would have been! 2. In the colour of the sky and
the fields. Suppose the sky had been made white instead of blue, and the fields
scarlet instead of green, how trying it would have been to the eye! 3. In the way
in which the sunrises and sets. It is done very gradually. 4. In the way in which
He provides for the preservation and protection of different animals. (R. Newton,
D.D.) The Divine workers :—He rested on the seventh day from the works of crea-
tion. Yet He is still working continually and doing good every day. I. He
PRESERVETH all things 1. That He does so appears—(1) From Scripture (Neh. ix.
6; Heb. i. 3; Acts xvii. 25-28). (2) From reason. (a) He is the first cause of all
things, now as well as at the first, and, therefore, all other causes and things must
needs depend on Him. (b) As great power is required for preservation as for crea-
tion. No finite power can preserve all things for itself, being but a creature needs
preservation. An independent creature is a contradiction. (c) Hence should not
God support us we should fall down to nothing (Job vi.). 2. How doth God pre-
serve all things. Hither—(1) Immediately from Himself; as the angels, sun and
fixed stars (Rev. iv. 11). (2) Mediately, as all other creatures in heaven and earth,
by secondary causes, who with Himself concur; by—(a) Propagation whereby all
creatures, even of the shortestcontinuance, successively are preserved to the end ofthe
world (Gen. vii.3; Psa. xxxvi.6). (b) Continuation and maintaining of individuals in
giving them food (Psa. civ. 27-30, cxlv. 15, 16, exlvii. 8, 9; Matt. vi. 26) ; giving a
blessing to it (Matt. iv. 4; Deut. viii. 3,4; Dan. i. 12-15). Inspection of—I. All
things—the stars (Psa. cxlvii, 4) ; the number of the sands and weight of mountains
(Isa. xl. 12); the hairs of the head (Matt. x. 30; Acts xxvii. 34). II. Of every-
thing that is done by mankind (Psa. xiv. 2; xxxiii. 13-15), particularly of thoughts
(Gen. vi. 5; Jer. iv. 14; Psa. cxxxix. 2); hearts and affections (Prov. xxiv. 12,
xxi. 2; Ezek. xxxiii. 31; John v. 42); words (Psa. cxxxix. 4; Matt. xii. 36);
actions (Rev. ii. 2-9)}; sins (Psa. lvi. 8; Rev. ii. 14) ; repentance (Psa. lvi. 8; Jer.
viii. 6); good works (Gen, xviii. 19; Matt. xxv. 34). IL. He ryLEs AND GovERNS
all things so that there is nothing falls out without His will effecting or permitting
it. 1, Not only the greatest and noblest parts of creation, but the least—(1) The
ravens, &c. (Psa. cxlvii.9; Matt. x. 29, 30). (2) The oxen (1. Cor. ix. 9; Deut.
xxv, 4) much more of His ministers. 2. All natural things—(1) Sunrise and
sunset (Matt. v. 45); (2) Grass (Psa. cxlvii. 8; clv. 13-15); (3) The elements
(Psa. exlvii. 16, 17; Jer. x..13; Job xxxvii. 10-12) ; (4) Fruitfulness (Deut. xi. 12);
(5) The senses (Exod. iv. 11); (6) Family increase (Gen. xxx. 2; Deut. x. 22). 3.


a
“


446 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. ¥.


a


All such things as are contingent and accidental. So Achan (Josh. vii. 16-18) ;
Jonathan (1 Sam. xiv. 41, 42), &c.; Hophni and Phineas (1 Sam. iv. 11; ii. 25) ; the
bow drawn at a venture (1 Kings xxii. 34, cf. vers. 17, 28). 4. All things tbat are
done by the free will of men which is inclined by God (Prov. xxi. 1; Psa. cxix. 36;
1 Kings viii. 58; Acts xvi. 14; 2 Sam. xvii. 14). 5. Use—(1) Acknowledge God
in everything (James iv. 13-14; Prov. iii.6). (2) Pray to Him for all true grace
and virtue and depend on Him alone for it. 6. Question: If God thus governs the
world how comes it to pass that there is so much sin init. (1) God could so have
ordered it that no sin should ever have been committed. (2) Though He permits it
He is not the cause of it (James i. 18-14). (3) God so orders it that good comes
out of it—(a) By permitting one sin He sometimes punisheth another (Rom. 1,
21-25). (b) He go overrules it as to turn it to the good of the righteous (Gen. xlv.
7,8; Acts ii. 23, iv. 28). (c) He makes it redound to either the glory of His mercy
in pardoning (Rom. ix. 23),; or of His justice in punishing it (Prov. xvi. 4; 2 Thess.
i. 7-9). IV. He orpzrs and pisposss of all things giving them to whomsoever He
pleases. 1. Wealth and riches (Deut. viii. 18 ; Gen. xxxii. 9,10; 1 Tim. vi. 17;
Job i. 21; Eccles. v. 18, 19, vi. 1, 2). 2. Honour and preferments (1 Chron. xxix.
12; Psa. lxxv. 6, 7; 2 Sam. xii. 8; 1 Kings iii. 13 ; 1 Sam. ii. 7,8; Psa. exiii. 7).
3. Love and favours (Gen. xxxix. 21; Dan. i. 9; Exod. xii. 36, iii. 21). 4. Health
and strength of body (2 Sam. xii..15, 16). 5. Gifts and parts of mind (1 Kings iii.
9-12; Exod. xxxv. 30, 31, xxxvi. 1, 2, xxxi. 1-6; James.i. 5). 6. All true grace and
virtue. (1) Faith (Eph. ii.8). (2) Repentance (Acts xi. 18; v.31). (3) All other
graces (James i.17, 18; 1 Cor. iv. 7). 7. Heaven and eternal life (Rom. vi. 23).
Conclusion: 1. All these works of God are done—(1) With infinite power; for He
doth all things without trouble, and only with His word since none can resist Him
(2 Chron. xx. 6; Job ix. 2). (2) With infinite wisdom; so that He directs all
things to the best and His own glory (Psa. civ. 24; Rom. xi. 33). (3) With infinite
justice and righteousness ; so that He wrongs none, nor is unjust or unrighteous to
any (Psa. cxlv. 17). (4) With infinite goodness and mercy (Psa. cxlv. 9). 2. Use—
(1) Learn to think that nothing comes by chance or fortune, but acknowledge God
in everything (Prov. ili. 6; Exod. viii. 19). (2) Fear nothing but God. + No good
can be withholden from us, and no evil can fall upon us without Him (Matt. x. 28-30).
(3) Although we ought to make use of means, yet we must put our whole confidence
in God without whom the best means are unsuccessful and with whom the least are
effectual (Psa. xxxvli. 3-7). (Bp. Beveridge.) The conjoint working of Christ with
the Father :—TVhe Jews considered Christ as claiming equality with God. But
supposing that they mistook His meaning what can be said of His not correcting
them? The charge of Sabbath breaking from which He yindicated Himself in the
text was insignificant compared to the charge based upon His vindication. Why
not defend Himself against such awful blasphemy. On the contrary, He confirms
the inference of the Jews in ver. 19. If He were not God He had no right to refer
to what God did as His vindication. The practice of the Creator could not be
quoted in proof that a mere creature might do what He thought fit on the Sabbath.
But were Christ and God equal He could act as God and therefore on all days alike.
Notice—I. Tur conrTINUED woRKING oF THE Farner. 1. It would present no
satisfactory account of the beautiful arrangements of the visible creation to say
that matter was first endowed with certain properties and placed in certain relations
and then left to obey the laws originaily impressed. Of course God has given
laws, and exerts no immediate agency to supersede them; but He is continually
working by and through them as instruments. (1) This is the teaching of
philosophy which insists that where there are laws there must be an agency and
a power of which laws are modes. (2) The Bible teaches not only the production
but the preservation of all things by God. There is scarcely a natural production
or occurrence which is not referred immediately to His agency. 2. God hag
also revealed Himself as a moral Governor, and observes every motion of the human
will, makes it subservient to His own purposes, registers whatever occurs for
judgment, instigates every good action and overrules every bad. No calamity which
can befall us, no anxiety disquiet, no joy cheer, no prayer escape which does not
proceed either from His permission or appointment. 3. There are worlds upon
worlds for which He does practically the same as ours. It were to be God to know
what God has to do. II. Tue continvep worxine or THE Son. 1. We may sup-
pose that Christ partly referred to the perfect union of will and person which there
is between the Persons of the Trinity when Paul declared that He was “the bricht-
ness of the Father’s person,” &. He went on to speak of Him as “ upholding all


—


oar, v,] ST. JOHN. 449
i Ee
things by the word of His power.” 2. But as Christ wrought the miracle in His
mediatorial capacity, it is rather as the Saviour than as the Creator that He here
speaks. The truth then is that Christ has all along been redeeming as the Father has
been with preserving all mankind. (1) This is true all through the dispensations.
As soon as there was sin there was salvation—through Christ, so that every human
being added fresh employment to the Mediator as well as to the Creator. (2) We
cannot but conclude that Christ in the office of Mediator has done something for
unfallen beings, and if so, how immeasurably this widens the sphere of Christ’s
activity. III. Tus errrcr or THIS DocTRINE should be—1. To give us the same
confidence in addressing the Mediator as in addressing the Father. Providence, in
giving us our daily bread, is not more uniform than that intercession from which
we derive daily grace. 2. To console the timid and downcast. ‘‘ My Father worketh
hitherto,” and whom will He neglect or fail to sustain? ‘I work,” and whom will
I refuse to save? Who shall come to me and be cast out? 3. To encourage an
application to that Divine Savour who in His house provides healing for the im-
potent on the Sabbath day. (H. Melvill, B.D.) My Father worketh hitherto :—
I. THE UNIVERSAL PRESENCE OF THE FaTHER aT work. 1. Men do not imagine God
to be near them in actual presence. They acknowledge Him as Creator chiefly
because it relieves them of the greater difficulty of otherwise accounting for the
existence of things. 2. In addition to this scientific concealment there is a figura.
tive disguise of the Divine presence. The grand creations we invest with personality,
and the spaces and elements we people with airy shapes of poetry and romance.
These imaginations serve for the Divine Being, and to introduce Him boldly into
conversation is considered bad taste or something worse. What a symptom of our
universal ungodliness, ‘God is not in all our thoughts”! 3. But while being
enemies to neither science nor imagination, let us open our Bibles and look on tha
works of God in their light. We let a ray fall on a flower, a structure, a strata, and
we exclaim, ‘* The work of Thy fingers.” If you ask us about genera, species, and
laws of variation, we leave them to scientists. We cannot detect half so many
qualities as they can, but we see our Father at work. If you tell me that the in-
stinct of a bird leads it to pick up a grain accidentally scattered, is it less true that
our heavenly Father feedeth it? David was no mean naturalist, yet when he speaks
of the sustentation of animals, their dissolution, and the renewal of their generations,
he passes over the laws of these changes and only sees the Father at work (Psa.
exly. 15, &c.). This is not mere poetry; it is written in the largest spirit of science.
But a higher Authority, when referring to a flower, affirms that the Father clothes
it, and when bidding His disciples imitate the trustful and uncareful birds, He adds,
“Your heavenly Father feedeth them.” II. Ir tHe FarHER 18 WORKING AROUND US
WHAT A SECURITY WE ENJOY. Each one of us may say, ‘‘ My Father worketh for me.”
‘When I consider the heavens,” &c. I say, ‘‘ Can I have a separate place in the
Father’s heart.”” He responds, ‘‘ The very hairs of your head are all numbered.”
It is sometimes hard to realize this ; then in my loneliness I hear the expostulation
from one who knoweth my frame and remembereth that I am dust, ‘‘ Why sayest
thou, O Jacob?” (Isa. xl.). Thus ‘‘He giveth power to the faint.” We are not
alone, for the Father is with us. III. Tae FarHer wonkKETH NOT BECAUSE AN
INTELLIGENT BEING IS NECESSARILY ACTIVE, BUT FOR SOME GREAT DESIGN WHICH THE
TRiuNE Gop IS ADVANCING AND MUST CompLETE. This work, extending over many
generations, may be called the second genesis. After the first creation God did not,
as the Jews supposed, enter on a Sabbath of inaction. His primal work was done,
but the Sabbath was as full of work as the six days, but work of anoblerkind. The
Spirit that moved on formless matter must now move on mind, Evil had come
into being, and evil is to mind what chaos is to matter. God spent His Sabbath
in making a new heaven and a new earth, not of matter, but of mind. Who shall
write the history of God’s Sabbath work for man? The Bible is but a chapter of it.
Eternity will unroll the volume. But following the Bible, how evident is the pro-
gressive design of love—the Father working in counsel ; the Son in personal revela-
tion ; the Spirit in influence; and locking more closely we observe the Divine Son
is the centre of this more glorious genesis. From Adam to John, all revelations
pointed to Christ, and the Father is now drawing all men to Him, All men are
proceeding Christward. (£. H, Jenkins, LL.D.) Thoughts -for the busy :—I.
The prenity of labour. Toil is not incident to man as a fallencreature. There is
royality in it, for the greatest worker is God. 1. God has been working in nature,
His works are His thoughts, and how beautiful they are is written on every hand.
2. God is working in providence and grace through all the millenniums for a great


448 ; THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. ‘[oHap. v.


purpose of redemption. Patriarchs, lawgivers, prophets, kings, and priests have
been His instruments. All the best works have been done because God works. 3.
Let these sublime truths point out the dignity of labour. Throw off the delusion
that freedom from work is to be sought as an end in itself. By indolence man
throws away his crown and rebels against that Divine law of work which finds its
highest expression in God. II. The quauity of labour. 1. Divine work is always
of the highest and most perfect kind. 2. Always faithful and true. 3. Each man
therefore should take his work as a sacred charge to do his best at it. To ‘‘do the
truth” (1 John i. 6) would work a reformation in this country. All bad work is a
lie. Men are lying when they build houses that cannot stand, when they supply
goods we cannot wear, and when they sell foods that poison us. III. The merHop
of labour. 1. We never see in Christ, though He was always busy, any symptoms
of rashness and hurry. There were depths in Him of holy peace which outer
storms could not disturb. 2. There are causes for anxiety and haste which are not
easy to control. But how many of them we never seek to master; desire for dis-
play and to be rich, a neglect of the deeper elements of character which leaves us
open to the annoyances of little-minded men. It matters little to us whether God
works or not. We have taken our concerns out of His hands. Thus we miss the
confidence and restfulness which is our strength. IV. The true mortves of labour.
Many work as though they said, ‘‘ The world worketh hitherto, and I work.” The
cardinal point is that success must be achieved at all costs. Christ worked, and we
must work because the Father works. (W. Manning.) God’s Sabbath :—What
would become of the Sabbath unless God worked on the Sabbath (Bengel.) The
law of the Sabbath is a law of a Being who never rests from doing good (Theo-
phylact.) The Divinity of Christ :—A citizen of London once became angry with
the sunlight, and he vowed that no sun should ever again shine within his home.
Closing the door and shutters, and lighting the lamps, he lived and died many years
as though therehad been nosun. The world justly pronounced him insane. Ina
similar spirit ‘liberal’? theologians and infidels deny Christ’s Godhead. (W. H.
Van Doren, D.D.) | Work must be constant :—A few days ago, in the mountains, we
went down in a valley to see a wonderful cascade, a marvellous sheet of water pre-
cipitating itself from lofty rocks, and there sat our German friends by scores con-
templating it, and reverently admiring its sublimity. As I looked at the cascade
the thought struck me it was rather too orderly to be altogether what it professed
to be, and, looking on, I noticed that the floods which poured down from the rocks
had suddenly diminished, as if the supply of the liquid element had become ex-
hausted. We found that this wonderful waterfall was played three or four hours
a day, and was an artificial wonder. But there is plenty of religion of that sort; it
is played three hours a day or so many hours a week. (C.H. Spurgeon.) Work
and joy :—I do not remember reading in Mr. Wesley’s diary a question about his
own salvation. He was so busy in the harvest of the Master that it did not occur
to him to distrust his God. Some Christians have little faith in consequence of
their having never sown the grain of mustard seed which they have received. If
you do not sow your faith by using it, how can it grow? When aman lives by
faith in Christ Jesus, and his faith exercises itself actively in the service of his Lord.
it takes root, grows upward, and becomes strong, till it chokes his doubts. Some
have sadly morbid forebodings; they are discontented, fretful, selfish, murmuring,
and all because they are idle. These are the weeds that grow in sluggards’ gardens.
(Ibid.) Royal workers :—We read in Homer of princesses drawing water from
the springs, and washing, with their own hands, the linen of their respective
families. Here the sisters of Alexander, that is, the daughters of a powerful prince,
are employed in making clothes for their brother. The celebrated Lucretia used to
spin in the midst of her female attendants. Augustus, who was sovereign of the
world, wore, for years together, no other clothes but what his wife and sister made
him. It was a custom in the northern parts of the world, not many years since,
for the princes who then sat upon the throne, to prepare several of the dishes at
every,meal. (Rollins’ ‘* History.”) God’s work is perfect :—There is not a more
necessary and consolatory truth than this—reason allows it, revelation affirms it—
‘* the work of the Lord is perfect.’’ Whatever He does sustains its consistency
and answers its end. Neither is there redundance nor defect. The question of
degrees, the scale of dimensions, cannot alter the fact; whether the emmet or the
leviathan, whether the atom or the world, each bears a stamp of entireness and
self-sufficience. The most cautious inspection, the most fertile imagination, can
discover no want, can suggest no improvement. You can relieve no difficulty, you


eS ee


\ |


CHAP. V.] ST. JOHN. 449
a ee
can facilitate no process, you can heighten no result. The system of the individual
is as faultless as that of the species, the economy of the particle as that of the
universe. The grain imbedded on the shore, the star set among the constellations
of the sky, in their differing ranks of constituted nature, exhibit the same matchless
adjustment, fitness, and application. (R. W. Hamilton, D.D.)


Vers. 19-23. The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father
do.—The unity of the Father and the Son:—The Jews sought to kill Jesus in
obedience to the law (1) because He wrought a miracle on the Sabbath; (2) because
He vindicated Himself on the ground of His equality with God, who constantly
works such miracles in His providence on the Sabbath. So far from disclaiming
the Jewish inference He here confirms it. Note—I, Curisr’s RELATION TO THE
FaTHER IN ALL He bors (ver. 19). 1. Unity of operation. ‘hese words assert that
as it is impossible for the Son to do anything of Himself, so it is impossible that the
Father can do anything without the Son. The cure of the impotent man, therefore,
was by both. 2. Distinction of persons. The Father shows, the Son sees; the
Father purposes, the Son executes. 3. Identity of works. They do the same, not
similar things. The same Jesus stands in the midst of us and says, ‘ Wilt thou be
made whole?” If we despise Him speaking in His word we despise the great God
with whom we have to do. II. THE GRouND OF THIS RELATION (ver. 20), 1. Love
is the expression of the Father’s feeling toward the Son, 2. He communicates
Himself to the Son and makes Him His counsellor. 3. This relation Christ made
known that they might marvel—admire God’s glorious manifestation of Himself
and give Him glory. III. Instances oF THE WORKS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THIS RELATION,
1 (ver. 21). Resurrection and quickening, including no doubt the physical, but
referring mainly to the spiritual process. (1) Raising up. Sin, as a frightful
incubus, rests on the soul exerting its paralysing influence. This spiritual death is
chased away. (2) Quickening. New life is imparted. Death implies previous
life. A tree cut down and withered is different from a stone. In Adam the soul
died; when the Son quickens a new and more glorious life is communicated. (38)
There cau be no consideration more alarming than our continuance in this death.
How dreadful to pass away without having the experience of this raising up and
quickening, and to lie for ever in condemnation as self-destroyed. 2 (vers. 22-23).
Judgment. (1) To Him is committed the whole administration of the gospel; and
when His supreme government is asserted as here, it means that the Father judgeth
no man alone—both judge. (2) He will preside at the eternal awards. IV. Im-
PORTANT INFERENCES DEDUCED FROM THIS RELATION. 1. If Christ is not worshipped
God is not (ver. 23). God must be approached according to the revelation He has
made of Himself: we cannot do so unless we know Him as the Father who sent
the Son. 2. Salvation comes by the word of Christ (ver. 24). (1) This hearing,
no doubt, includes listening with the outward ear; a great and necessary duty.
But it is also (ver. 25) of a kind which awakens to life, with the mind and spirit,
therefore, prompting to action, so that we become not hearers only, but “‘doers.’’ (2)
Salvation is by resting on the true object of faith—in God as sending the Son not
as the Creator, &c. (3) This salvation is everlasting life—a great salvation there-
fore. ‘‘ Howshall we escape if weneglect it.” (A.Beith,D.D.) The Father’s love
to the Son:—I. Tue Fatuer tovera roe Son. What has this to do with us?
What have we to do with the Son? The answer to the latter will answer the former.
If we are one with Christ the fact that God loves Him—1. Will solve a number of
curious and doubtful questions. Satan is always trying to draw believers away from
what is simple, The Father loveth the Son. Can Satan deny that? If not, then
if I be the Son’s, all the outgoings and principles of God concerning me must be
of love. Everything must be consistent with that. 2. Will lift us up above a
number of depressions. (1) Are we tried? (2) lonely; (8) poor; (4) weary and
worn. Whoever was so tried as the beloved Son? II. Curist ResTEp IN THE
FarHer’s LOVE, AND IN THE DEEP CONSCIOUSNESS OF IT PUT FORTH IMMENSE POWER.
1. Wherever love attains its highest form there is rest. It puts away all ifs and
speculations, and goes down into the ocean depths of certainties which are beyond
the reach of surface storms. 2. This should give us great power (1) in prayer,
passing into God’s mind through an inlet of love; its answer coming forth through
the outlet of love; (2) infaith; (3) inhope. III. Curisr’s reLation To THE I’aTHER
DETERMINES His ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUTURE, AND OUR RELATION TO Him DETER-
MINES OUR PART IN IT. In present and future resurrection and judyment. (P. B.
Power, M.A.) Christ’s reply resembles Luther’s: ‘I cannot do otherwise”; or,


————


450 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. ¥
ee eee
to take a nearer example, Jesus puts His work under the guarantee of the Father’s,
as the impotent man had just put his under the shelter of Jesus. (F. Godet, D.D.)
Christ’s limitations :—Neither the man nor the angel exists who could dare to say
of himself: ‘‘I can do nothing of myself;” because no man’s and no angel’s self
is essentially and inseparably one with the self of God. The creature can tear
itself away from its Creator, and place its I in opposition to Him; it can seek its
life in itself, instead of in Him, and it can act ‘‘in its own name” (chap. vili. 44);
the Son of God, on the contrary, has nothing of His own, no self, which does not
eternally contain the same life which the Father has. (R. Besser, D.D.) Ths
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the Son.—The delega-
tion of judicial authority to Christ :—I, JupemEnT appeRTaIns To Gop. It is His
in criminal causes (Rom. xii. 19) and in civil things (Psa. lxxxii. 1). No’ function
of God is so often reiterated. And He is the Judge of judges themselves. Judg-
ment is so essential to God that it is co-eternal with’Him. 1. He knows, and
therefore naturally detests evil. We are blind, and need the assistance of the
law to know what is evil. And if a man be a judge what an exact knowledge of the
law is required of him—for some things are sins to one nation which are not to
another, and some things are sin at one time which are not at another. Only God
has a universal knowledge, and therefore detestation of evil. 2. He discerns when
thou committest evil. Hence you have to supply defects in laws so that things done
in one country may be tried in another. But God has the power of discerning all
actions in all places. Earthly judges have their distinctions and so their restric-
tions; some things they cannot know—what mortal can, and some things they
cannot take knowledge of, for they are bound by evidence. But nothing keeps God
from discerning and judging everything. 3. He knows how to punish evil. The
office of a judge being not to contract or extend the law, but to declare its true
meaning. God hath this judgment in perfection; for He made the law by which
He judges. Who then can dispute His interpretation? As, then, God is judge in
all these three respects, so He is a judge (1) without appeal; (2) without needing
any evidence (Prov. xxiv. 12, xvi. 2; 1 Cor. iv. 4); and if so, not only I, but not
the most righteous man, nor the Church He hath washed in His own blood, shall
appear righteous in His sight. II. How then, seeing that judgment is an insepar-
able character of God, can it be said that THE FaTHER JUDGETH NO MAN? Not
certainly because weary. He judges as God, not as Father. In the three great
judgments of God the whole Trinity judges. 1. Before all times in our election.
2. Now in separating of servants from enemies. 3. At the last judgment in
separating the sheep from the goats. Consider God altogether, and so in all
outward works, all the Trinity concurs, because all are one God; but consider God
in relation, in distinct persons, and so the several persons do something in which
the other persons are not interested. So the Son judgeth, the Father judgeth not,
for that Judgment He hath committed. III. To raz Son He HatTH comMITTED aun
JupGMENT, the image of the invisible God, and so more proportional unto us, more
apprehensible by us. 1. But doth He judge as Son of God or as Son of Man.
Upon this the Fathers and Reformers are divided. But take this rule, God hath
given Christ this commission as Man, but Christ had not been capable of it had He
not been God too. The ability is in Him eternally, but the power of actual execution
was given Him as Man. 2. All judgment—-(1) Of our election. If I were under
the condemnation of the law, and going to execution, and the king’s pardon were
presented to me, I should ask no question as to motives and circumstances, but
thankfully attribute it to his goodness and accept it; so when I consider myself as
under God’s consideration, and yet by the working of God’s Spirit I find I am
delivered from it I inquire not what God did in His cabinet council. I know that
He hath elected me in Christ. And, therefore, that I may know whether I do not
deceive myself I examine myself whether I can truly tell my conscience that Christ
died for me, which I cannot do if I have not a desire to conform myself to Him;
and if I do that then I find my predestination. (2) Of our justification, * for there
is none other name,” &c. Do I then remember what I contracted with Christ when
I took His name at baptism? Have I fulfilled those conditions? Do TI find a
remorse when I have not? Do I feel remission of those sins when I hear the
gracious promises of the gospel to repentant sinners? Have I a true and solid
consolation when I receive the seal of pardon at the Sacrament? Therefore thig
judgment is His also. (3) Of our glorification (Rev. i. 7). Then He shall come as
Man and give judgment for things done or omitted towards Him as Man, “ for not
feeding,” &c, Conclusion: Such is the goodness of God that He deals with man


a s


CHAP. v.] ST. JOHN. 451


by the Son of Man. 1. If you would be tried by the first judgment ; are you elected
orno? Do you believe in Christ? 2. If by the second, are you justified or no?
Do you find comfort in the Word and sacraments of Christ? 3. If by the third,
do you expect a glorification? Are you so reconciled to Jesus Christ now that
you durst say now, “Come quickly, Lord Jesus”? then you are partakers of all
that blessedness which the Father intended for you when, for your sake, He com.
mitted all judgment to the Son. (J. Donne, D.D.) The Kedeemer our Judge :—
That our Saviour was perfect God and perfect man is a truth which cannot be
denied and Christianity not fall to the ground. But this very combination will
cause apparent inconsistencies in the way in which He is spoken of. And it should
be remembered that what holds good of Him in one capacity may be inapplicable
to Him in another. As God judgment could not be committed to Him. He had
it by Divine necessity and right. But it is as Mediator, a Being in which the two
natures combine, that He is entrusted with the authority as Judge. I. He wun
JUDGE AT THE LAST DAY. What are the qualifications requisite for such an office?
1. Obviously no mere creature can fulfil that function. There must be acquaint-
ance with secrecies of character as well as open actions. Hypocrisy must not pass
undetected, nor unobtrusive merit fail of recompense. Angels cannot be judges of
human character, nor possess themselves of all the necessary evidence. Omunisci-
ence alone will suffice. 2. But if we cannot approach an angelic judge with con-
fidence, how approach omniscient Deity? A created judge is immeasurably nearer
than the Creator, though of a different nature. 3. You ask, therefore, for one who
shall have a thorough fellow feeling with those brought to his bar, i.e., a man.
But how can you hope to have a man who, qualified by sympathy, should yet
possess the qualification of omniscience? 4. This combination, however, does
exist. A man sits on that “ great white throne,” “bone of our bone,” but God to
whom all things are nakéd and open. II. He sunczs now, for all judgment is
committed to Him. 1. To this we are indebted for that tenderness which character-
izes God’s present judgments. Afflictions are not allowed-to come together; “ the
rough wind ” is restrained till ‘‘ the east wind’ has passed away. Chastisement is
very different conceived as inflicted by God and inflicted by the Mediator. 2. If
this be so how heavy will be the final judgment! There will be no pleading that
our case was not thoroughly understood. All along we have been drawn by the
cords of a man; then the impenitent will be judged by the Man who died for them
and tried by every possible means to turn them from enemies into friends. His
presence itself will condemn, and they will call to the rocks, &c., to hide them from
not the thunderbolts of avenging Deity, but from the face of Him who became man
for their salvation. Anything might be better borne than the glance of this face so
eloquent of rejected mercies. (H. Melvill, B.D.) The judgment :—Men will have
views very different from what they now have. I. Tur misEr will see a life spent
in gathering gold with terror. II. Tue amsrriovs will wonder that he could barter
his soul for office. III. Tae sensuauist will dread to review his luxury and lewd-
ness, IV. Tue sopuist will argue no more against Divine truth. V. THe mmeeEnt-
TENT will be amazed at his madness in clinging to his sins. VI. Tur mockeEr will
jest no more about sacred things. VII. TH proranz will howl over the folly that
insulted God. (W. H. Van Doren, D:D.) The judgment will be searching :—
I will tell you a dream of one of quality, related to myself by the dreamer himself,
Said he, “I dreamed the day of judgment was come, and all men appeared before
Christ. Some were white, others spotted. Mcthought,” said he, “I was all white,
saving that I had one black spot upon my breast, which I covered with my hand.
Upon the separation of these two sorts I got among the white on the right hand.
Glad was I; but at last a narrow search was made, and one came and plucked away
my hand from my breast; then appeared my spot, and I was thrust away among
the spotted ones.”? (Thomas Larkham.) That all men should honour the Son
even as they honour the Father.—F qual honour to be paid to the Father and to the
Son:—I. Wax? 1. Because the perfections of the Father are those of the Son
(ver. 26). Omnipotence, Omnipresence, Omniscience, Holiness, Love, &e. 2.
Because the works of the Father are those of the Son (ver. 19). Creation, Provi-
dence, Redemption, Resurrection. 3. Because the administration of the Father is
that of the Son (ver. 22). (1) Now over kingdoms, cities, families, individuals.
(2) At the-great day. 4. Because it is the special desire of both the Father and the
Son. (1) Of the Father, because on the honour of the Son the whole blessedness of
the universe is centred. (2) Of the Son, because the Father is only honoured
through the Son. God was not honoured in Judaism, witness its lapses int


Ss
452 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. -fomar, #2


— eee —_—_nan eee = *
idolatry and its ultimate formalism; nor by Mohammedanism, witness its cruelty
and licentiousness; nor in heathenism, where He is not known at all; nor by Deism,
as proved by its development into agnosticism and atheism. Only in Christen.
dom is God honoured, because Christ is honoured. II. How? 1. By admiring the
perfections of the Divine Son. ‘The chiefest among ten thousand,” &c. 2. By
acknowledging the services of the Divine Son. We are His because He made, pre-
served, and redeemed us; therefore we should glorify Him as our Master, Friend,
Saviour. 8. By co-operating with the rule of the Divine Son. (1) By obeying it
ourselves. (2) By securing its recognition in others. 4. By making the Supreme
desire in the universe the master passion and motive of our souls; doing all things
with the one aim of securing the honour of the Son and of the Father through Him.
Ill. Wuere? 1. At home. (1) In secret prayer. This will test the purity and
constancy of our motive. (2) In our families, bringing them up to honour Christ
by reverencing His name, word, and ordinances. 2. In the sanctuary. (1) By
attentively listening to the Word. (2) By regular attendance at His table. (3) By
heartiness in His worship. 3. In the world eschewing all business, amusements,
&c., likely to bring dishonour on Him. (J. W. Burn.) He that honoureth not
the Son honoureth not the Father :—Amphilochus, Bishop of Iconium, entered the
palace of Theodosius, and bowed to the Emperor, but not to Arcadius his son. The
Emperor reminding him of his neglect, the good man still refused, and on his
showing great displeasure, Amphilochus replied, “O king, how much more will
Jehovah abhor those rejecting His Son!” (W. H. Van Doren, D.D.) Christ’s
demand of man :—Across a chasm of eighteen hundred years Jesus Christ makes a
demand which is beyond all others difficult to satisfy. He asks that for which a
philosopher may often seek in vain at the hands of his friends, or a father of his
children, or a bride of her spouse, or a man of his brother. Heasks for the human
heart ; He will have it entirely to Himself; He demands it unconditionally; and
forthwith His demand is granted. (NapoleonI.) Christ claims Divine honours :—
«« And they worshipped Him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy.” Did they
sin in worshipping the Lord Jesus Christ? After their long career of intimacy, did
love to such a being, who had exhausted the symbolism of life to express His life-
giving relations to them; with every conceivable incitement, reverence, and
worship ; with love, wonder, joy, and gratitude kindling their imaginations towards
Him ; without a solitary word of caution lest they should be snared by their en-
thusiasm, and bestow upon Him the worship that belonged only to God—did they
sin in worshipping Him? If they did, was not Christ Himself the tempter? If
they did not, may not every living soul worship Him? (H. W. Beecher.)


Ver. 24 (in conjunction with vi. 47). Verily, verily.—1. These words indicate a
subject of special importance. 2. They were used to denote a clear and certain
revelation. 3. Notice when this certainty lies solely in ‘‘I say unto you.” In the
matter of our salvation carnal reason never arrives at certainty. Mere argument
can never bring a troubled heart to a sure anchorage. The ipse dizit of a mere man
is nob enough. Note—I. To wHoM THE BLESSING OF OUR TEXT comEs. These favoured
persons are—1l, Hearers who are also believers. It is not communicated by drops
of water; we are to act towards saving truth as towards other information, First,
we hear of Jesus, His person, work, office, and blessings; then we accept Jesus as
the appointed Saviour for ourselves. 2. Believers who remain hearers, ‘“‘ My sheep
hear My voice.” 3. Believers in the Lord Jesus (chap. vi. 47). They have personal
faith in a personal Saviour. 4. Believers in Jesus because of the witness of the
Father. We are sure He can save because He is divinely commissioned, divinely
furnished, and the pleasure of the Lord must prosper in His hands. 5. Every such
believer, whatever else he has or has not, he has everlasting life. But he is full of
fault and imperfection; he makes mistakes in theology; he is afraid he has not
attained to everlasting life. No exception is to be made on any of these grounds.
6. There is no statement made as to the salvation of any other sort of person.
Nothing is said about the baptized, professors, &c., only about believers. II. Tux
BLESSINGS WHICH BELONG TO THE BELIEVING. 1. He hath everlasting life. He was
condemned and reckoned as a dead man; but he is now acquitted and his life is
granted him. He was spiritually dead also, but through Christ he is quickened ;
and because Christ lives ever he shall live also. 2. He is in a condition of non-con.
demnation. In Christ he has been judged, condemned, and punished, and is there-
fore clear of the law and all its penalties. 3. He is passed from death unto life: In
regeneration lies the essence and major portion of the resurrection. III. Tue asgur-


OnAP. Vv.) ST. JOHN. 453
a ae leer tare oe ee cette ee ecto nthe ND
ANCE WITH WHICH THIS DOCTRINE Is STATED. 1. It is certified by the.terms in which our
Lord utters it. 2. It is verified by conscious experience. 3. It should conse-
quently be confidently proclaimed. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The gospel of Christ :—
We are here taught—I. Tue NEED oF HEARING THE GOSPEL OF Curist; and
that not with the ears of the body oaly, but with the heart, the will, the affec-
tions of man. “He that heareth My word.” II. BrLrer IN THE EVER-BLESSED
Trruiry, in the Father and the Son, which is the gift of the Holy Spirit. ‘*He that
» » « believeth on Him that sent Me.” III. Tur stnrun ESTATE oF MANKIND, the fall
through sin into spiritual death, and the consequent condemnation of the whole
race of Adam, who through the sin of the first man have come into condemnation.
IV. THe NEED WHICH WE ALL HAVE oF A REDEEMER AND MxpIATOR, through whose
passion, death, and resurrection we pass from death unto life, V. Tum HAPPINESS
WHICH IS GIVEN TO THOSE WHO BELIEVE IN AND WHO OBEY GOD IN THIS LIFE, and in
obeying Him possess Him who is everlasting life. VI. THat rrERNAL Lire which
after the death of the body 1s THE HOPE AND THE REWARD OF THE RIGHTEOUS, and
which is assured to those who in resisting temptation and in overcoming sin here
have passed from deach unto life. (W. Denton, M.A.) A short sermon on a great
text:—I. Tue preacuer. 1. The dignity of His Person. (1) The Son of God,
(2) The ambassador of the Father. (3) The faithful witness. 2. The solemnity of
His manner. As became one who spoke with (1) full knowledge. (2) Absolute
authority. (3) Tender sympathy. (4) Personal directness. II. Tum pD1scoursn,
1, The meaning of salvation. (1) Eternal life. (2) No condemnation. (3) Fulness
of existence. 2, The way of salvation. (1) Hearing Christ’s word. (2) Believing
Christ’s Father. III. Tae auprencz. 1. Their persons—men, 2. Their characters
—dead. 3, Their numbers—whosoever. 4. Their responsibilities—involved in
their ability to hear and believe. Lesson: Take heed how ye hear. (T. Whitelaw,
D.D.) Everlasting life :—Life is of many degrees—lowest in the sponge, then in
the oyster, and higher still in the worm. Through a long and beautifully graduated
series we come to man, partly material, partly spiritual; the link between earth
and heaven. Life is absolutely perfect in God only; the great source of life to all
created beings. ‘‘ This is life eternal,” &c. (chap. xvii. 3). This life in its fulness
implies—I. FREEDom FRom sIN. 1. Its guilt. 2. Its pollution. 8. Its attendant evils.
II. THE POssESSION OF ALL Goop. 1. Perfect love. 2. Perfect purity. 3. Perfect
youth. 4. Perfect activity. 5. Perfect blessedness. (W. H. Van Doren, D.D.)
Eternal life :—You will observe here that everlasting life is a thing which a man is
declared, on certain conditions, to have in this world, that the death which is itg
contradictory is said to be escaped in this world, and in the very act of passing over
into life; and that the condition of escaping the one and having the other is faith
in God through Jesus. Now what I wish to do, is to point out the dignity and the
joy of this true life of the soul, this everlasting life of faith; and if we can know
the secret of its blessedness here, we shall know what its blessedness shall be here-
after. I. And first, To THE JUSTIFIED SOUL THERE IS THE JOY OF LIVING ITS TRUE LIFE.
In all life there is joy ; much more in the soul’s true life. In the free exercise of
its noblest faculties ; in the free use of its noblest powers; in the free apprehension
of Divine truth, the free choosing of the right, the unselfish loving of the beautiful
and the good; it is a joy even nowand here so to live the true lifeof the soul. And
when we come to analyze this joy, we find that in all its details it is a life of
blessedness. 1. For, first, there is the joy of triumph, the guadiam certaminis, that
courts and enjoys the well-won victory. Worldly and carnal pleasures woo the
soul’s affections from their true and worthy objects. To resist these is conflict
worthy of heroic souls; to stand steadfast, to be true to truth, to goodness, to
righteousness, this is victory, and the joy of it is bliss to the struggling, conquering
goul. And when the soul’s victorious inner life is translated into worthy outward
action, that outward life becomes heroic too, the life of a knightly soul that proves
its knighthood and receives its reward in scattering error, in righting wrong, in
helping tha weak, in relieving the oppressed, and in doing his duty to God and all
the world. 2. And then there is the joy of progress. For the soul’s true life is a
progress from the less to the greater, from the partial to the more perfect good.
There is growth in humility, and so there is no more galling and fretting of pride.
There is growth in meekness, and so the burden of resentment is laid aside. There
is growth in faith, and so the unseen things are seen with more and more dis-
tinctness to be the great thing. There is growth in hope, and so the soul grows
glad and young as it lays hold on the hope of eternal life. There is growth in
love—in the blissful love that never faileth, that suffereth long and is kind, &e.


eA,


454 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. . [cuap. ¥.


Pb i
3. And then there is the joy of self-sacrifice. Man had forgotten the great truth,
that self-sacrifice for duty and for love is the very joy of the soul’s true life. But
God revealed it in Jesus. And revealing it He showed not only the Divine wisdom
and power, but also the Divine blessedness. Who does not understand something
of this! Who are the great and happy souls of earth? Not those, assuredly,
who look for base ease, or sordid gain, or selfish advantage, or guilty pleasure ; but
the pure and strong and lofty souls, who in loving the unseen and following lofty
ideals gladly sacrifice themselves for what they love. The patriot who goes at his
country’s summons to battle; the father and husband who scorns delight and
lives laborious days for wife and children; the mother who turns away from all
delights to bend in yearning tenderness above the couch of her sick or afilicted
child; the Christian man or woman who in loving, dutiful deeds of brotherly love
and goodwill, delight to help the unfortunate and make the wretched happy—these
are the great and happy souls, and in their self-sacrifice they 4nd the highest joy
of their soul’s true life. In a word, then, the soul’s true life in this world is the
life of faith, of hope, and of love. In the victory of its faith, the progress of its
hope, the glad self-sacrifice of its love, its joy consists. And this brings me to my
concluding thought. We have seen what the soul’s true life in this world is.
II. Wuat SHALL IT BE IN THE NEXT WORLD BUT THE SAME IN KIND, THOUGH IN
FULLER, LARGER MEASURE? ‘The only difference shall be that the limitations of
sin, the hindrances of earthliness, shall be removed. Unfettered and free, the soul
shall expand in the perpetual delight of life and love and peace—the delight of
growing knowledge, the delight of more and more adequate utterance, the security
and peace of more perfect self-consecration, the deep and tender joy of more
entire self-sacrifice. How this shall be, I cannot tell. It is enough for me to know
this one thing—that the soul’s true life, the eternal life, begun here, shall continue
after death substantially the same, and that its joys shall be the same, only fuller,
larger, richer. Oh, then, let me ask myself this question: Am I living now the soul’s
true life—the everlasting life of faith and hope and love—and am I finding now and
here the joy and the blessedness of that life? If not, then even heaven itself
would be a hell to my untutored soul. But if I do know the joy and peace of be-
lieving, then eternal life is mine already. (Bishop S. S. Harris.) Passed from
death unto life.—Notice the smallness of the conditions, and the magnificence of
the offer. The salvation of a man’s soul is simply a matter of capitulation, and
the terms of the capitulation are, ‘‘ Hear the messenger and believe the mission.” I.
THE UNDERTAKING WHICH THE ALMIGHTY HAS MADE OF WHAT Hm WILL DO TO THOSE
WHO GIVE UP AT DISCRETION. 1. Look a moment at our position. We have
provoked God and attacked His rights, and therefore have separated ourselves from
God. Therefore we do not deserve to die, nor sure to die, but we are dead. For
death is not annihilation. Separation of soul from body is physical death:
separation of soul and body from God is physical death. People abhor the thought
of eternal punishment or eternal death; but what if that means separation pro-
longed through eternity. Is there anything in that inconsistent with God? But
that would be hell enough. 2. Christ comes and offers union with Himself, thatis,
nearness to God which is life, (1) The nature of this life. (a) Physical life of a
higher order because consecrated. (b) Intellectual life—a life of latent thoughts,
energies and affections which, but for this, would sleep on for ever. (c) A life of
true satisfying service. (2) Its characteristics. (a) A present possession. The
moment you believe in Christ you live ; you have done with death for ever. What
is coming and is called death will not be death to you, because no separation. (0).
A lasting life. In the old life nothing was very lasting ; either the thing passed
away, or the power to enjoy it. The new life has its hidden springs in God, and
will last for ever. (c) A life free from condemnation. There is nothing’ now
behind, and no future to be afraid of. Your sins were condemned and punished in
Christ, and there shall be no resurrection of forgiven sin. II. WHAT ARE THE
TreRms? 1. “‘ Hear My word.” (1) Do not you all hear it? Not with the inward
ear, (2) But what word. If you receive any word, you will receive all. Take this
one, “Come unto Me,” &c. 2. ‘‘Believeon Him that sent Me.”? Notin Me. Some
object to vicarious atonement on the ground that it does not put the Father in His
right place. But Christ here, as elsewhere, traces it all to the Father and His love
It is part of your salvation to take worthy views of the Father. (J. Vaughan,
M.A.) Passing from death to life:—I. Tam sTaTE FROM WHICH EVERY BELIEVER
I8 DELIVERED. 1. Its nature. A threefold death has befallen man. The body dies
everlasting death is threatened, spiritual death is inflicted. ‘This latter is the death


cua. ¥.] ST. JOHN. 455


here, and is not simply the absence of what constituted life, but the presence also
of the opposite. (1) Man’s knowledge was a part of his life, but it has gone and he
is ignorant and misrepresents the truth. (2) This flow of holiness is staunched,
and he is defiled. (3) His innocency is blotted out, and he is guilty. (4) His title
to heaven is gone, and he is exposed to hell. 2. Its forms. Itdoes not always take
the same shape. (1) A man’s circumstances will do something to curb the
tendencies of his nature. Your life may be chaste and outwardly religious, but with
all this there is a defiled nature seen by the eye of God. (2) In other cases there is
a complete contrast, and depravity knows no shame. 3. Its extent; total (1) as
regards the individual. (a) The human form once so noble and symmetrical and
undying has become enervated by disease, and falls into the grave. (b) The mind
has not escaped its blight. Go to the lunatic asylum where the mind is gone, and
to the cultured atheist whose vast intellectual powers are perverted. (c) The soul
is dead, not that it has ceased to be immortal, butliveson in death. (2) As regards
the race. However employed and wherever found man is the impersonation. of
death. 4. Itscause. Not God. Look at the proofs of Divine benevolence in the
beauties of nature, and ask, Is God the cause of death? Look at the monstrosities
of nature—the drunkard, e.g., and ask, Is that God’s handiworks? II. Tue
CONDITION TO WHICH, BY THE MERCY OF GOD, EVERY BELIEVER HAS BEEN BROUGHT:
from death to life. 1. What is this life? (1) Life is a series of relationships. In
vegetable life there is a relationship of dependence; in animal life’ of the senses:
in rational life of consciousness; in spiritual life to God in Christ. (2) Life has its
developments. This could not be predicated of a stone. In vegetables you see it at
its lowest, in reptiles higher, in beasts higher still, in man highest ; and in rational
life you have the babe, the child, and the man, and so in spiritual. (3) Spiritual
life is knowledge. Mark the contrast between men of large intellectual powers and
a man hali-witted, who knows God is his Father and Christ his Saviour. They are
dead; helives. (4) It is purity. (5) Itislove. 2. Whence comes it? (1) Not from
self; a@ corpse cannot raise itself. (2) Not from another; a corpse cannot raise
others. (3) From God the fountain of life, through Christ, the resurrection and the
life. III. Tue process FROM THR ONE To THE oTHER. 1. Its character a purely
spiritual process, illustrated by the transformation of the caterpillar into the butter-
fly ; the change from winter to spring; the resurrection of thedead. 2. Its means.
The gospel embraced by faith. 3. Its Agent, the Holy Spirit. (Gervase Smith,
D.D.) — Passing from death to life :—I. Froma death of uNBELIEF to a life of FAITH.
II. From a death of ratszHoop to a life of rruts. III. From a death of sin to a
life of RigHTEOUSNESS. IV. From a death of misery to a life of BLESSEDNESS.
(W. H. Van Doren, D.D.) We are saved by believing :—A small matter may
suffice to shape the destiny of an immortal soul. In those ill times when there
were slaves across the Atlantic, a lady went down to one of our ships accompanied
by a negro servant. The lady remarked to the captain that if she were to go to
England and take this black woman with her, she would become free as soon as she
landed. The captain replied, ‘‘ Madam, she is free already The moment she came
on board a British vessel she was free.’”” When the negro woman knew this do
you think she went on shore with her mistress? By no means; she chose to keep
her liberty. Howslight the change of place, but how great the difference involved:
marvel not that faith involves such great things. (C. H. Spurgeon.) We must
believe or perish :—If s& man will not do that which is necessary to a certain end, I
do not see how he can expect to gain thatend. You have taken poison, and the
physician brings an antidote, and says, ‘‘ Take it quickly, or you will die. If you
take it quickly I will guarantee that the poison will be neutralized.” But you say,
“No, doctor, I do ndt believe it: let everything take its course; let every tub
stand on its own bottom; I will have nothing to do with you, doctor.” ‘ Well, sir,
you will die, and when the coroner’s inquest is held on your body the verdict will
be, ‘Served him right.’” So it will be with you, if, having heard the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, you say, ‘‘ Pooh-pooh ! I am too much of a common-sense man to have
anything to do with that, and I shall not attend to it.” Then, when you perish, the
verdict given by your conscience, which will set upon the King’s quest at last, will be
a verdict of felo-de-se. He destroyed himself. (Ibid.) Faith must lay hold on
Christ :—One night, when preaching in Philadelphia, right down by the side of the
pulpit, there was a young lady whose eyes were riveted on me, as if she were drink-
ing in every word. I got interested in her, and after I had done talking I went and
spoke to her. ‘‘ Are you a Christian?” ‘No; I wish I was. I have been seeking
Jesus for three years.” I said, ‘“‘There must be some mistake.” She looked


; ~ 4 ’ . 2 Re ba : _
456 ) THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. oma. ¥.


strangely at me, and said, ‘‘ Don’t you believe me? ” ‘*Well, no doubt you thought
you were seeking Jesus; but it don’t take an anxious sinner three years to meet a
willing Saviour.” ‘‘ What am I to do, then?” ‘The matter is, you are trying to
do something; you must just believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.” “ Oh, I am sick
and tired of the word, ‘Believe, believe, believe!’ I don’t know what it is.”
“Well,” I said, “ we’ll change the word; take ‘trust.’” “If I say, ‘I'll trust Him,’
will He save me?” “No; I don’t say that. You may say a thousand things, but
He will if you do trust Him.” ‘‘ Well,” she said, “I do trust Him; but,” she
added in the same breath, ‘I don’t feel any better.” ‘Ah, I’ve got it now! You’ve
been looking for feelings for three years, instead of for Jesus.” (D. L. Moody.)


Vers. 25-27. The hour is coming and now is when the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God. The spiritual resurrection :—I. Its susszects. The spiritually
dead, in. trespasses and sins. To have life we ‘must be born again.” II. Its
MANNER. 1. The dead hear the voice of the Son of God in the word preached. 2.
This word receives its power from heaven. III. Its nature. Those who hear.—l.
Live. 2. Shall live. Death is banished for ever. IV. Its szason. 1. The hour is
coming. (1) At Pentecost. (2) Ever since. (3) Till time shall be no more. 2,
Now is. (1) The day of the Spirit’s power had already in some measure come.
Under every dispensation many heard the voice of the Son of God and lived. (2)
Now is the accepted time. V. Its sources, 1. The life which is in the Son (ver.
26), 2. The authority exercised by the Son. (A. Beith, D.D.) The spiritual
awakening :—I, Tue time. oF 17. Now, during the currency of this Christian dis-
pensation, at any and every moment thereof (2 Cor. vi. 2; Heb. iii. 7, iv. 7). II.
THE supsecTs oF rt (Eph. ii. 1). III. Toe manner or rr. The vitalizing of a
dead soul results from the infusion into it of life by the Son of God (ver. 21). 1.
Not directly. 2. But indirectly through the word which the Son speaks. IV. THE
CONDITION oF 1T. Not all the spiritually dead are quickened, or even all to whom
the word of Christ is externally addressed, but only those who hear and believe
(vers. 24-25, cf. Isa. lv. 3). V. THe arounp or it. The fact that the Son is
possessed of life in Himself ag an original and inexhaustible fountain, even as it
exists in the Father (ver. 26). VI. THe enp or 17. Life in the fullest and highest
sense. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) Life for the dead:—I. SINNERS ARE BY NATURE
peaD. 1. Legally under the sentence of death (Rom. y.). We are guilty and con-
demned. The curse of the law and the wrath of God are upon all viewed in their
relation to Adam. 2. Really. The body is subject to death and to all the miseries
which precede death. The soul is dead in trespasses and sins. Natural death
makes the body lifeless; spiritual death makes the soul graceless, and both soul
and body comfortless for ever. (1) In natural death the body is without the soul ;
in spiritual the soul is without God. (2) Natural death disfigures the body;
spiritual thé soul. (3) Natural death makes the body cold; by spiritual the soul
becomes cold toward God. (4) In the one a man loses all right to property that
once was his; by the other men lose all their right which they had in Adam to
communion with God. (5) As a dead body is without understanding, so the natural
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God. (6) A dead body cannot raise
itself, neither can a dead soul. II. In toe Gosrrn MEN ARE PROMISED LIFE. 1.
This life is real. 2. It is suitable, removing condemnation, extracting the sting of
death, imparting spiritwal vitality to the condemned, guilty, and helpless. 3. Christ
is this life, and the Holy Spirit applies it to the soul. 4. This life becomes part of
a man’s being. 5. This life, although obstructed in its growth, is capable of endless
development, JII. Waar IT 1s THAT QUICKENS THE SOUL OF THE DEAD. The voice
of Christ is the Gospel, heard by the faith of the heart. (J. W. Reeve, M.A.)
Life in Himself.—Life unoriginated, independent, absolute, eternal life (Psa.
xxxvi. 9). I. Sprrrrvan. II. Everrnowine. III. Overrnowine. IV. Aun saris-
FyInc to men and angels. (W. H. Van Doren, D.D.) God is the focus and
fountain of life:—In Him life may be contemplated in its twofold activity. I. Taz
LIFE oF GoD PASSES FORTH FROM ITSELF. It lavishes itself through the realms of
nothingness. It summons into being worlds, systems, intelligences, orders of ex-
istences unimagined before, In doing this it obeys no necessary law of self-expan-
sion, but pours itself forth with that highest generosity that belongs to a perfect
freedom. That is to say that God the Life is God the Creator. II. Gop 1s Brine
RFTURNING INTO ITSELF, FINDING IN ITSELF ITS PERFECT SATISFACTION. God is thus
tne object of a dependent life, He is indeed the object of His own life; all His
infinite powers and faculties turn ever inward with uncloyed delight upon Himself


cnaP. v.] ST. JOHN. 457
8 upon their one adequate end. We cannot approach more nearly to a definition
of pleasure than by saying that it is the exact correspondence between a faculty and
its object. Pleasure is thus a test of vitality; and God as being Life is the One
Being who is supremely and perfectly happy. (Canon Liddon.) And hath given
Him authority to execute judgment.—The advent in judgment:—I. Wuo 18 THE
JUDGE ? Christ. He must be Divine to work out so great a judgment; but His
humanity is expressly given as a reason for His judgeship. 1. We know His charac-
ter, and can rely on His fairness and goodness. 2. He knows us, can sympathize
with our weakness, and can understand our temptations. 8. Having in His human
life conquered the same' temptations, He has a right to condemn us if we fail. 4.
As Messianic King He has the office of judging those who submit to Him and
those who reject Him. II. Wo arz ro BE TRIED? 1. The dead. Death is no
escape. Those who would not hear the voice of mercy must hear that of judgment.
Spiritual death might prevent their hearing the first, but with physical death added
they will hear the second. 2. All men. - III, Waar 1s THE GROUND OF TRIAL? - 1,
Not opinions, feelings, professions, resolutions, but deeds, 2..Not what men expected
of us, what the world did, what was fashionable, convenient, suitable or esthetic in
our conduct, but its moral character solely. The simplest but deepest lines of
cleavage will separate men—the question of good or evil. 3. But this will be judged
by One who reads the heart, weighs all circumstances, and characterizes an act
according to its motive. Thus many deeds which the world accounts good will be
condemned, and others that are condemned will be justified. IV. Wuat wit THE
SENTENCES BE? 1. A resurrection of life. The reward of obedience is for further
obedience—not luxurious indolence. 2. A resurrection of judgment. To the im-
penitent death does not end all, nor any judgment-day. Their future is dark, but
just and fair. V. WHEN WILL THIS JUDGMENT BE? No one can know. God has
fixed it. Every day brings it nearer. To each man it comes virtually at death.
(W. F. Adeney, M.A.) The Son of Man our Judge :—As a man His life will con-
demn us, J. His Humiiiry our pride. II. His temperance our indulgence. III.
His FORBEARANCE our impatience. IV. His cHastiry our sensuality. V. His prety
AND DEVOTION our ungodliness and worldly-mindedness. (W.H. Van Doren, D.D.)
The Son of Man.—1l. In His exaltation (chap. i. 51); as being in heaven while
on earth (chap. iii. 13). 2. As Lord of the Sabbath (Matt. xii. 8). 3. As blas-
phemed (Matt. xii. 32). 4. As coming in glory (Matt. xvi. 27). 5. As suffering
(Matt. xvii. 12). 6. As rising (Mark ix. 9). 7. As Saviour (Matt. xviii. 11). 8.
As sitting on His throne (Matt. xix. 28). 9. In His second advent (Matt. xxiv. 30).
10. As made under the law (Gal. iv. 4). 11. As subject to God’s decrees (Matt.
xxvi. 25). 12. As forgiving sins (Matt. ix. 6). 13. As houseless (Matt. viii. 20).
14. As wearing a golden crown (Rev. xiv. 14). 15. As Lord of the angels (Matt.
xiii. 41). 16. As supreme Judge (Rev.i. 7). 17. As head of the Church (Rev. 1. 18).
(Ibid.) Thejudgment of the Son of Man:—Judgment, as Scripture knows it, is not the
popular idea of judgment, which bids us be careful in reverence for the tribunal of
human opinion; nor the scientific idea, which shows us how inexorably what we
are about to-day will tell upon what we shall be; nor even the moral idea, which
challenges us to say whether there is not a right and a wrong, and a choice which
we can make between them. The judgment of Scripture is a simpler, deeper,
stronger thing, which includes and explains all these. The judgment of Scripture
is that which brings each man before God-his Maker. In it God isa present, silent
“ Judge of all.” God’s revealed Word declares a judgment which must be stringent
and searching, because it is the judgment of the All. Holy and All-Knowing. What
question is it that we should ask? It is, ‘“‘ By what standard shall we be judged?”
The text seems to suggest the answer, ‘The Father hath given to the Son authority
to execute judgment, because He is” (the) ‘Son of Man.” Not, as we might have
expected, because He is Son of God, but because He is Son of Man. The Judge
wears our manhood; His manhood equips Him for judgment, even as it equips
Him for sympathy and compassion. It is by man’s standard, then, that we are
judged and shall be judged ; and fairly, for it is both the judgment which tries us
by what we are made to be, and the judgment which we know; the judgment which
speaks within us, just in proportion as our manhood is true and our conscience
clear and strong; the judgment which speaks to us still more clearly through the
human voices of men and women better than ourselves, calling us to “‘ quit as like
men.” In the Gospels we see the Son of Man beginning thus to judge. By the
human instinct of compassion, the priest and Levite are condemned, and the good
Samaritan approved; by the human instincts of gratitude and humility, the


oa


458 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [crar. ¥.


eee UEIEEEEETD SUSE EnEESTanSRES URES


forgiven, but unforgiving, servant is judged; by the common standard of faithful
human service, and even by that of worldly sagacity and foresight, the servant who
hid his lord’s talent and the foolish virgins are judged; by comparison with the
purely human qualities of zeal and pluck in the jewel collector, or of skilfulness
even in the unjust steward, He rebukes men’s slackness and unwisdom in the
things that concern their souls; by the human instincts of charity, He declares
that men shall be eternally judged, according as they have, or have not, regarded
the appeal of the poor, sick, naked, hungry, and captive. Think, then, that we,
individually and collectively, shall be judged by the standard of human excellence
as it stands in our time, and as we may know it if we will. What a dignity and
value this gives to the human life about us in all its width and variety. For there,
amidst much that corrupts and confuses, are to be found the best thinkings, doings,
and strivings of our time and place; and by them, as men of our time and place,
we must.be judged. In this respect there are some simple counsels which may
help. We must, for example, often learn from those whom we can by no means
wholly follow. The prudence of the unjust steward is commended, without sanction
of his character ; the Positivist, who believes in no hereafter, may. be admirable in
his tenderness for all the natural parts and sympathies of this present life; students,
whom, perhaps, we must think narrowly indifferent to interests outside their own
departments of knowledge, are often excellent examples to us by their thorough-
ness, their perseverance, their reverence for every fragment of fact. Again, there
is judgment for some of us in simple things, in natural virtues. We may go high-
flying after intellectual ambitions, and forget modesty and homely courtesy and
kindness to those about us; or after special devotion and piety, while we neglect
the simple duties of industry in daily work, or dutifulness at home, or brotherly
kindness to Christians who are not of our sort. Once again, it would be well to
judge ourselves by what is good in men of habits or temperament unlike our own ;
not to hug our own one-sidednesses, but to suspect them; to remember, if we are
eager and easily moved, how much the slow, sober people have to teach us; or, if
our pride is in moderation and solidity, how likely we are to need examples of
warmer and less self-centred character, and a more generous appreciation of ideals.
Remember, then, that the standard by which you must be judged is not that of
your own low aims and narrow thoughts, but it is the standard of what you have
the opportunity of raising those aims, or enlarging those thoughts, to be by a due
use of all that is best and most inspiring in human life, as you have the privilege
of knowing it. But we have not exhausted the meaning of the text. It cannot
merely mean that we shall be judged by human standards. It must mean that we
shall be judged by the standard of the true manhood of Christ, and of humanity,
taught, restored, illuminated by Christ. We have His Name on our lips, His cross
before our eyes, His teaching in the gospels, His means of grace lavishly given to
us. Must there not be a judgment in this—a judgment because He is Son of Man
revealing to His brother-men how they may be true men, as God their Father would
have them be; and they will not? (H. S. Talbot, D.D.) Christ will bring
men to judgment:—A man goes into an inn, and as soon as he sits down
he begins to order his wine, his dinner, his bed; there is no delicacy in season
which he forgets to bespeak. He stops at the inn for some time. By and
by the bill is forthcoming, and it takes him by surprise. ‘I never thought
of that!—I never thought of that!’ ‘‘ Why,” says the landlord, “here is a
man who is either a born fool or else a knave. What! never thought of the
reckoning—never thought of settling with me!” After this fashion too many live.
They eat and drink and sin, but they forget the inevitable hereafter, when for
all the deeds done in the body the Lord will bring us into judgment. (C. H. Spur-
geon.) Death will be followed by judgment :—After a mission festival several
pastors and deacons continued an hour together, when the conversation drifted
from the heathen abroad to those around us, and the following story was told by a
village miller :—‘ I sat at a garden concert with a friend of mine. The first part
of the programme was ended, when an acquaintance of my friend’s came to us.
‘Have you heard,’ said he to my friend, ‘that Mr. BR died yesterday quite sud-
denly? A great pity; he was an agreeable and clever business man, and a pleasant
companion. Ah well! he enjoyed life while he lived, and he was quite right; for
when we are once dead it’s all finished.’ ‘Is it all finished? Do you really think
there is an end of it?’ said I. ‘ Ah!’ returned he, ‘I see you are one of the old
superstitious ones. What shall come after death greater or better than this life ?
“As the tree falls, so it lies.”’ ‘ Quite right,’ said I; ‘* As the tree falls, so it lies ;”


CHAP. V.] — its ST. JOHN. 459


but—do not take it amiss, friend—when you wish to prove by this quotation that
after death it is finished with respect to us, you have not considered the matter on
all sides, or your opinion is a blind one. Near my mill I have a woodyard, and
now and then I buy some trees to cut down. Often have I stood over the fallen
trunks and thought of those words, ‘ As the tree falls, so it lies ;” none will grow one
inch taller or thicker, better or worse; all that can be done in himis done. But
now, dear sir, it is not all finished; does it not rather begin? I go from trunk to
trunk proving the wood. ‘‘ This,” I say to myself, ‘‘ will be good for building pur-
poses, that will prove useful ;” but for others, I say it is but fit for the fire. You
know now how I think of the text. May God help us to become trees of righteous-
ness.’” (Der Glaubensbote.)


Vers. 28,29. The hour is coming in the which all that are in their graves shall
hear His voice.—The general resurrection :—I. The rEsuRRECTION. 1. Its subjects.
All who are in their graves. (1) The almost universal custom of preserving the
remains of the departed bears witness to the truth of the text. No such custom
obtains with reference to animals. The body was not formed to die, and men
cherish the hope of its recovering its lost immortality. (2) Our text, therefore,
gratifies the most sacred feelings of the human heart. Our separation from our
loved ones is only temporary. (3) The same persons shall rise. Momentous
changes, indeed, take place; but what changes take place between infancy and old
age! Yet it is the same person in whom they transpire. (4) The analogy by
which Scripture illustrates this mystery is that of grain sown in the earth, which
dies in order to live again. 2. The power by which it is accomplished. Christ’s
voice. (1) Not the voice as heard through pastors, &c. The season for hearing,
that for conversion, sanctification, comfort, &c.,is over. This we can refuse to
hear, but not that. (2) The voice of the archangel and the trump of God, terrible,
irresistible, dead awakening. 3. The time. (1) It is determined in the counsels
of God. (2) It will be at the winding up of the affairs. of time, ‘‘ the last day.”
The day of world’s first judgment came; so did that of Sodom, and Babylon, and
Jerusalem ; and just as surely shall this. II. The supement. All shall come forth.
1. The righteous. (1) They shall not taste of death. (2) Their bodies shall be
fashioned like unto Christ’s glorious body. (3) They shall obtain everlasting
blessedness. 2. They that have done evil. (1) The unbelievers who are con-
demned already to have their condemnation confirmed. (2) They shall rise to be
everlastingly banished. (A. Beith,D.D.) The resurrection :—What Christ avows
and affirms is that He is the Son of God, and that is the first thing that was ever
done in heaven—the eternal generation of the Son: that by which He proves this
is that there shall be a resurrection of the body; and that is the last thing that
shall be done in heaven. I. The prenrry of this resurrection. Marvel not at this
—at your spiritual resurrection, that a sermon should work, or sacrament comfort,
Deem not this a miracle. But there are things which we may wonder at, Nil
admirari is but the philosopher’s wisdom; he thinks it a weakness that anything
should be strange to him. But Christian philosophy tells us that the first step to
faith is to wonder with holy admiration at the ways of God with man. Be content,
then, to wonder at this, that God should so dignify as to associate to His presence
the body of man. God is a spirit, every soul is a spirit, angels are spirits, and
therefore proportioned to heaven ; so no wonder they are there. But wonder that
God, who is all spirit, and is served by spirits, should have a love for this body.
1. Behold this love even here. (1) The Father was pleased to breathe into this
body at first, in the creation. (2) The Son assumed this body in the redemption.
(3) The Holy Ghost consecrates this body and makes it His temple by His sancti-
fication. So the whole Trinity is exercised upon the dignifying of the body. 2.
This purpose of dignifying the body is opposed—(1) By those who violate and
mangle the body which God made in inhuman persecutions. (2) By those who
defile the garment Christ wore by licentiousness. Some of the Roman emperors
made it treason to carry a ring that had their picture on it to any place in the
house of low office. What name can we give that sin to make the body of Christ
the body of a harlot? (1 Cor. vi. 15-18). (83) By those who sacrilegiously profane
the temple of the Holy Ghost by neglecting the duties belonging to the dead bodies
of God's saints. 3. Those exceed this purpose who—(1) Pamper with wanton
delicacies or sadden and disfigure.with fastings and disciplines His own workman-
ship. (2) Who dishonour or undervalue the body or forbear marriage. | (3) Who
keep any rag of a dead man’s skin, or chips of their bones, or lock of their hair for


r)


460 THE BIBLI CAL ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHap, v.


a relic, amulet, or antidote against temporal or spiritual calamities. I. The
APPROACH of this resurrection. The former resurrection Christ said, ‘‘ Now is”; of
this He said, “It is coming.” Ina sense this applies to death. The resurrection
being the coronation of man, his lying down in the grave is his sitting down on
_ that throne where he is to receive his crown. To the child now born we may say,

“The day is coming’’; to him that is old, ‘‘ The hour is come’; but to him that.
is dead, ‘The minute is come’’—because to him there are no more minutes till it
do come. III. The generatiry of this resurrection. It reaches to all that are in
the grave. God hath made the body as a house for the soul till He call her out;
and He hath made the grave a house for the body till He call it up. Shall none,
then, rise but those who have enjoyed a grave? It is a comfort for a dying man,
an honour to his memory, the duty of his friends, a piece of the communion of
saints, to have a consecrated grave; but the word here is in monumentis—t.e., in

receptacles of bodies of whatever kind. Some nations burnt their dead, there the fire
is their grave; some drowned them, there the sea; some hung them on trees, there
the air. The whole mansion of the dead shall be emptied. IV. The instrument.

The voice of the Son of Man. In the spiritual resurrection it is the voice of the
Son of God, lest the human vehicle should be despised. Here it is that of the Son
of Man, who has felt all our infirmities, lest we should be terrified at the presence of
the offended God. The former we may hear if we choose; the latter we must
hear whether we will or not. God whispers in the voice of the Spirit; He speaks a
little louder in the voice of a man; but let the man be a Boanerges, yet no thunder
is heard over all the world. But the voice at the resurrection shall be heard by
the very dead, and allof them. V. ThepiverszEenD. 1. You have seen moral men,
or impious men go in confidently enough; but they will “come forth” in another
complexion, They never thought of what was after death. Even the best are
shaken with a consideration of that. But when I begin this fear in this life, I end
it in my death, and pass away cheerfully; but the wicked begin this fear when the
trumpet sounds, and never shall end it. 2. Fix on the conditions ‘‘ done good.”
To have known good, believed it, extended it, preached it, will not serve. They
must be rooted in faith, and there bring forth fruit. Conclusion: Remember with
thankfulness the several resurrections that God hath given you. 1. From super-
stition and ignorance, in which you in your fathers lay dead. 2. From sin and a
love of it, in which you in your youthlay dead. 3. From sadness, in which you in
your worldly crosses or spiritual temptations lay dead; and—4. Assure yourselves
that God, who loves to perfect His own work, will fulfil His promise in your resur-
rection to life. (J. Donne, D.D.) The doctrine of the resurrection is peculiarly
Christian. With natural reason, assisted by some light lingering in tradition,
a few philosophers spelled out the immortality of the soul; but that the body should
rise again is brought to light by Christ. It is the key-stone of the Christian arch;

for if Christ be not risen our faith is vain. It was the main weapon of the early
missionaries, and therefore should be oftener preached. It is, moreover, continually
blessed of God to arouse the minds of men. We shall—I. Expounp THE TExT.
1. There is a forbidding to marvel at the renewing of natural life, as in the case of
Lazarus, &c., and at the quickening of the spiritually dead—both of which are
things which it is legitimate to wonder at by way of admiration, but not in the
spirit of insulting unbelief. But the greater marvel is the general resurrection.
Yet to you it is less than that of the marvel of saving dead souls. In the former
there is no opposition to omnipotence, but in the latter the elements of death are
so potent that regeneration is a complicated miracle of grace and power. Never-
theless, to the few the former is the greatest marvel. Let us be admonished by
these marvelling Jews. Does it seem impossible for that ungodly man to be con-
verted? That you should be supported in your trouble? That your corruptions
should be cleansed? Doubt no more. Your Saviour will raise the dead. 2. The
coming hour. (1) ‘‘An hour,” because near to Him: since we do not begin to look for
an hour that is remote. It may be a thousand years off, but with Him that is but
as one day. Like Him, therefore, count it close, and act as though it would come
to-morrow. (2) ‘‘Coming,” therefore, certain. Dynasties may stand or wither; but
the hour of resurrection is sure, whatever else may be contingent or doubtful.
Every second brings it nearer. Look at it, then, as a thing that ever cometh—(3

the hour par excellence. We hear of hours which have been big with the fate of
nations, crises in history; but here is the culminating crisis of all. 3. All ‘that are
in their graves.” Those before the flood, those after; from east, west, north, south;
mighty empires, &., and you. 4. ‘Shall hear His voice.” (1) Why, the ear has gone!


ye


se ae


ouaP, Vv.) ST. JOHN. 461


But the God who gives the ear to the new-born babe, shall renew yours. (2) That
voice now sounding in this place is not heard by those who have ears; yet those
who have no ears shall then hear it. How deaf must those be who are more deaf
than the dead. You must hear the summons to judgment; God grant that you
may hear the summons to mercy. 5. ‘Shall come forth.” Not only emerge, but
be manifested. Hypocrisy wil] be unmasked, and unobtrusive good acknowledged.
6. “Those who have done good and those who have done evil.” (1) Death makes no
change in character, and we must expect no improvement after death... @) Only two
characters will rise. There are no mingled characters. (3) All will be judged
according to their works which have evidenced their faith. (4) They will meet with
differentdooms. II. DRAw LESSONS FROM THE TEXT. 1. Of adoring reverence. Ifthe
dead are to rise at the woice of Christ let us worship Him. 2. Of consolation to those
who mourn departed friends. Weep not asif thou hadst cast thy treasure into the sea,
thou hast only laid it in a casket whence thou shalt receive it brighter than before.
3. Of self-examination. (1) What shall be your position? (2) How shall you meet
before God those whom you have sinned with before men? (3) How shall you meet
Him as your Judge who would have been your Saviour? (C,H. Spurgeon.) The
resurrection :—l. THE EVIDENCE BY WHICH IT IS ESTABLISHED. 1. The express
declarations of the commissioned servants of God (Heb. ix. 19; Job xix. 25-27;
Psa. xvi. 9-11; Isa. xxvi. 19; Hos. xiii. 14; Dan. xii. 2; Matt. xxvii. 52, 53; 1
Thess. iv. 18-17; 1 Cor. 15). 2. Our Saviour’s own resurrection. If Christ did
not risé, our faith is vain; if He did, He can raise us, and His resurrection is a
pledge of ours. 3. Let this evidence produce on your minds its legitimate impres-
sion, and banish all uncertainty. 4. The folly of scepticism will appear when we
consider that this is in harmony with reason. For admitting God’s infinite power,
this is not impossible; and granting His infinite goodness, it is certain. II. Tux
AGENCY BY WHICH IT SHALL BE ACCOMPLISHED. 1. By hearing Christ’s voice. The
archangel’s trumpet is a symbol of that in its awakening power. 2. The mode is
uncertain, but Christ has innumerable resources of which we have no knowledge.
III. THE IDENTITY OF THE BURIED WITH THE RAISED. 1. If new bodies were
produced they could not be said to come out of their graves. The word “ resur-
rection” suggests something different from a new creation. Besides, it would bé
contrary to equity that one body should do good or evil and another be rewarded or
punished. 2. Still ‘* we shall all be changed,” but not so as to lose our identity.
The glorified Christ is the same Jesus as ‘‘ the Man of sorrows.” We shall be like
Him, yet the same persons that we are now. IV. THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE ACT.
V. Tue mmprovement. The subject suggests—1. A powerful motive to seek an
interest in the Christian salvation. We must all die; and if we have not been
saved we shall rise to the resurrection of damnation. 2. Comfort under the loss
of near and dear relatives. 3. Confidence in the prospect of our own dissolution.
(P. Grant.) The resurrection brought to light by Christ :—I stood on the top
of the Catskills one bright morning. On the top of the mountain was a crown of
flashing gold, while all beneath was rolling, writhing, contorted cloud. Butafter a
while the arrows of light shot from heaven, began to make the glooms of the valley,
strike tent. The mists went skurrying up and down like horsemen in wild retreat.
The fogs were lifted, and dashed, and whirled. Then the whole valley became one
grand illumination ; and there were horses of fire, and chariots of fire, and thrones of
fire, and the flapping wings of angels of fire. Gradually, without sound of trumpet or
roll of wheel, they moved off. The green valleys looked up. Then the long flash of
the Hudson unsheathed itself, and there were the white flocks of villages lying amid
the rich pastures, golden grain-fields, and the soft, radiant cradle of the valley, in
which a young empire might sleep. So there hangs over all the graves, and sepul-
chres, and mausoleums a darkness that no earthly lamp can lift; but from above
the Sun of Righteousness shines, and the dense fogs of scepticism having lifted,
the valleys of the cead stand in the full gush of the morning of the resurrection.
(7. De W. Talmage, D.D.) The conqueror conquered :—If I were to call on you to

ive the names of the world’s great conquerors, you would say, Cwsar, Alexander,
Philip, and the first Napoleon. You have missed the greatest. The men whose names
have just been mentioned were not worthy the name of corporal when compared with
him. Herode on the black horse that crossed the fields of Waterloo and Atlanta, and
bloody hoofs have been set on the crushed hearts of the race. He has conquered his
every land and besieged every city; and to-day, Paris, London, St. Petersburg, New
York, and Brooklyn are going down under his fierce and long-continued assault,
That conqueror is Death. He carries a black flag, and takes no prisoners. He digs


3
462 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHaP. ¥.


nnn tittttttty Gada
a trench across the hemispheres and fills it with carcases. Had not God kept
creating new men, the world, fifty times over, would have swung lifeless through
the air; not a foot stirring in the cities, not a heart beating—a depopulated world
—a ship without a helmsman at the wheel, or a captain on deck, or crew in the
rigging. Herod of old slew only those of two years old and under, but this monster
strikes all ages. Genghis Khan sent five millions into the dust ; but this, hundreds
of thousands of millions. Other kings sometimes fall back and surrender terri-
tory once gained; but this king has kept all he won, save Lazarus and Christ. The
last, One escaped by Omnipotent power, while Lazarus was again captured and
went into the dust. Whata cruel conqueror! Whata bloody king! His palace
is a huge sepulchre ; his flowers the faded garlands that lie on coffin lids ; his music
the ery of desolated households ; the chalice of his banquet a skull; his pleasure-
fountains the falling tears of a world. But that throne shall come down; that
sceptre shall break ; that palace shall fall under bombardment, ‘‘ For the hour is
coming in which all that are in their graves shall hear His voice, and shall come
forth.” (Ibid.) The inevitableness of the resurrection:—An infidel German
countess said her grave never should beopened. She ordered it to be covered by a
solid slab of granite; that around it should be placed square blocks of stone, and
that the whole should be fastened together by iron clamps. On the stone, by her
order these words were cut, ‘‘ This burial-place, purchased to all eternity, must
never be opened.” Thus she defied the Almighty. But a little seed sprouted under
the covering, and the tiny shoot found its way between two of the slabs, and grew
there, slowly and surely until it burst the clamps asunder, and lifted the immense
blocks. Man’s power fails even to secure a tomb from natural destruction ; much
less can it secure the soul against that day in which each one is to give account
of the deeds done in the body. (J. L. Nye.) Evil may be contemplated from
two points of view, either on the side of its positive malignity, its will and
power to work mischief, or else on that of its negative worthlessness, and, so to
speak, its good-for-nothingness ; zovpyooc contemplates evil from the former point
of view, and ¢a&vAoc from the latter. There are words in most languages which
contemplate evil under this latter aspect, the impossibility of any true gain ever
coming forth from it. Thus ‘“nequam ” es strictness opposite to frugi), and
“nequitia”? in Latin, ‘‘ vaurien” in French, ‘‘naughty” and ‘“‘naughtiness” in
English, taugenichts, ‘‘ schlecht,” schlechligkeit in German. This notion of
worthlessness is the central notion of gdvdoc (by some identified with ‘faul,”
foul), which in Greek runs successively through the following meanings: light,
unstable, blown about by every wind, small, slight, mediocre, of no account,
worthless, bad ; but still bad predominantly in the sense of worthless. , Pa@vdoc, as
used in the New Testament, has reached this latest stage of its meaning; and rd
pavra. roatavrec, are set over against rd dya@d momoayrec and condemned as
such to the ‘resurrection of damnation.” (Archbishop Trench.) The resur-
rection credible :—Wycliffe’s corpse was burnt to ashes, and these ashes were
cast into the river; carried into the sea, and thence dispersed in a thousand
directions, can the particles ever again be reunited? The Christian philosopher
sees no difficulty in the case. Did any of these changes happen to the Reformer’s
body irrespectively of those natural laws which God has ordained? And, if even
s0, 1s it not just as easy for Him to reverse their action as it was to give them
that action originally? It is a well-known chemical law, that, by the use of
proper agencies, bodies thoroughly dissolved may be recovered and restored to
their pristine shape. A single illustration will suffice. If we throw a lump of
solid camphor into a vessel of spirits of wine, it will soon be completely dissolved ;
nevertheless, by diluting the spirits of wine with water, we may recover the
camphor in the form of a sediment; nay, with the loss of a few grains, we may
restore it to its original shape. So, too, of a silver vase dissolved in aquafortis.
Beyond all controversy, these experiments are, in the eyes of the philosopher, far
less marvellous than the act of reconstituting a dispersed, disorganized boy ;
and yet, bearing in mind the infinite power of Jehovah, we can conceive it
just as easy for Him thus to restore originally as to create. The future punish-
ment of the wicked:—A professor in one of our leading colleges some time ago
went to the president with his doubts upon the subject of endless punishment, and
confessed that he could ‘hardly believe the doctrine.” ‘*I couldn’t believe it at
all,” was the president’s reply, “if the Bible did not teach it.” Everlasting
damnation :—A venerable minister preached 2 sermon on the subject of eternal
punishment. On the next day it was agreed among some thoughtless young


a a SE


onAP. v.} ST. JOHN. 463


men, that one of them should endeavour to draw him into a dispute, with the
design of making a jest of him and of his doctrine. The wag accordingly went,
and commenced by saying, ‘‘I believe there is a small dispute between you and
me, sir, and I thought I would call this morning and try to settle it.” “Ah,”
said the clergyman, ‘‘ what is it?” ‘* Why,” replied the wag, “you say that the
wicked will go into everlasting punishment, and I do not think that they will.”
“6 Oh, if that is all,” answered the minister, “there is no dispute between you
and me. If you turn to Matt. xxv. 46 you will find that the dispute is between
you and the Lord Jesus Christ, and I advise you to go immediately and settle it
with Him.” (W. Baxendale.)


Ver. 30. I can of My own self do nothing; as I hear I judge.—Christ’s present
judgment :—This verse is a conclusion of this part of Christ’s apology for His
curing of the man, and commanding him to carry his bed on the Sabbath day, and
for His asserting His unity and equality with the Father; wherein, from the former
purpose, he sums up these conclusions: 1. That He is inseparable from the
Father in operation (ver. 19), having no private power of His own (as they conceived
of Him asa mere man); but the same in essence, power, and operation with Him.
2. That He is in all the Father’s counsels, and hath the power of administration of
all things communicate to Him from the Father, which is pointed out under the
name of hearing, as it is verse 19, by seeing, to hold forth the spirituality of the
way of communicating, and His infinite comprehension of all that is communicate,
as hearing and seeing all. 3. That His government and administration is most just,
as seeking no satisfaction to any will of His own, contrary to, or diverse from the
Father’s, as He is God; and that He doth this not only as God simply, but as God
now incarnate also, being the same still with the Father, and acting in all things
according to the will of God. And though as man, He have a will distinct from
His will as God, and so diverse from the Father’s will, yet that did act in subordi-
nation to the will of God (Matt. xxvi. 39). Whence learn: 1, The divinity of
Christ is a truth that may no ways be quarrelled with, and doth call for our second and
serious thoughts ; therefore doth He recapitulate His apology, that this truth may be
inculeate; 2. Such is the strict conjunction and perfect unity of the Father and the
Son, that the Son neither doth, nor can do anything without the fellowship of the
Father; so that in all His working the Father is to be seen and taken up; for “ I can
of Mine own self do nothing,” saith He. 3, Christ, in the administration of all things,
and executing of His purposes in this life, and at the day of judgment, is upon
the Father’s counsel, acting from Him, and all Christ’s administrations are upon
counsel and conclusion taken betwixt the Father and the Son, for, saith he, ‘As I
hear, I judge.” 4. Christ’s administrations and sentences are all just and right,
doing injury and violence to no man, nor ought they to be stumbled at by any, for,
“« My judgment is just,” saith He. 5, The reason of the justice of Christ’s judgment
is because it is agreeable to the will of the Father, with whom He is one, and whose
will is the rule of justice, as being supreme and absolute Lord; which will Christ,
being incarnate and God-man, did conform Himself unto in all things, for, “ My
judgment is just, because I seek not Mine own will” (nor have any will contrary to,
or diverse from His, as hath been explained), ‘‘ but the will of the Father, which hath
sent Me.” (G. Hutcheson.) —Christ’s present judgment :—Note—l. There isa moral
difference in the judgment of men concerning Divine truth. 2. Diversity of judg-
ment is dependent on moral condition. 38. Moral condition is resolvable into one
of two great principles of action—self-seeking or God-seeking. 4. Adoption of the
Divine will is the essential candition of just judgments. Their principles—1.
Explain the perversion of the Bible by its avowed disciples. 2. Indicate the
method in which the gospel should -be preached. 3. Supply a test of fitness for
the work of the gospel ministry. 4. Show the necessity of Divine influence. (W.
H. Van Doren, D.D.) The unclouded heart :—1. For the training of goodness,
the ancient reliance was on the right discipline of habit and affection : the modern
is rather on the illumination of the understanding. Vice is made a blunder of in-
tellect, and, like optical delusions, to be cured by the most approved instruments
for seeing. 2. This prescription is attractive from its apparent simplicity. It
seems to take away all mystery from the moral emotions. But its value disappears
the moment we use it, as, say, the miser, the cheat, the insane candidate for glory.
When has it ever made such generous, just, and meek. It is true that you have
only to give the slave of passion a different view of the objects of his desire and
he is setfree. It is equally true that you have only to make the paralytic run and


464 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. Vv,
a nn EnEnIE EE nEEEnEEEnEE SEEN
he will be well. 3. Christ, reversing the order of the explanation, placed the truth
in a juster point of view. He knew that if sometimes because the reason is
darkened the passions are awake, it more often happens that because the passions
are awake the reason is darkened. Pure sympathies make a clear intellect. When
auditors, feeling that, ‘‘never man spake like this man,” asked, “how knowest
this man letters?’ &c., He said, “ My judgment is just because I seek not Mine own
will,” &c.; and He instructed others how to gain a like discernment: “If any
man do His will,” &c. ‘Whatever be the word on which the judgment may be en-
gaged, it will be invariably ordered by the sympathies of a just, disinterested, and
holy mind. 4. Even in His abstruser toils, these are the wise man’s mightiest
power. The most turbid clouds which darken reason are those which interest,
fear, and ambition spread, and these the pure affections sweep away. How often
will a child penetrate the centre of some great truth. A pure-hearted man will be a
right-minded man. 5. All the great hindrances to impartiality in the quest of
truth have their seat in some class of selfish feelings. The excessive eagerness
about reputation produces a thousand pitiable distortions of understanding. In
one it takes the shape of a determination to be original and so extinguishes his
perception of all ancient excellence, in another it passes into the pride of being
moderate and sound, and so he dreads eccentricities far more than falsehoods. And
what is partizanship but a collection of selfish feelings, fatal to all the equities of
reason. 6. But the mere absence of selfishness is not the only condition for a just
judgment. Inpartiality will accomplish nothing without impulse. Clearness of
intellectual view will be found not- in one who follows the light without the deep
love of it, but in Him who seeks the will of One who sent Him, and who trusts it
with a “love that casteth out fear!” I. ON QUESTIONS OF PRACTICAL MORALS this
principle holds good. The moral habits and tastes of men form their opinions
much more frequently than their opinions form their habits, so that their theoreti-
cal sentiments are little more than a systematic defence after the act. Any moral
practice may be recommended; yet how many things we palliate would be con-
demned by the very act of expounding them to others—duelling, e.g. It is fearful
to reflect how the moral sentiments are modified by the atmosphere of social influ-
ence; how the indications of the unperverted conscience may become obscured or lost,
and the possibility of remorse killed out. II. Inrrs supGMENT OF HUMAN CHARACTER
the same principle rules. The pure affections still the confusion of the senses and
remove all motive for not seeing men and life exactly as they are. One who looks
on the world as his appointed post of strenuous duty and feels on him the Divine
charge to leave it better than he found it must close neither eye nor heart against
its ills; and as for its charities and virtues, delighting in them all, he discerns them
all; bringing as they do the refreshment of a generous veneration what temptation
has he to doubt or decry them. ‘To the selfish, on the other hand, men are tools
and have to be flattered into service, and accustomed to speak of good qualities
which they do not possess, the mind dwells to such an extent on the negation of
excellence that it ceases to believe in it, and thus the nobler half of human nature
undergoes permanent eclipse. III. Those who “ seek their own will,” are liable to
error respecting those CHANGES IN society which are brought about by the nobler
forces of the human will. It is happy for the world that over the vision of its
greatest enemies, their own selfishness spreads a film concealing the powers which
will effect their over-throw. In spite of all the pampered despot’s vigilance, con-
spiracy, conducted by lean and praying patriots, has gone on unnoticed before his very
eyes, and suddenly the tempest bursts. It is of the very nature of guilty power
to be surprised by the apparition of high-minded virtue in a people. Conclusion:
1. Selfishness under the form of jealousy draws another cloud over the judgment
and hides from it all that is fairest in kindred minds. 2. But our judgments will
not be right unless our sympathies be not only disinterested but pure. In addition
to not seeking our own will, we must seek God’s. The partialities of the affections
ca ore way ee those of self-love ; but they are partialities still; and
while they make our judgments merciful, may preven i i just.
Martineau, D.D.) ~0 : Sie , Coan


Vers. 31-40. If I bear witness of Myself My witness is not true. There is
another that beareth witness of Me.—The witnesses of the Son:—I. A GREAT
WITNESS. His forerunner. The Baptist as a witness for Christ was—1. Human
(ver. 34; cf, iii. 31). 2. Brilliant. While he lasted he was like the lamp that gave
light to the whole household of the Jewish people. So should every Christian in


ea ee
4


CHAP. ¥.] ST. JOHN. aes


his place as parent, master, teacher, citizen, be a blazing torch, or, at least, a
useful lamp, to guide others to Christ (Matt. v.16; Phil. ii. 15). 3. Acceptable.
For a time the people buzzed round him like moths round a flame (Luke iii. 15). Ha
was therefore a witness of their own selection, and hence one that might be supposed
to be impartial. 4, Transcient. So Christ’s witnesses can seldom count on pro-
tracted popularity (Heb. vii. 23). 5. Yet permanent (ver. 83), A word truly
spoken for Christ never dies. II. A erearer witness. His works. 1. More
exalted in its origin (ver. 34; cf. iii. 31). John’s was from earth, Christ’s from
heaven, 2. More direct in its expression. Christ’s works, being the Father’s, pro-
ceeded straight from Him without passing through a subsidiary messenger as John.
3. More conclusive in its significance. John’s was necessarily imperfect, he being
but human. But Christ’s works were such as the Father only could do (chap. iii.
2, xiv. 10,11). The inference from verses 36 and 39 was irresistible that Christ
was the Son of God. III. Tue crearesr witness. His Father. 1. The Scriptures
the medium of the Father’s testimony (vers. 39, 46). 2..The Scriptures the Father’s
testimony par excellence. The Father speaks in them by the Holy Ghost. To
reject them is to reject the last and highest form of evidence God can give. (T.
Whitelaw, D.D.) The witness bearer :——We are not informed whether our Lord’s
opponents expressed their feelings, but knowing all things, He replied to their secret
objections that the testimony was valid, inasmuch as He was not-alone in bearing
it (ver. 31), Such testimony could not be given by any man (ver. 34); it could be
given so as to be on a footing of equality with His own only by ‘ another” such
as Himself, viz., the ‘‘Father.” The testimony was—l. ‘ Of another,” implying
distinctness of personality, and yet equality of testimony in value. 2. That of
the God of Truth, known to Christ, who is in the bosom of the Father as it cannot
be known to men. Consider, then, the Father’s testimony to Jesus by John. I.
THEY HAD SENT TO JOHN (ver. 33). Some of them, perhaps, had themselves been
deputies (chap. i. 19). By taking this step they had manifested a high opinion of
John’s testimony. What authority, then, ought that testimony to have on the
subject they had submitted to him? II. Jonn BorE witTNEss TO THE TRUTH. John
repudiated the Messiahship of himself, but announced Jesus as the “Lamb of
God.” Had they put by this testimony? They were now reminded of it. III.
THE AUTHORITY OF GoD’s TESTIMONY WAS NOT HIS, BUT THAT OF HIM THAT HAD SENT
HIm (ver. 34). Man of himself was not equal to the task of witnessing to the
glory of Christ. ‘‘No man knoweth the Son but the Father.” Man may be
employed to proclaim what God is pleased to communicate, but the authority is
not his, but God’s. John was sent from God to bear witness of the light. How
vain, then, to speak of the authority of the Church in the Roman sense. It abides
in the Word which she is commissioned to proclaim, and in that only. IV. Jonn’s
PLACE AND HONOUR IN SUCH A CAUSE (ver. 35). 1. He was a burning and shining
lamp, a vessel prepared and ordained to diffuse light. The oil of grace in his
heart was kindled from above, not from below. All miristers of Christ are of a
similar character. 2. The Jews had rejoiced in this light, and had acknowledged
John as a messenger from God. It was for a season only, however. John’s
ministry was short, and their willingness to rejoice in it was shorter still. When
they found that he was the herald of no political deliverer, when they understood
the conditions of entering the kingdom John predicted, and when he pointed to
Jesus as the Lamb of God, they gave him up. Lessons: 1, Have we received the
gospel as the Word of God? It is only when we hear God in the Word that we
hear at all. 2. Were we once more willing to rejoice in the gospel than we are
now? (A. Beith, D.D.) Christ’s witnesses :—God alone can testify touching the
nature of a Divine relation. Christ has the witness of—I. Tue Baprist. His
predicted forerunner. II. His mrracrzs. III. Taz Farner. 1. At His baptism
(Matt. iii, 17). 2. At His transfiguration (Luke ix. 35). 3. In the temple (John
xii. 29). IV. Tue Hoxy Scrierurzs. 1. Old Testament. 2. New. V. His
DISCIPLES in whom He dwells. VWI. His Enemies, the rancour and persistence of
whose opposition is a testimony to His Person and worth. (J. W. Burn.)
The witness of the Old Testament Scriptures to Jesus Christ:—I. They witness to
Him sy THE GREAT NEED or A Saviour, revealed by the lives and expressed in the
words of the noblest of men. II. They witness to Him BY THE UNSATISFYING EX-
pEDIENTS to which men resorted to meet that need—law, ritual, sacrifice. III.
They witness to Him BY TURNING MEN’s THOUGHTS from the past aud the present to
the future. The golden age of Israel was ever before her, not behind. IV. They
witness to Him BY THE UNREALIZED mEALS of Prophet, King, and Priest, which


“a


466 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cmap. v¥.
eee —._— a 0—_"e_
Christ alone fulfilled. 1. As Prophet, He spoke with authority. 2. As King, He
wrought with authority. 8. As Priest, He forgave with authority. (C. M. Hardy,
B.A.) These things I say, that ye might be saved —Have an object :—A minister
once had the celebrated Andrew Fuller as a hearer. After service, both were invited
to a neighbouring house for refreshment. The preacher, who evidently thought he
had made no failure, was desirous to ascertain Mr. Fuller’s opinion of his effort.
The veteran divine seemed unwilling to be drawn out upon that subject, and for
some time took no notice of his ycunger brother’s allusions and hints. At length
a remark was made of so inviting a character as that Mr. Fuller could not we
avoid making some reply. He said, ‘‘I gave close attention to your sermon, and
tried to ascertain at what you were aiming it: what was your object?” Several
years afterwards that preacher referred to Mr. Fuller’s inquiry as a cutting reproof
which he deeply felt, and which had the effect of changing essentially the character
of both his motives and his labours. (Clerical Anecdotes.) He was a burning
and a shining light.—I. In the anatocy employed by our Lord we have the three-
fold characteristic of a Christian minister—light, heat, and lustre. He is a living
lantern. ‘Light in the Lord.” 1. The first qualification for a Christian teacher is
that he sees. He has heard the voice, ‘‘Let there be light,” and the voice has
divided the light from the darkness. 2. The Christian doctrine is that the world
and human nature are dark, and that Christianity is a light shining in a dark
place. 38. In harmony with this view, every Christian man, and especially the
Christian teacher, should be a light-bringer, none the less so because his tempera-
ment and character are called to a different routine of duties, or develop a varied
order of excellences. There may be more or less of the red flare of human passion
or the beautiful white light of love. Light is one, but it shines through various affecting
media. There is light—(1) In the eye, by which we know sensible objects; (2) In
the understanding, by which we know scientific relations and are able to reason,
&e.; (3) In the will, which affects the whole range of our moral vision ; (4) but we
see most clearly when we see through our affections. 4. But the Christian, like
John, must be a burning and shining light—the marriage of knowledge and zeal;
the white and red lights of life; impetuosity and prudence; Peter and John going
up to the temple; the jewels on the high priest’s breastplate; the gorgeous red of
the ruby, the soft blue of the sardonyx, the cataract splendour of the diamond.
II. Our Lord permits the designation to wear the form of rutogy. John was an
extraordinary teacher every way. 1. When any insist on ecclesiastical authority, I
like to point to John the Baptist. How strangely he must have startled the ordinary
opinions of his day. To the priests his mission must have appeared most heretical
and disorderly. How strange that the conservators of religion are ever the last to
learn the meanings of a great revelation. But when the Word of the Lord burns
in the heart of a prophet he cannot hold back. 2. John was no dreamer, but never
did prophet appear more so, proclaiming the visionary kingdom at hand. In the
nature of things the light would not be comprehended by the darkness. Suddenly,
in the death state of the Jewish nation, John rose. ‘ The kingdom of heaven is at
hand. Repent ye.” God’s turning to man.the plea for man’s turning to God—the
sum and seal of the gospel lies in that. III. Gzenmrauizations. The burning and
the shining light was—l. Before his age. The age was one of formalism and
religious apathy. John was the impersonation of reality and earnestness. The
most dreadful sight on earth is that of a preaching machine, yet that is often pre-
ferred to a prophet. 2. He was banished from society by his convictions. All
men who leave the formalism of the present moment must make up their minds for
the desert, But it is there we learn our true strength and the meaning of our
mission. 3. He died a martyr to his faithfulness. (Pazton Hood.) Sacrifice
and submission :—Suppose it were certainly predicted of your child that he should
grow up the servant of other men, that he should have none of this world’s honours
and that his life should be made up of sacrifice and submission; would you not
conceive it a dreary prospect? This prospect was realized in John; but the
Master pronounced it grand. The poet sings, “Lives of great men all remind
us,” &c, Thousands of young people have read these lines with hopefulness; of
full-grown persons with misgiving; of the old who have wished that they had
never heard them. But what are the elements of a grand life? There are easy
pleasant, showy, restless, plodding, successful, and average lives; but of grand lives
two only are possible, both realized in Christ and in those who are like Him. I
THE LIFE oF sAcRiFice. There are those in this world whom God calls to live for
others, and the wants of others are to them the gate of everlasting glory. It may


a


OHAP. V.] ST. JOHN. 467


be the poor, sick, penitent, orphan, one’s country, church, household, parish, city,
or hamiet. Human want is everywhere. To resolve to live for others, to give time,
wealth, prayers, that others not so fortunate may be helped, cared for, taught, and
that not grudgingly or of necessity, nor for profession or pay or praise, and on the
first motion, and in faith—that is the way to make life sublime. And it is sublime
because—l. It contradicts the desires of the heart, which never go that way by
themselves, and involves that most glorious of victories, the conquest of self. 2.
Because it is like the life of Christ and of those who have loved Him best. II.
THE LIFE OF HOLY suBMIssION. In this life there is what is called the inevitable.
Often this takes a formidable shape, and seems as if it might wreck the whole life.
The wider the range of this enemy of peace, the greater the trial to a sensitive and
eager spirit. But submission to the inevitable must take the form of intelligent
resignation to the will of God to ennoble life. To this end—1. The mind must be
kept in check by the thought of God. 2. The spirit of complaint be checked. 3.
The habit of cheerfulness cultivated. Lessons: 1. One of warning to the pros-
perous: the one thing in their life which could have given it grandeur is lacking,
and failure will be written on it at last without sacrifice and submission. 2. One
of consolation to the unfortunate : acceptance of one’s lot as from God, and making
the best of it, makes it glorious. 3. Put, then, away mock heroic ideas of grandeur.
There are lofty lives where the world cannot see, but God can; and noble lives,
although covered with this world’s tinsel glory, which will one day utterly fade
away. (Morgan Dix, D.D.) Light :—The Word is a hand-lamp. Candles
of tallow were first used, then lamps with wicks of flax were universally
substituted. The ancients, in the absence of tables, used candlesticks from twelve
inches to five feet high, made of wood, bronze, marble, silver and gold, with several
branches. That of Antiochus was adorned with jewels set in chains. They were
made in the form of lilies, seals, vines, and other figures. Lamps were used in
marriage ceremonies, and placed in sepulchres. Olive oil was used, which on festive
occasions was highly perfumed. Sometimes the lamps were held by the domestics
standing round the table. Emblematically ministers are called candles (Zech. iv. ;
Rev. i., xi. 4). The Rabbis were called “ Candles of the Law; Lamps of the Light.”
Light and fire were symbols of God (chap. i. 4, iii. 20). Lamps are required only
in the sun’s absence, so at Christ’s coming John disappears. The Church is symbo-
lized under the sign of a candlestick (Rev. i. 20). Caravans in the desert at night
are preceded by a brilliant lantern, which lights all who follow. Should the bearer
be careless, ‘“‘ Let your light shine” sounds from all. Christ was never called, like
John, a “light-bearer”’; the word light as applied to Him is entirely different. (W.
H. Van Doren, D.D.) The light and the lamp :-—Just as Christ was not a Light,
but the Light, so John was not a lamp, but the lamp; he was the friend and ser-
vant of the Bridegroom, who was to go before Him with the torch of his testimony.
Burning like fire, his call to repentance penetrated into the hearts of men ; brightly
shining, full of gospel truth, he went before, lighting the way which led to the Lamb
of God. (R. Besser, D.D.) The torch-bearer :—John was not a permanent
sun; he was the torch which cannot burn without consuming itself. Critics have
interpreted the article as signifying the torch par excellence, as alluding to
Gir. xlviii. 1, ‘the word (of Elias) shone like a torch,” and as comparing John
to the well-known torch-bearer who walked before the bridegroom in a nuptial
procession ; but the article simply means the light, of which there never was
more than one in the house. (F. Godet, D.D.) The lamp that burneth and
shineth :—The two epithets express the same idea ; that of the ephemeral brilliance
of a torch which wastes as it gives light. ‘The imperfect ‘‘ was” proves that the
torch is now extinguished. John was imprisoned or dead. (Ibid.) A lamp shines
by burning, and burns in shining ; the sun wastes not while raying forth its beams.
(T. Whitelaw, D.D.) Burning and shining lives :—Some shine but do not burn;
others burn but do not shine, True grace in the soul does both. Basil thundered
in his preaching and lightened in his life. Of the martyrs Rogers and Bradford it
was difficult to decide whether their eloquence or their holiness shone the brighter.
(Van Doren.) Let your light shine :—As 1 have seen the glowworm at late evening,
by the silent side of an empty English lane, mount some tall spike of grass and
turn its tiny lamp, content to hang, head downwards, itself ‘unseen, 80 that the ex-
quisite soft green light which God had given it might be visible in its loveliness ; so
may one find in this world’s lowly and unfrequented paths Christ’s light-bearers,
who shed each his own sweet love-light round a narrow circle of the dark, that the
wayfarer who sees may praise, not his unsightly and, sooth to say, concealed self,


468.


of a minister.

burns in the sanctuary ought still to remain undimmed. For that fire no curfew
must ever be rung. Burning and shining lights :—Paul, Peter, James, or John—
Luke, Mark, Matthew, or Apollos—Andrew, Philip, Barnabas, or Stephen—each
would bea burning and shining light: in one the lustre might dart from the pen,
in another from the tongue; from one might flash the lightnings of eloquence, from
another the more quiet beam of lucid exposition. St. Bernard may illuminate a
court, or Thomas 4 Kempis acloister ; Wickliffe may lighten a rectory or a kingdom ;
Luther may blaze over an age; Brainerd and Elliott may spend their fiery light in
rousing the latent emotions of Indian tribes; or Williams, in identifying Christianity
to savages with the arts of life; Whitfield may be the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, echoless as soon as uttered ; Madame Chantal, the glorious Elizabeth of
Hungary, or the lovely Florence Nightingale, may show how the Tabitha and Dorcas
spirit is not confined to any age, to cottage, or to court. But the fact about Chris-
tianity is, that it turns all its possessors, all its sound-hearted professors, into burn-
ing and shining lights. (Paxton Hood.) The self-consuming life :—As a burning
and shining light while illuminating others consumes itself, so Christian teachers
should sacrifice themselves in the service of God for their fellow-men. (Zeisius.)
Ye were willing for a season to rejoice in His light.—Jesus compares the Jews
to children who, instead of taking advantage of the precious moments during
which the torch burns to accomplish an indispensable task, do nothing but
dance and play the fool in its light till it goes out. It is impossible to charac-
terize better the vain and childish satisfaction which the national pride has
found for the moment in the appearance of this extraordinary man, and the
absence of the serious fruits of repentance and faith which it was intended to
produce. ‘Instead of being yourselves led to faith by John, you made him an
object of curiosity, You pleased yourselves with him.” Comp. Luke vii. 24, &c.,
which charges them with making it an amusing spectacle, and closes by comparing
them toa group of children playing in the market-place. (F. Godet,D.D.) Playing
with the light :—‘‘ All you ever seriously contemplated was to leap, dance, make
sport of, like gnats in the twilight, like flies round a lamp, like dancers at a wed-
ding.” The phrase marked not the progress of the Baptist’s career, but the short-
lived character of their favourable mood towards him, or the celerity with which
their satisfaction in the radiance emitted by him turned into disgust. (T. Whitelaw,
D.D.) _ Regeneration better than admiration :—The Jews were pleased enough with
the thrilling excitement of his ministry, and experienced the delight of a new and
powerful sensation, But when John struck deep they forsook him, and never
mourned when the martyr perished; as children sport with fire till they are burned,
then they cast it aside. Thus the Athenians sought profane amusement in Paul’s
preaching (Acts xvii. 19). Thus popular preachers are followed by thousands who
will the next day be found at the gaming table, the racecourse, or the theatre. Not
admiration, but regeneration is what a minister should seek for. (Van Doren.) I
have greater witness than that of John.—The Greater Witness :—Jesus was com-
petent to bear witness to His own glory ; so was the Father and the Holy Ghost.
Kach did, and they alone are competent witnesses, Besides the testimony of the
Father through John there were—I. Two orTHER FORMS IN WHICH THE FaTHER
BORE WITNESS. 1. By the works which He gave Jesus to finish (ver 36). John’s


‘a = = See gee a


aera ee


omar. v.] ST. JOHN. 469


mission served its end by calling attention to them: the works themselves are now
put in evidence. (1) What were they? Not miracles merely, but all that required
to be performed for man’s salvation. (2) In what sense were they ‘‘ given ” Him?
(a) In the everlasting covenant; (6) When He was instituted in His mediatorial
office ; (c) In token not only of the Father’s love for the elect, but for His Son. (3)
They were given Him to finish. Not to enter on and fail to accomplish. All heaven
and earth were entitled to act on the assurance that there could be but one issue.
(4) Yet the works were His, done by His own inherent, personal, almighty power,
and of His independent sovereign will. (5) These works bore witness that the
Father had sent Him. ‘They were evidences not of an ordinary prophetic, but of an
extraordinary Messianic mission. 2. The Father had directly borne witness to Him
(ver. 17)? Here also was testimony greater than John’s. (1) Christ doubtless
referred to His baptism. Never had such a testimony been borne before. ‘ Unto
which of the angels,” &¢. The Father’s voice was heard; the emblem of the Spirit
was seen; the image of the invisible God was revealed. Thus the triune Jehovah
visited the East. It was a descent more glorious than on Sinai. Jesus now
appealed to it. (2) The Jews sought after a sign. Here was one.. It had not been
given ina corner. It bore testimony to the Only Begotten, but notwithstanding,
the Jews remained in their unbelief. 3. This constituted their great sin which led
ultimately to the cross. Unbelief is no less an evilin us. The evidence that Jesus
is the Messiah is complete: who of us believes it unto salvation? What then if we
be guiity of crucifying Christ afresh. II. Curist’s APPEAL TO THE JEWS ON THIS
SUBJECT FOR THEIR CONVICTION consists of three charges. 1 (ver. 37). The Saviour
spoke here of all the ways in which the Father had testified of Him. The Father’s
voice was uttered through Moses, the prophets, John, at Jordan and through the
“works.’”? But to them it was.as though it had never spoken. They enjoyed such
opportunities as their fathers never enjoyed. Some of these, however, had heard
and seen. Abraham, Jacob, Moses. 2 (ver. 38). It was their national boast that
they had the Scriptures, and a deep though superstitious regard for them. But
they had not the word abiding in them. It was not so with all, however, e.g., Mary,
Elizabeth, Simeon, Anna, Andrew, Philip, Nathanael. How common now the
former case, how rare the latier, and the consequent acceptance or rejection of
Christ. 3 (vers. 39, 40). (1) He praised them for the duty. But how much de-
pends on the spirit and aim of the search. Theirs was fruitless through prejudice.
(2) They searched but did not come to the eternal life. Their discovery was an
hallucination. How sad to read and hear about Christ and not find Him. (A. Beith,
D.D.) The Son’s complaint against His own :—I. A GRAVE INDICTMENT. 1. Non-
acceptance of His Father’s ambassador (ver. 38). 2. Unwillingness to partake of
His salvation (ver. 40). 3. Rejection of His gracious message (ver. 47). II. A
SUFFICIENT PROOF. 1. They entirely misconceived the nature and use of the Bible
(ver. 39). That which had been given them so as to prepare them for Christ they had
failed to understand. They beheld in it a sort of superior talisman that endowed
them with eternal life. They never dreamed of searching it for light to lead them
to the Son. It is possible for a Christian to make a Saviour of the Scriptures rather
than of Christ. 2. They were devoid of true love to God. They made much pro-
fession of knowledge and zeal for God’s law, but had no sincere regard for the Law-
giver. This was evinced by the fact that though they had the law it was not within
them (ver. 38). 8. They were wholly out of sympathy with such a Saviour as
Christ professed to be (ver. 43). Had He come as a temporal deliverer they would
have rallied to His standard; but because He came in His Father’s name and with
His Father’s love, and to do His Father’s work, they would have none of Him.
What a melancholy tale for that day and for this. 4. They were completely ab-
sorbed in their own personal ambitions (ver. 44), and so were incapable of appre-
ciating Christ. 5. They were thoroughly steeped in scepticism even in regard to
Moses (ver. 46, 47). Hence their unbelief in Him of whom Moses wrote, though not
excusable, was not surprising. III. A rrarron rate. 1. To be accused to the
Father (ver. 45), to be impeached before the high tribunal of heaven as those who
had dishonoured the Father’s majesty in despising His Son. 2. To be prosecuted
by Moses, the very law-giver in whom they had trusted. 3. To be deserted by the
Son. Appalling retribution. Lessons: 1. A call to self-examination. 2. A note
of warning. (Z'. Whitelaw, D.D.)| The works which the Father hath given Me.—
The declaration of this relation of the Father and the Son is peculiar to St. John.
The Father hath given—I. Ann THrInGs 1nTO His Hann (iii. 35, xiii. 3). Il. Aun
gupement (vers. 22,27). III. To wave uire 1n Himsuxr (ver.26). IV. A company /


470 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [OHAP.. V.


OF FAITHFUL SERVANTS (vi. 39; cf. Vi. 65, vii. 2, 6,9, 12, 24). V. CommMANDMENT
WHAT To SAY (xii. 49) anD To Do (xiv. 31, xvii. 4, ef. xvii. 7, &ec.). VI. AvrHortry
OVER ALL FLESH (xvii. 2). VII. His nau (xvii. 11, &.). VIII. His exory (xvii.
24, cf. ver. 22), (Canon Westcott.) Search the Scriptures.—I rather construe
it in the indicative sense, “ye search,” upon these reasons—1. Because of what
is said in the verse itself, ye think ye have eternal life in them; in which
words our Saviour intendeth not so much to show what they might have in the
Scriptures, for then it had been proper to have said, In them ye have eternal life, as
He meaneth to touch upon the erroneous conceit of the Jews, who thought they
obtained eternal life by the study of the law ex opere operato. 2. Because of the
context in the verse following, which lieth fairer in this sense, Ye study the Scrip-
tures scrutinously, and they are they that testify of Me, and yet ye will not tome unto
Me—than taken thus: Search ye the Seriptures, for they testify of Me, and ye will
not come to Me. Besides, consider—1. That Christ is speaking to the doctors of
the Sanhedrim, the most acute, diligent, and curious searchers of the Scripture of all
the nation. Men that made that their glory and employment; and howsoever it
was their arrogancy that they thought their skill in Scripture more than indeed it
was, yet was their diligence and scrutinousness in it real and constant even to
admiration. It was exceedingly in fashion among the nation to be great Scripture
men, but especially the great masters of the Sanhedrim were reputed as the very
foundations of the law and pillars of instruction, as Maimony styles them in the
treatise ‘‘Mamrim,” cap. i. And therefore it cannot be-proper to think that Christ
in this clause sets them to the study of the Scripture, upon which they spent all
their wits and time already, as confessing their studiousness, yet showeth them how
unprofitably they did it and to little purpose. 2, They did exceeding copiously and
accurately observe and take up the prophecies in Scripture that were of the Messias,
and though they missed in expounding some particulars concerning Him, yet did
they well enough know that the Scriptures did testify of Him abundantly. 3. The
word that is used, goevydre, which betokeneth a narrow search, seemeth to be in-
tended purposely to answer the word 717, which they themselves attribute to
themselves in their unfolding of the Scriptures. (J. Lightfoot, D.D.) Search the
Scriptures :—I. WHAT ARE WE TO UNDERSTAND BY THE ScripruRES? 1. Man had
at first as perfect a knowledge of God as was necessary for him (Eccles. vii. 29). 2.
This knowledge was impaired by the fall, so that a Divine revelation became
requisite for his instruction in duty and the way and means to happiness. 3. Herea
God revealed His will to Adam (Gen. iii, 15). 4. This was handed down by tradition
for 2,500 years, and the long lives of the patriarchs preserved it incorrupt. Methu-
saleh lived 243 years with Adam, and 98 with Shem, who lived 50 years with Isaac.
5. Man’s life being shortened, God wrote His law by Moses (Psa. xc. 10). 6. For the
clearing of it He inspired prophets continually (Heb. i.1; Numb. xxvii. 21). 7. When
Christ came He inspired others to record His works and doctrine (chap. xiv. 26). 8.
Hence the Scripture is contained in the books of the Old and New Testaments. (1)
The Old in number thirty-nine, which the Jews reduced to thirty-two, and they
divide them in this manner: (a) The Pentateuch. (6) The Prophets. (c) The
Hagiograpba, (2) The New Testament consisting of (a) Gospels, (b) Acts, (c)
Hpistles, (d) Apocalypse. 9, These are all that make up the canon; and that the
Apocrypha is no part thereofis plain (Heb. i. 1; 2 Pet. i. 20, 21; Eph. ii, 20). (a)
Malachi was the last prophet. (b) From reason. They are neither of the Old nor
New Testaments, in many places they contradict both, and they do not speak as»
from God. (c) From the Fathers. II. WHY ARE WE TO SEARCH THE ScrIPTURES? 1,
Because they are the Word of God (2 Tim. iii. 16; 1 Pet. i. 20, 21). (1) Probably—
(a) From their antiquity. (b) The simplicity of the penmen (Exod. xxxii.; Numb.
xi. 11-14, xii, 3). (c) Their low quality (Amos vii. 14; Matt. ix. 9; Acts iv. 13),
(2) Their high doctrine as Trinity, Creation, Fall, Incarnation, &e. (e) Fulfilment
of prophecy. Gen. iii. 15 was given 4,000 years before its fulfilment: Gen. xii, 3
almost 2,000; Gen. xv. 13, 14, 400. So Dan. ix. 24; Gen. xlix. 10. (jf) Their
speaking with so much majesty and authority (1 Cor. i. 17). (g) Their efficacy
and power to convert (Psa. xix. 7,8; Heb. iv. 12). (h) The hatred of wicked men
against them (John xv. 19). (2) Certainly—(a) If this be not God’s word there is
none. (b) God hath attested it by miracles. (c) If they were not from God, then
either from Satan or man. Not from Satan, for they destroy his kingdom (James
iv. 7). Not from men; good men would not cheat the world, bad men would not
condemn themselves, (3) Theuse. If the Scriptures are the Word of God, then—
(2) Here is terror to the wicked (Isa. xlvili. 22). (b) Comfort to the godly (Matt. y.


cuaP. v.] ST. JOHN. 471
ee EE NE a a eee ee ee eee ee
2-4). (c) Counsel to all, Wherefore: Reverence them; believe them; prize
them (Psa. xix. 10; Prov. ii. 14, 15); be thankful for them; conform your lives to
them; delight in reading them (Psa. i. 2; xix. 10). 2. Because they contain all
things necessary to be known and believed, explicitly or implicity ; which appears
(1) from Scripture. (a) God is their Author, and therefore they are like Himself—
perfect (2 Tim. iii. 16). (b) They furnish the man of God unto all good works
(2 Tim. iii, 17; Psa. xix. 7). (c) They contain the whole counsel of God (Deut. iv. 2,
xii. 82; Rev. xxii. 18, 19; Gal. i. 8,9). (d) Christ and His apostles taught nothing
but Scripture (Luke xxiv. 27; Acts xvii. 2, xxvi. 22). (2) From reason. If all
things necessary are not in Scripture, then there is something which I have no
certainty of, and then the Scriptures would be in vain (John xx. 21). III. Anz aun
BOUND TO SEARCH THE Scriptures? Yes. 1. God commands all (Deut. >-0-6:¢ ba eas BI
Col. iii. 16). 2. God commends it (Acts xvii. 11; 2 Cor. i. 138; 2 Tim. iii. 15). 3.
They were written to be read of all (Rom. xv. 4); and were, therefore, first
written in the vulgar tongues. 4. The knowledge of the Scriptures keeps from
error (Matt. xxii. 29). 5. All are bound to mind their salvation. IV. How must
WE SEARCH THE ScripruREs? 1. With reverence and devotion. 2. With attention
and understanding (Acts viii. 30). 3. With affection (Acts ii, 37). 4. With fear
(2 Kings xxii, 11-13). 5. With faith (Heb. iv. 2). 6. With delight (Psa. i. 2;
cxix. 103). 7. Toa right and good end. 8. Constantly (Psa. i. 2). V. Uses. 1.
Reproof to such as neglect to search the Scriptures. 2. The highest encouragement
and motive thereunto. (1) There is none so ignorant but this will make him wise
(2 Tim. iii. 15; Psa. xix. 7). (2) There is no heart so sinful but this will cleanse it
(Psa. xix. 7). 3. No soul so dejected, but here it may find comfort (Psa. xciv. 19).
4. It is horrible ingratitude not to read what God hath written, and we shall have
to answer for it. (Bp. Beveridge.) Search the Scriptures :—I. WHAT ARE THE
Scriptures? 1. The Word of God. In the sense in which the words of man are
his, and reveal his thoughts, will, purposes, the Scriptures are the Word of God.
He is their Author, and they rest on His authority. This is opposed—(1) To the
Deistical. (2) To the Rationalistic. (3) To the Quaker views. 2. From this it
follows that they are (1) infallible; (2) holy; (3) powerful ; (4) consistent ; (5) the
appointed means of salvation. We are enlightened, begotten, sanctified, and saved
by the truth. 3. They are complete, containing all the extant revelation of God.
4. They are plain, so that every one can learn for himself what God says. I. Ws
SHOULD KNOW WHAT WE SEEK WHEN WE SEARCH. We should search—l. For know-
ledge of God, Christ, truth, duty. 2. For consolation. 3. For holiness. III. How
ARE WE TO SEARCH THE Scriptures? 1. Reverently and submissively, with fixed
determination to believe every truth they affirm. Everything is right which they
affirm, and wrong which they condemn. We are not to sit in judgment on
Scripture. 2. With diligence. (1) Studying them much. (2) Consecutively.
(3) What they teach on particular subjects. (4) Availing ourselves of every aid;
fixing right principles, and availing ourselves of all subsidiary means. 3. With
dependence ; convinced that without Divine guidance we shall obtain neither right
speculative knowledge, nor right spiritual views. 4. Therefore with prayer previous
and continued. 5. With self-application. (C. Hodge, D.D.) Search the Scrip-
tures :—I. THE DIRECTION. 1. Not merely possess. 2. Nor survey. 3. But search as
the woman for the lost piece of silver. 11. THE SUBJECT OF SEARCH. The Scriptures
not merely theirs, but ours. 1. Between sixty and seventy writings, composed at
intervals of hundreds of years, yet with one chain of truth, one message. 2. The
original source of even the nineteenth century’s history, biography, and science. 3.
The only guide for the soul of man. III. Tae oBJECT OF THE SEARCH. 1. May we not
search for scicntific truth (Acts xvii. 26). 2. For our own family recordsfrom Adam
to John. 3. For the Divine message to our individual soul. 4. More especially for
the life and the testimony here mentioned. In, through, and by the Scriptures,
eternal life is to be had. Life is the joy of every living creature, therefore search
for it in the Scriptures that reveal it by testifying of Him who is “ the Life.” IY.
Mernop or szanca. 1. Fairly, without foregone prepossession. 2. Prayerfully.
3. Regularly. 4. Comprehensively. (Pulpit Analyst.) Search the Scriptures :—-
I Wuy. 1. Because it is Divine in its origin. (1) This it claims to be (Heb. i.1, 2;
2 Pet. i. 21; 2 Tim. iv. 16). (2) This it can be proved to be from its fulfilled
prophecies and its unique teaching. 2. Because it gives us correct ideas of our
condition. (1) Our sinfulness. (2) The possibility and way of our salvation. 3.
Because it makes us acquainted with our enemies and our dangers. (1) It exposes
the wiles of the devil. (2) It furnishes us with weapons. (3) It throws light on our


472 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. ’ (cHaP. v%.
Be ee SS TEE aI’
dark and perilovs way. II. How? 1. With prayer. Prayer gives insight to the
searcher, and opens up the depths. 2. With an upright intention of submitting to
the will of God. Not going with the desire to nourish preoccupied fancies; nor as
a controversialist for polemical weapons, but to know what God has said. 3.
Regularly and diligently. (1) By ourselves. (2) With our families. (T. Snell.)
Search the Scriptures :—1. Christ’s Scriptures were those of the Old Testament. :
2. Of these Christ said, ‘‘ They contain eternal life.” Hence—(1) If you admit the
New you must accept the Old, for Christ endorses it. (2) In the New it is the same

truth and life as in the Old. 3. What a far better Bible is ours. Two witnesses to

one Christ—first in figure, then in historical reality. 4. Remember what the Bible

really is. God in His love desired to make Himself known to His creatures; so He

gave His Son, “the express image of His Person.” How could we know the Son?

Only by the Holy Ghost, who testifies of Him in the Scriptures. The Scriptures—

I. MaxE KNowN OURSELVES. With this end, St. James saysthey area mirror. There

we can see our real selves. II. Revea seur’s antipote. Christin His saving mission

as promised, and as come, and as coming again. III, PRovIDE AN ORACLE TO RESOLVE
pousts; to check difficult questions; to show daily duty. IV. Renp THE VIEW oF
FutuRITy. Conclusion: How many of you could pass an examination in the facts

and truths of the Bible? Shall a soldier not know the articles of war? Shall a
scholar not know his grammar? ‘‘ Search the Scriptures.’ (J. Vaughan, M.A.)
Children’s sermon :—The Bible means the book, the book of books, Scriptures mean
writings, the marks them out from all others. Search means hunt, dig. Why
search? Because—I. THey aRE THE WorD oF Gop. When you are absent from

home you write to your parents, and although they do not see you they know from

your handwriting, signature, and expressions that it is yours. God takes strange
methods sometimes to convince men that the Bible comes from Him. A young

man, an infidel, had to carry a large sum of money through a forest. He lost his

way, and was benighted. He came to a cottage and obtained shelter. The owner

was a rough-looking man, which made him afraid for his treasure. So he resolved

to stay up all night and guard it. By and by the man reached down the Bible,

upon which a load was taken from the traveller’s mind. He knew he was safe in

the house of a Bible reader. This led him to be a Christian. Il. Tory maxes
KNowN A Saviour. A pious widow had a large family, all of whom became
followers of the Saviour but one, a wild lad who went to sea. His mother gave him

a Testament, and wrote his name and her own on the back. The ship was lost,

and years passed by without any tidings. Eventually a sailor begged at the widow’s

door, and gave an account of his life. He had been shipwrecked, and with another

had been cast on a desert island. His companion read day after day in a little book

his mother had given him. ‘‘He wept a good deal over his sins, and gave himself up

to the Saviour and soon afterwards died, and gave me the book.” The book was
produced, and it was the very one the widow had given to her boy. III. Tury
TEACH US How TO Live. 1. As ever in the sight of God. ‘Thou God seest me.”

2. To be obedient and useful. IV. Tay show us THE WAY TO HEAVEN. (E. Woods.)

The duty and advantage of searching the Scriptures :—The supreme Authority in
teligion here sweeps away (1) the dishonourable reflections of the infidel; (2) the
servile restraints of the superstitious ; (3) the wild fancies of the enthusiast. For

how can Christianity be accused of conspiring to keep the world in ignorance when

its injunction is, Read and investigate, making it therefore a duty to learn to read

and to reason? How can it be charged with enslaving the mind by delivering it

over to priesteraft, when its Author commanded a promiscuous audience to search

for themselves? How can it be charged with fanaticism, when we are charged to

bring all our sentiments and feelings to an inspired standard to be regulated? No!

the most formidable foe to ignorance, and the most active stimulant to knowledge;

that which best secures for the awakened mind the full enjoyment of its rights and

the freedom of its inquiries, and the best safeguard against the perversion of our
reason is the Bible. I. To ram Bisix Christ points while He says, ‘‘ Search,” &c.

1. The Scriptures are a mine of wealth. 2. We should therefore search

them as men digging for hid treasure. (1) This suggests that its discoveries do

not all lie on the surface to be obtained by a casual glance. Books partake of

the qualities of their author, If the mind be profound, so will be the writing.

What depths then may be expected in a volume inspired by God. (2) Yet with all

this depth there is the utmost simplicity. The Scriptures first instruct our childhood

and to the last engage the mature reflections of old age; before we can understand

any other book we may read this to profit; and after we have exhausted all others,


CHAP. V.] ST. JOHN. 473


we still find something here to learn. (3) But if searching implies difficulty, then
careful and frequent perusal is required; and this should be accompanied with the
comparison of one part of Scripture with another, and with the use of every avail-
able help and with prayer. (4) This searching does not preclude hearing. II. The
Saviour here points To oURSELVES and reminds us of our professed principles. ‘‘In
these Scriptures ye think ye have eternal life.’”” He appeals—1. To the principle that
in the Scriptures we have eternal life. How fondly we cling to life; yet we must
soon part with it. We aspire, therefore, to a continuance after this present state,
and nothing short of eternity can satisfy our cravings. What then will discover
and guarantee this to us? Not the speculations of reason, but the revelation of
God. This discloses to us the duration and blessedness of eternal life. What a
motive then to search it to find this pearl of great price. 2. To persons, for ‘you
yourselves judge that you have eternal life in the Scriptures”’: (1) to those who
neglect it altogether ; (2) to those who keep it as a gilded toy ; (3) to those who only
read it on Sundays; (4) to those who pay no more honour to it than they do to
their catechism, prayer book, or favourite author; (5) to those who study it super-
ficially or partially, or for the support of their own private views. III. The Saviour
here points ro Hisrir as He says, “ These Scriptures testify of Me.” Note—l.
The fact that we have here the testimony of Jesus. This is declared to be ‘‘ the
spirit of prophecy,” or the soul of revelation. As the single principle of gravitation
throws light on the whole system of the universe, so the discovery of Christ and
His salvation explains the whole record of Scripture. 2. The argument which
thence arises—(1) That the Scriptures by testifying of Christ afford us eternal life.
He whom they reveal came not only to convince us of the fact and the grandeur of
our immortality, “I came that ye might have life,” &c. (2) That the Scriptures
deserve to be diligently searched. What folly for a man who yearns for heaven to
neglect the only means of getting there! (J. Bennett, D.D.) The necessity of
searching the Scriptures :—Truth must be sought, and that with care and diligence,
before we find-it. Jewels do not use to lie upon the surface of the earth. High-
ways are seldom paved with gold. What is worth our finding calls for the greatest
search. . . . Prejudice is the wrong bias of the soul, that effectually keeps it from
coming near the mark of truth; nay, sets it at the greatest distancefromit. They
are few in the world, that look after truth with their own eyes; most make use of
spectacles of other’s making, which causes them so seldom to behold the proper
lineaments in the face of truth; which the several tinctures from education, autho-
rity, custom, and predisposition do exceedingly hinder men from discerning (John
vii. 48; St. Luke xi.-52). (Bp. Stilling/leet.) Blank pages of the Bible :—1 dare
say none of you ever saw a kind of ink used for secret writing. Common ink, you
know, leaves a very plain mark on the paper; but this ink of which I am
speaking fades away directly it is used, and the paper seems to be blank. But if
that sheet of paper is held to the fire, the writing comes out, and can be read
easily. Now to a great many people the pages of the Bible, especially of the Old
Testament, seem all blank, without any beauty or interest., But if you learn to
read God’s word with care and intelligence, above all, if you pray to God to show
you the true meaning, the pages which seemed blank before will be full of interest
for you. (H. J. W. Buxton, M.A.) Practical searching :—Search the Scrip-
tures, not as thou ‘wouldst make a concordance, but an application; as thou
wouldst search a wardrobe, not to make an inventory of it, but to find in it
something fit for thy wearing. (J. Donne, D.D.) Scriptural investigation -—
1. The Sadducees ‘erred, not knowing the Scriptures,” and this is the source of
error all time through. 2. Christ made the Scriptures His constant rule and guide,
and so, therefore, should we. I. Ir 1s EVERY MAN’S DUTY. TO SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES.
Gcd’s purpose in vouchsafing the Scriptures was in consequence of our fall, and the
necessity of a new birth in Christ Jesus; and their characteristic feature is to lead
men to a practical knowledge of these two great truths. If man had continued in a
state of innocence he would not have needed an outward revelation, because God’s law
was originally written on his heart ; but since his fall, without such a revelation he
could never have known how God could be-reconciled. This revelation, then, is
suited to his wants as a fallen creature, and that is sufficient evidence of its divinity.
The infidel desires a sign, but no sign shall be given him but this, and if this is
not enough, he would not believe though one rose from the dead. II. Some surr-
ABLE INSTRUCTION WHEREBY THE SCRIPTURES MAY BE STUDIED WITH PROFIT. 1, Have
in view the one end for which they were written, to show the way of salvation
through Christ. Always look for Christ ; in Old Testament prophecies, &c., and in


Rie


474 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. v.


ss
New Testament teaching. 2. Search with a humble disposition, for God hides its
meaning from the wise in their own eyes, and reveals it to babes who desire “ the
sincere milk of the word that they may grow thereby.” 3. Search with a sincere
intention to put in practice what you read. ‘If any man will do His will,” &e.
But to those who read without a desire to keep the commandments, but only for
amusement or cavil, God will never reveal Himself although they search to the end
of time. 4. Make an application of everything you read, and this will make “all
Scripture profitable for reproof,” &c. 5. Labour to obtain the influence of their
Divine Author. It was for the want of this that the disciples fell into frequent
and inexcusable mistakes. Therefore begin by praying that the Spirit who guides
into all truth may assist you, and close by praying that He may engraft the truth
on your heart. 6. Read diligently, thoroughly, daily. (H. J. Newbery, M.A.)
The inexhaustible treasures of Scripture:—In the Dresden gallery of royal gems
there is a silver egg: touch a spring, and it opens, disclosing a golden chicken ;
touch the chicken, and it opens, disclosing a crown studded with gems; touch the
crown, and it opens, disclosing a magniticent diamond ring. So it is with the
Bible; as we study it, we touch successive springs, disclosing exhaustless treasures.
(G. D. Boardman.) The importance of Scripture study :—The Bible should be
diligently studied because of—I. Irs or1e1n. Divine (2 Tim. iii.10). IL. Iv 1s rou-
LOWED BY THE QUICKENING Spirit oF Gop. III. Iv Is FITTED YOR ALL PEOPLE. 1.
There is no nation wherever located or however educated for whom it has not just
what they need. 2. It isadapted to all varieties of moral development. IV. THERE
IS NOTHING THAT CAN GIVE SO MUCH LIGHT TO THE WORLD, 1. It is like the sun; all
other lights are like candles, oil, gas, or electricity. 2. Its effects, like those of the
sun, are to kindle all other lights. 3. Like the sun it gives life, beauty, &c. V.
ITS AMPLITUDE REQUIRES CLOSE AND PERSEVERING ATTENTION. Who can study a
picture-gallery or inspect a building to profit with one visit? The miner requires
years before he can exhaust the mine. SotheBible. VI. Ir wit assist MoRE THAN
ANY OTHER BOOK IN FORMING A CLEAR, TERSE LITERARY STYLE. The greatest writers
aud speakers have been indebted to it. VII. THe BrsuE Is A LIBRARY IN ITSELF.
The fewness of the books is noobjection. An old doctor uses few medicines. VIII.
THE STUDY OF THE BIBLE WILL INTRODUCE YOU TO Goop sociETy. Enoch, Abraham,
Moses, Elijah, our blessed Lord, &c. 1X. Tue Brste is rwmuraBue. 1. In doctrine.
2.In language. 3.In influence. Persecutors have destroyed it, and infidels argued
it out of existence; but it still lives and they are gone. X. Iv 1s INEXHAUSTIBLE.
All physical growth has a law of limitation, but there is no limit to the growth of
the soul. For the expanding needs of our spiritual nature the Bible has an infinite
supply. You can master every other book; the Bible never. XI. Ir rresriFiEs oF
Gop. XII. Ir REVEALS ETERNAL LIFE. Sin is the germ of death; the Word plants
the seed of never failing vitality. (H.M. Scudder, D.D.) How we should study
the Bible :—I. Pensonauty. Commentaries and lesson-helps are sometimes a hin-
drance. We must do our own thinking, evolving for ourselves what God has
involved. 1. We must compare Scripture with Scripture, for the Bible is its own
best commentator. The Gospels supplement each other; the Acts explain the
Epistles ; both covenants form one Divine unity. 2. Master the principles which
be at the foundation of Hebrew poetry and prophecy, particularly the principle of
parallelism ; for while our rhyme is that of sound, the Hebrew is that of thought.
3. Learn the geography and natural history of the Bible. A true map is in a sense
a part of the Bible. 4. We must put forth all our mental powers to perceive acutely
conceive accurately, reason closely, and express clearly. We must learn how to
trace analogies, bring out real points, follow the outline of arguments, detect links
and observe general drifts. 5. We ought to summon the aid of imagination to
realize actors and scenes. 6. But let us beware of the old sin of letter worship;
that killeth, only the Spirit giveth life. Seek the essential under the incidental,
the central under the superficial, the eternal under the transcient. II. Humpty;
with docility of spirit; stripping ourselves of preconceptions; searching not for the
confirmation of our opinions but for the truth of God. Only the pure in heart
those of unmixed pellucid motives shall see God. “The meek He will guide in
judgment.” III. PRAYERFULLY. Scholarship is: but a telescope, and telescopes are
of no use to the blind or in the dark. The spirit must illuminate our understand-
ings and guide into all the truth. IV. Exrcuriveny. Do the truth as well as study
if; in fact, this is the only way of knowing and bélieving it. (G. D. Boardinan
D.D.) Bible study :—The Bible should be studied—I. Criticanuy. We are all
possessed of judgment and reason, and God intends us to employ them. A large


CHAP. V.) ST. JOHN. 475


number of passages have come to be used in a conventional sense, which is not their
real sense. It is the latter we ought to find. Make, then, the Greek Testament an
object of study; or, if not, a good commentary. II. Consecutiventy. We do not
do the Bible justice if we read a scrap here and a scrap there. The Epistle to the
Romans, ¢.g., as ali letters, should be read straight on. If you can only master a
few verses keep to them, but do not let the chain be broken. III. Occastonauxy.
Carry a little Testament about with you to refresh you as you take a glass of water
when you are thirsty between meals. . IV. Toricanuy. Take the subject of justifi-
cation and see what Paul says, and then James, and then John. Don’t be afraid
of controverted subjects. Work them out for yourself, not from treatises or ser-
mons, but God’s Word. V. ExperimENTALLY. When you read a passage ask
yourself. With whatlessonam I impressed? Don’t be content with being interested,
try and get something for edification. VI. Devortonanyy. If we want a real feast
let us go down upon our knees, spread the Bible open before us, and realize that
God is speaking to us. This is where the Jews failed in spite of all their critical
care and reverence, ‘Ye have not His word abiding in you.” Many people use
their Bibles as superstitiously as any Chinaman uses his praying machine. ‘‘I
have read my chapter this morning, and my conscience is satisfied.” But
how much good has it done you? Just as much as counting the beads of
a rosary; i.é., none, unless you have found in it a living Saviour. (W. H.
M. H. Aitken, M.A.) The testimony of the Scriptures to Christ :—I. As making
atonement for sin, and thus providing THE GRoUND oF Lire. II. As procuring
the influences of the Spirit, and thus providing THE mEaANs or Lire. III. As ex-
hibiting a perfect humanity, and thus providing THz mopxL or tue. IV. As over-
coming death, and thus providing rue TRIumeH or Lire. (W. H. Van Doren, D.D.)
How to study the Bible:—To some the Bible is uninteresting and unprotitable
because they read too fast. Among the insects which subsist on the sweet sap of
flowers there are two very different classes. One is remarkable for its imposing
plumage, which shows in the sunbeams like the dust of gems; and as you watch
its jaunty gyrations over the fields, and its minuet dance from flower to flower, you
cannot help admiring its graceful activity, for it is plainly getting over a good deal
of ground. But in the same field there is another worker, whose brown vest and
strong straightforward flight may not have arrested your eye. His fluttering neigh-
bour darts down here and there, and sips elegantly wherever he can find a drop of
ready nectar; but this dingy plodder makes a point of alighting everywhere, and
wherever he alights he either finds honey or makes it. If the flower-cup be deep,
he goes down to the bottom; if its dragon mouth be shut, he thrusts its lips
asunder; and if the nectar be peculiar or recondite, he explores all about till he
discovers it, and then, having ascertained the knack of it, joyful as one who has
found great spoil, he sings his way down into its luscious recesses. His rival of the
painted velvet wing has no patience for such dull and long-winded details. But
what is the end? Why, the one died last October along with the flowers; the
other is warm in his hive to-night amidst the fragrant stores which he gathered
beneath the bright beams of summer. To which do you belong ?2—the butterflies
or the bees? Do you search the Scriptures or only skim them? (J. Hamilton,
D.D.) The Bible to be studied often and lovingly :—Lord Bacon tells us of a
certain bishop who used to bathe regularly twice every day, and on being asked
why he bathed thus often, replied, ‘‘ Because I cannot conveniently do it three
times.” If those who loved the Scriptures were asked why they read the Bible so
often, they might honestly reply, ‘‘ Because we cannot find time to read them
oftener.” (C. H. Spurgeon.) Superstitious use of the Bible :—The Bible is some-
times used as a book of magic. Many open it at random, expecting to be guided by
the first passage that they see, as Peter was told to open the mouth of the first fish
that came up and he would find in it a piece of money. A missionary of high
standing was cured of this superstition by consulting the Bible in an important
matter of Christian duty, and the passage that met his gaze was, ‘‘ Hell from
beneath is moved to meet thee at thy coming.” (J. M. Buckley, D.D.) The
advantage of unfettered Bivle study :—It was a glorious hour in England when
the Bible was unchained, when every man could hear and read in his own tongue,
wherein he was born, the history it told of the doings of God with man. Freedom
sprang to light wherever the book went, and at its touch imagination stirred and
awoke to life. A fresh world of thought and feeling, the world of the Oriental
heart, opened out its riches to the poet and the philosopher. New blood streamed
through the veins of English literature. Not only intellectual, but political free


476 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. %


dom deepened wherever its words were heard and its principles received. It gave
new force to the struggle against tyranny. It gave fresh impulse to political
progress. It made cruelty, injustice, the oppression of the weak, the corruption
of the great and the small, more hateful and intolerable. It initiated reform ; it
was the standard of all noble revolution. Our civil freedom—accelerating as it
goes—has always taken much of its impulse from the book of true liberty, true
fraternity, true equality. And it is not only intellectual freedom or political free-
dom which have gained their living force from this book. Higher than the
imagination of the poet, the intellect of the philosopher, and the patriotism of the
citizen, is the immortal spirit which abides in man. The spiritual being of man
lay crippled and unmoved in England, like the lame beggar of old at the beautiful
gate of the temple. When the Bible was put into the hands of every man in the
country, it came, like Peter and John of old, to the heart of England, and pro-
claimed the gospel of Chyist Jesus. Straightway the soul of England received
strength, and entered into the temple of spiritual freedom, walking, and leaping,
and praising God. Tar and wide the book penetrated into the homes of England,
and the fetters which had been bound on the spirits of men mouldered into the dust
from whence they came. Religious freedom was the Bible’s child. (S. A. Brooke,
M.A.) The Bible interpreted by love :—You have heard of the story of the blind
girl who, when her fingers became callous, cut her finger-tips to make them more
sensitive. This, however, only made them harder, and then she could not read her
Bible at all. At last, after bitter weeping, she kissed her Bible a farewell. To her
intense joy, that kiss revealed to her the fact that she could read the raised words
- with a touch of her lips. Ever after she kissed into her soul that precious Word.
(H. M. Scudder, D.D.) Christ in the Bible :—I know that men sneer at the idea
that Christ is traceable everywhere in the Scriptures. A wealthy man builds and
furnishes a house for the reception of his much-loved bride. When she enters it
she finds that all the rooms and all the furniture, from the least to the greatest,
bear signs that she was thought of. Will she sit patiently under a sneer at her
acknowledgment of the forethought of the bridegroom for her needs and tastes?
Will she not point out the proofs, above and below, in common and peculiar things,
and reassert that she sees the signs of his perfect knowledge and love everywhere?
And shall we be frightened by a sneer from affirming that God, who built up all the
books of the Bible, saw His end, and made reference to that end in every stage of
revelation—that Christ is everywhere ? Does not our Lord support the idea when
He says to the Pharisees, ‘‘ Search the Scriptures, for these are they that testify of
Me”? And ‘ Ye will not come to Me that ye may have life’ is a mournful form in
which He explains their utter misconception of the Scriptures. May that saying
not be applicable to us! Let us read the Bible to find Christ. (D. G. Watt, M.A.)
Christ in the Bible :—There was once a famous artist who made a wonderful shield
and worked his own name so cleverly into it, that it could not be removed without
destroying the shield. The Bible is like that shield, and the name of Jesus is so
worked into it that we find it everywhere. Have you ever seen a photographic
artist take one of those sun-pictures which are now so common? Well, at first
there was no picture, only a piece of glass with a kind of white cloud upon it. But
presently, as the artist poured certain chemicals upon it, a picture began to come
out of the mist; first one feature, then another, till you saw the likeness of a
friend. The Old Testament Scriptures sometimes appear strange and uninteresting
to you; there is a mist over them as it were. But as you study the words, or hear
them explained, gradually new beauties, new features, come out, and you find a
likeness. Whose likeness, my children? ‘The likeness of Jesus Christ. Have you
ever seen a kaleidoscope? When you hold it to your eye and turn it round you
see a number of pieces of coloured glass which form all kinds of beautiful patterns
such as stars, and crowns, and fountains, and flowers. The Bible is very like &
kaleidoscope. When you look carefully into it, the more you turn over its pages
and study them, the more beautiful things you find there ; and remember that all
these beautiful things will show you something about Jesus. Whether you are
reading in the Old Testament or in the New, whether you study the law or the
prophets, or read about the Judges or the Kings, you will find something about
Jesus. He said, ‘‘ Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of Me.”
Whenever you read your Bible do so with one object—always read looking for J esus
(H. J. Wilmot Buxton.) _ Christ the interpreter of the Bible :—In the vision of the
apocalyptic book sealed with seven seals, one only out of all on earth or in heaven
was able to break the seals and read the scroll: it was He who is alike the Lion of


cnr. v.] ST, JOHN. 477


Judah and the Lamb of God. And He is still the only one who is able to interpret
His own volume. We must consult Him, then, if we would understand His Word.
Search the Scriptures :—It is said of some of the mines of Cornwall that the deeper
they are sunk the richer they prove; and though some lodes have been followed a
thousand and even fifteen hundred feet, they have not come to an end. Such is
the Book of God. It is a mine of wealth which can never be exhausted. The
deeper we !sink into it, the richer it becomes. (Charles Graham.) The Bible
worth searching :—There is gold in the rocks which fringe the Pass of the Splugen,
gold even in the stones which mend the roads, but there is too little of it to be
worth extracting. Alas! how like too many books and sermons! Not so the
Scriptures; they are much fine gold; their very dust is precious. Christ the
gem of the Scriptures :—What the pin is when the diamond has dropped from its
setting, that is the Bible when its emotive truths have been taken away. What a
babe’s clothes are when the babe has slipped out of them into death, and the
mother’s arms clasp only raiment, would be the Bible if the Babe of Bethlehem
and the truths of deep-heartedness that clothed His life should slip out of it.
The Bible handy :—Dear friends, fly to this comfort with speed in every time of
trouble ; get to be familiar with God’s Word, that you may do so. I have found it
helpful to carry ‘‘ Clarke’s Precious Promises” in my pocket, so as to refer to ii in
the hour of trial. If you go into the market, and are likely to do a ready-money
business, you always take a cheque-book with you ; so carry precious promises with
you, that you may plead the word which suits your case. I have turned to promises
for the sick when I have been of that number, or to promises to the poor, the
despondent, the weary, and such like, according to my own condition, and I have
always found a Scripture fitted to my case. I do not want a promise made to the
sick when I am perfectly well; I do not want balm for a broken heart when my
soul is rejoicing in the Lord; but it is very handy to know where to lay your hand
upon suitable words of cheer when necessity arises. Thus the external comfort of
the Christian is the Word of God. (C. H. Spurgeon.). The test of truth:—A
man offers you a note. You are not quite sure about it. You say to him, “I
don’t know. Hold on; I’ll let you know in half an hour™; and away you run,
round the corner. Your lawyer lives near by. You show him the note. ‘‘Sucha
one offered me this. I thought I’d just speak to you about it. What would you
do?” ‘Better have nothing to do with it,” says the lawyer, shaking his head.
You run back, and say to the man, “I’ve concluded not to take that note.”’ Then
some transaction is urged upon you. -You hesitate. You don’t know exactly whether
it will stand in law. ‘ Wait,” you say, ‘ wait a minute—I can’t decide yet”; and
away you go, round the corner. ‘ Oh, yes,” says your lawyer, ‘‘ that’s all perfectly
right and safe” ; and back you run, and the matter is settled. He is the “ man of
your counsel.” Just in this way should you consult the Bible in regard to all the
actions of your life. The Scriptures without comment :—There is a story told
concerning John Bunyan’s “ Pilgrim’s Progress.” Good Thomas Scott, the com-
mentator, wrote notes to it: he thought the “ Pilgrim’s Progress” a difficult book,
and he would make it clear. A pious cottager in his parish had the book, and she
was reading it when her minister called. He said to her, ‘Oh, I see, you are
reading Bunyan’s ‘ Pilgrim’s Progress.’ Do you understand it?” She answered
innocently enough, “ Oh, yes, sir, I understand Mr. Bunyan very well, and I hope
that one day I shall be able to understand your explanations.” |= The wonders of
Scripture :—The boy holds his ball of twine in his hand, and thinks it is not much,
he can clasp it so easily; but when he begins to unroll it, and his wind-borne kite
mounts higher and higher, till at length that which on the ground was taller than
he is now no bigger than his hand, he is astonished to see how long it is. So there
are little texts which look small in your palm, but, when caught up upon some
experience, they unfold themselves, and stretch out until there is no measuring their
length. (H.W. Beecher.) The Bible first :—A business man sat at his fireside in
the city. Near by him, playing on the floor, was his only child, a beautiful little
boy. It was early in the morning. The day’s task was not begun, and while
waiting for his breakfast the father took up the daily paper to read. The dear child
came and climbed up on his father’s knee, and, laying his hand gently on the
paper, looked lovingly up into his face and said, ‘‘ No, no, papa, Bible first, Bible
first, papa.” Very soon after this dear child was taken sick, and died. ; As that
father stood by the coffin in which his dead darling lay, and when he laid him in
the grave, he seemed to hear his gentle voice repeating those simple words, “No,
no, papa, Bible first.” He never forgot those words. They were ringing in his


=,


478 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHap. ¥.
ee et
ears all the time. He made them the rule of his life. A search warrant :—
‘“What warrant have you to read the Bible for yourself?” was the demand of
another priest of a new convert to the true faith. ‘“‘ Och!” was the answer, ‘ I’ve
a sarch warrant”? (John v. 39). Diligent seeking will be rewarded by joyous
finding :—A friend of mine had been told that the Word of Life was contained
in his Bible. He went quickly home, and he said, ‘‘If it is there, I will find it.”
He began with Genesis, and read on further, until in due course of time
he reached that good evangelical chapter, Isaiah liii. He read carefully until
he came to the words, ‘By His stripes we are healed.” ‘That is it,” said he; “I
have it now; we are healed; I am healed. There is no hoping or wishing, or
‘perhaps,’ or ‘ but,’ or ‘if’—we are healed.” (Dr. Mackay.) Heathen testimony
to the excellence of the Scriptures :—A Hindoo paper, published in Bengal,’speaks as
follows of the excellence of the Bible:—‘‘It is the best and most excellent of all
English books, and there ig not its like in the English language. As every joint of
the sugarcane, from the root to the top, is full of sweetness, so every page of the
Bible is fraught with the most precious instruction. A portion of ths book would
yield to you more of sound morality than a thousand other treatises on the same
subject. In short, if anybody studies the English language with a view to gaining
wisdom, there is not another book which is more worthy of being read than the
Bible.” How to search the Scriptures :—As the apes in the story, who, finding
a glow-worm on a very cold night, took it for a spark of fire, and heaped up sticks
upon it to warm themselves by, but all in vain, so do they lose their labour that, in
the warrantable search of Divine truth, busy themselves about sounds of words and
incoherent Scripture sentences; when, partly from depravedness of mind, partly
from ignorance, partly from instability, suddenness, and haste, they make a snatch,
and run away with that which looks somewhat like the sense of Scripture, and so
deceive their own souls, crying out, like the mathematician in Athens, “ I have found
it, I have found it,’’ when indeed they have found nothing to the purpose nor anything
to the true information of themselves or others in the ways of God and goodness.
Bible facis:—The learned Prince of Granada, heir to the’ Spanish throne, im-
prisoned by order of the Crown lest he should aspire to the sovereignty, was kept
in solitary confinement in the old prison at the Place of Skulls, Madrid. After
thirty-three years in this living tomb death came to his release, and the following
remarkable researches marked with an old nail on the rough walls of his cell, told
how the brain sought employment during those weary years :—‘‘ In the Bible the
werd Lord is found 1,853 times; the word Jehovah 6,855 times, and the word
reverend but once—in Psa. cxi. 9. The 8th verse of Psa. cxvii. is the middle verse
of the Bible. Esther viii. 9 is the longest verse, and John xi. 35 the shortest. In
Psa. evii. the 8th, 15th, 21st, and 31st verses are alike. Each verse of Psa. exxxyvi.
ends alike. No words with more than six syllables are found in the Bible.
Isa. xxk&vii, and 2 Kings xix. are alike. The word girl occurs only in
Joel iii, 3. There are found in both Testaments 3,586,483 letters, 773,693
words, 31,373 verses, 1,179 chapters, and 66 books.” (W. Bazendale.)
Origin of the Bible Society : Mary Jones was the daughter of a poor weaver
living in a humble dwelling at the foot of Cader Idris. She was born in 1782,
and early in life began to learn her father’s trade. She attended a Sunday-school,
and was soon distinguished by her readiness to learn and repeat large portions
of the Word of God. As yet, although there had been many editions of the
Welsh Bible published, it was an exception to see a copy in a poor man’s house in
Wales. The nearest Bible was two miles distant from Mary Jones’s house. She
had permission to read it as often as she chose. Meanwhile she carefully set aside
all her pence, determined if possible to buy a Bible of her own. After years of
saving she succeeded in making up the sum necessary to buy a copy of the Welsh
Bible. She ascertained that Bala was the nearest town in which a copy might be
got; and it was twenty-five miles away. But nothing daunted the girl set otf, and
walked all the way foot-bare, carrying her boots in a bag in order to put them on
just before entering Bala. She arrived at Bala late in the evening—too late to see
Mr. Charles, from whom the Bible was to be had. In the morning she went to Mr.
Charles, and he was touched by her simple story. He said: ‘I am sorry that you
have come all the way to obtain a Bible, seeing I have no copy to give you. All the
Bibles I received from London have been sold months since, excepting one. or two
which I have promised to keep for friends.” Mary Jones wept bitterly. The dis-
appointment was too much for her. But Mr. Charles could not withstand her tears

and he at last gave her one of the promised Bibles, Mary placed the Bible in her


CHAP. v.] | ST. JOHN. 479


bag, and bade good-bye to the good Mr. Charles, feeling grateful to him for letting
her have what she considered the greatest of treasures. Her visit to Mr. Charles left
a lasting impression on both. Often afterwards did Mr. Charles refer to that touch-
ing incident to convince his English friends of the intense craving of the Welsh
nation for the word of life. In December, 1802, Mr. Charles laid before the Com-
mittee of the Religious Tract Society the pressing needs of his country ; and related
the story of Mary Jones. The story awakened sympathy in every breast, and it was
then resolved, not only to have a Bible Society for Wales, but a Bible Society for all
nations, This was the origin of the Bible Society. Who would have thought that
little Mary Jones’s journey to Bala would have supplied the important link which,
until then, had been wanting in the chain of events before the Bible Society could
spring into being? Mary lived to an old age. The Bible she bought at Bala was
by her bedside when she passed away. She no longer required to read it. She knew
all its promises and consolations by heart. This Bible has recently been handed
over to the British and Foreign Bible Society with the formation of which it has so
sacred a connection. An open Bible is engraved on her tombstone with the words,
“‘ The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, but the word of our God shall stand for
ever.” Then come these words :—‘‘ Mary, widow of Thomas Lewis, weaver,
Bryncrwg, who died December 28th, 1864. Aged 82. This tombstone was erected
by contributions of the Calvinistic Methodists in the district, and other friends, in
respect to her memory, as the Welsh girl, Mary Jones, who walked from Abergwyno-
lwyn to Bala, in the year 1802, when sixteen years of age, to procure a Bible of the
Rev. Thomas Charles, B.A. A circumstance which led to the establishment of the
British and Foreign Bible Society.” (Clerical Anecdotes.) Dr, Johnson’s dying
counsel :—Dr. Johnson said to a young gentleman who visited him on his deathbed,
“Young man, attend to the voice of one who has possessed a certain degree of fame
in the world, and who is about to stand before his Maker. Read the Bible every day of
your life.” (W. Baxendale.) Ye will not come unto Me, that ye might have life.—
Man’s happiness dependent on his coming to Christ :—You have read the lives of wise
and good men, and yet without any conception that they were anything else, and
that with all their excellences they had corresponding defects. Now, if Jesus Christ
was a mere man you would have the same impression on reading His memoirs.
But this is not the case. Who can read our text and feel that Christ was merely a
wise and good man? I. THE FINAL SALVATION OF MAN IS MADE DEPENDENT ON HIS
comine To Curist. 1. Christ is a unique Being who exists in a condition unlike any
other, not a condition of simple humanity or simple Divinity, but one who combines
the attributes of both. 2. To sustain the character of Saviour it was necessary that
He should suffer the just for the unjust, and that He should have the power to
remit sin and confer eternal life. 3. To secure the benefits the sinner is required to
come to Christ, not corporeally, speculatively, but by personal application of en-
lightened faith, 4. This Christ required in the days of His flesh, and He requires
it now. (1) There must be an acknowledgment of His power to confer the blessing
—just the same as when you apply for a favour to your friend. You insult him if
you disbelieve in his power. (2) You must renounce your trust in everything else
but your own need and His clemency. Does the pauper require a little wealth to
qualify him for asking relief? 5. Coming in contact accidentally or designedly
with others sometimes leads to unanticipated and important results. Chance meet-
ings have been full of weal or woe. But no meeting was ever fraught with such
effects as the meeting of a sinner with his Saviour. Take the case of the impotent
man; that of any saved man. (1) Internal: guilt removed, conscience allayed,
passions quelled, apprehension destroyed, and, instead peace, joy, hope, &. (2)
External: the drunkard is made sober, &. 6. Not only are the results extra-
ordinary, they are satisfactory. The mind is at ease, and sometimes rises to trans-
port ; and there is not the slightest wish to have this occurrence undone. II. Strange
as it may appear MEN WILL NoT coME TO CHRIST THAT THEY MIGHT HAVE LIFE. 1
Why? (1) Some are too proud to come. There is nothing more offensive to the
pride of a man of intellect or social virtue to be told that he must come in the same
way as the publicans and the harlots. (2) Some say they cannot, and wait for Divine
assistance. That is conveyed with the command. Come, and you will have power
to come, as the withered hand was bestowed by stretching it forth. 2. This refusal
is extraordinary. (1) Man in all his stages—as child, youth, man—regards the
teraporal future with growing solicitude. Why not, then, the eternal? (2) This
eternal future is vastly more important, and is forfeited by not coming to Christ,
Imagine a condemned criminal not accepting an offer like this! 38. This refusal is


— ee


480 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. V.
i
so extraordinary that it deserves to be recorded. Write down, then, solemnly—‘“ I
will not come to Christ,” &. (T. East.) Coming to Christ for life :—Suppose a
legislator, anxious to deter his subjects from crime, were to threaten confiscation of
property. An individual offends and is punished. Suppose the children to tread
in the steps of the father, and the legislator to have devised a method without en-
croaching on the principles of rectitude, by which the forfeited inheritance might
be restored on easy terms, what would you think of the children if they despised
the blessing and rejected the offer? And yet that was the case with the Jews, and
is the case with the sinner. Perhaps you may conclude that you have obeyed this
invitation because you are a professor of Christianity, but you have not unless
you are a real Christian in heart and conduct. I, Tue circUMsTANCES WHICH HINDER
SOME FROM comING To Curist. 1. Disbelief in Christ’s Divine mission. (1) But
shall a man be condemned because he does not apply for salvation to one in whom
he disbelieves ? No, but fog disbelieving that God has commissioned that One to be
a Saviour. (2) But shall he be condemned because a@ certain impression is not pro-
duced upon him, and because the evidence is insufficient? Yes, if through his own
culpability, which is the case where the gospel is preachcd in its purity and sim.
plicity. 2. The Pharisees abstained because they were self-righteous—a reason which
keeps many away still. 3, Others are deterred by the cares of the world. They have
no time for it, and besides industry is a part of religion; they come to church, and
what time can be spared should be spent in enjoyment. 4. Others come not because
bound by the chains of criminal practice. 5. With some youth is the impediment.
I will some day, but there is plenty of time. 6. With others age is the obstacle. It
is now too late to change, and the meetness of declining years co-operates with
mental repugnance. II. IN wHAT MANNER. AND WITH WHAT DISPOSITIONS ARE WE TO
coms. 1. With a sense of sin, its guilt and power. 2. With a conviction of our own
impotence and deservedness of punishment. 3. With a desire to be saved. 4.
With a faith in Christ’s power and willingness to save. 5. With a determination to
be obedient to Christ’s commands. III. Pracrican apprication. 1. To sinners.
Come at once. 2. To disciples. Show that you have come by fulfilling the duties
you owe to Christ. (7. Gisborne, M.A.) Coming to Christ the only means of
salvation :—I, WHAT IS MEANT HERE BY LIFE? As death is put for evil, so is life for
all that is good (Deut. xxx. 15). And seeing that the happiness which God hath
prepared for His people consists in the full enjoyment of all that is good, it is
called life; and eternal life, because it shall last for ever. Though it be perfected
only in the other world it is begun in this. At our new birth, when we are made
God’s children by adoption and grace the Holy Spirit is breathed into us and
becomes the principle of eternal life in us (chap. v. 47, 54; v. 24; 1 John iii. 15),
IJ. Tus LIFE IS TO BE HAD IN CaRistT JESUS, AND IN Him onty (John xvii. 2; xiv. 6;
Col. iii. 4; 1 John v. 20). All things related to it are founded in Him. He pur-
chased life for us, promised it to us, prepares it for us and us for it, and bestows it
upon us. To make this clear—l. Man created in the image of God was immortal;
but the first man in whom all the rest were contained by sinning made himself
and his posterity obnoxious to the death God had threatened. 2. But Jesus
Christ, the second Adam, having taken away the sin of the world, hath thereby
abolished death, so that man by Him may have life again. 3. Christ being now
by the right hand of God, exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, confers upon the
penitent believer this life. III. Tost wHo WouLD HAVE THIS LIFE MUST GO TO
Curist ror it, 1. By coming to Him. He means believing in Him as—(1) Our
Prophet, assenting to all He has revealed to us. (2) Our Lord and Master, obeying
all that He commands. (3) Our Priest, and trusting in His merits. 2. By thus
coming to Him He gives us grace to repent, power to resist temptation, His Holy
Spirit to guide us into all truth, to strengthen our faith, and to guide us to heaven.
IV. NEVERTHELESS MEN WILL NoT Go To CHRIST FoR LIFE. 1. The truth of this
proposition is proved by our Lord’s assertion, and is confirmed by experience. 2.
The reasons. (1) Because men are so stupid as not to care for it; they look no
further than what just lies before them, and go on eating and drinking, and sleeping
and playing, till death comes and carries them to a place they never thought of in
their lives (Deut. xxxii. 28,29). (2) But if they cannot with all their art keep their
conscience quiet they flatter themselves with hopes that they will do well enough
without troubling themselves about going to Christ, for they are moral. (3) And of
those who have some sense of their sins many think that their good works counter-
balance them. (4) But there are others who are poisoned with heretical opinions
denying Christ’s Divinity and Atonement. (5) The greatest reason, however, is


4
j
4
&


a | oe


BHAP. v.] ST. JOHN. 481


————


that they have things which they deem of greater moment (Luke xiv. 18-20; bu

Matt. xvi. 26). (Bp. Beveridge.) How to come to Christ, pea the great apes
—I. LIFE Is ONLY TO BE FOUND IN Curis (ver. 39). 1. Not in the letter of the
Word, but in the Living Word; not in an idea, but in a Person, Many are now
satisfied with an imaginary Christ. 2. Why? Because they have never known the
want of a real Christ. If they felt the pangs of hunger they could never be satisfied
with wax fruit. 3. The real Christ differs from the ideal in that He is a living
Christ, and can communicate the life that is in Himself. 4. Vain all your self-
satisfaction, morality, prayers, &c., if you have not life from Him. II. Tue way
TO OBTAIN THIS LIFE IS BY COMING TO CuRisT. 1. There are various steps in this
process indicated by great Scripture words. (1) ‘‘Coming” to the Cross. (2)
“‘ Looking ” away from everything to Christ. (3) ‘‘ Believing” that He died for us.
(4) “ Receiving” Him in all His fulness. (5) ‘‘ Embracing,” grasping, or holding
Him fast. 2. These are acts of faith, so you must—(1) Believe the record that He
is ‘‘ the Lamb of God,” &c. (2) Believe that He has given you your discharge in
full. You can only do this by committing all your sins to Him. III. Lirenzss
SINNERS DO NOT COME TO CHRIST BECAUSE THEY WILL NoT. (W.J. Chapman, M.A.)
The great refusal :—I. Wuy 18 IT THAT WE WILL NOT COME TO CHRIST FOR LIFE?
1, Negatively. Not (1) from any want of sufficiency in Christ to meet our need
(vers. 21-29). (2) From any want of evidence that He is the eternal life (vers.
31-39). (3) From any want of consciousness of the need of life (ver. 39). We all
want something we have not, and few are so besotted as not to feel their need of
heaven. 2. Positively. Prejudice and enmity against Himself, arising from self-
righteousness and unbelief. He gives four reasons for this. (1) Ver. 41. The
Lord Jesus is not fashionable in the world. (2) Ver. 42. If you only knew how
God delights in Christ, and is honoured by Him, you would love and admire Christ
too. (3) Ver. 44. The thing that keeps many back is the knowledge that he would
be sneered at. (4) Ver. 46. We don’t believe our Bibles, and therefore do not come
to Christ for life. II. Curist sETS BEFORE US THREE WEIGHTY MATTERS. 1, The
great want of our souls is life. We think that reformation, good resolutions, a
certain amount of sorrow, will do when Life is wanted; for the Bible is in nothing
more emphatic than that man is dead in trespasses and sins. Consequently words,
works, prayers, repentance, are all dead till we come to Christ. That is the begin-
ning of religion. 2. The great duty and privilege of every sinner. (1) We must
come to Christ because (a) God commands it; (b) it is the end of Christ’s comting;
(c) the purpose of gospel preaching ; (d) the object of the mission of the Spirit. (2)
It is our privilege to come (a) because life is to be had on the easiest terms; (b)
because all men, without exception, may receive it. (3) But what is coming?
Taking Him at His word and pleading His promise. You want no further warrant:
than your need and His invitation. 8. The great folly of infatuated sinners.
Health proclaimed to diseased souls, life to dead souls; when the world, pleasure,
evil calls, they go, but God calls in vain. What is this but folly? Conclusion: 1.
Christ says, ‘‘Come unto Me”: not to ministers, priests, ordinances: men readily
goto them. 2. Not to go to Christ for life is to reject Him. (Marcus Rainsford.)
The lamentations of Jesus :—I. Men, apart from the salvation of God, are in a state
of peatH. 1. In this plaint of the Saviour’s the true condition of sinners ig seen
in awful distinctness. He knew what wasin man. 2. The estimate of man’s state
and prospects is of vital importance. To deny or neglect is (1) to accuse Christ of
coming into the world on a needless errand ; (2) to reject the only offer of deliver-
ance. II. In order to pass from death to life we must comm To Jxsus. 1. On our
part it is not a word, but an act. A dead-letter knowledge destitute of moving power
pervades and paralyzes the Church. 2. Beware lest you lose yourself in any mist
which may gather round the expression, ‘‘ Come unto Me.” In the experience of
life we frequently pass over from one confidence to another, and we do this as really
and potentially as we come in body from one place to another. It is not an
incapacity to understand such a change, it is unwillingness to make it. III. In
order to live NOTHING MORE 18 NEEDED than to come to Jesus. 1. No preliminary
qualification is demanded. None are excluded for the presence of one quality or
the absence of another. 2. To go conclusively off from self and all other confi-
dences and cleave to the Son of God as all your salvation is all that is necessary.
3. The effects which the change produces have not produced the change. 4. It is
not the coming to Christ and a better obedience that will bring life to the dead.
Coming to Christ is itself alone this. IV. Those who are spiritually dead are Not
wiitine to come to Christ for life. 1. This seems strange, and the Lord Himself


Leos


482 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHAP. V.
NN $n


wondered at their unbelief. 2. The human nature of the question is graphically —


represented in the history of Naaman. Most men would do difficult things willingly
for the sake of what they call heaven; but they are unwilling to do the easy thing
God requires. 3. The want lies in the will. V. Jesus compiains that they will not
come to Him for life. 1. Here the Saviour opens His heart that He may look in
and see the love that fills it. 2. The upper side of religion is not a sentiment, but
a fact; such also must its under side be. The one is Christ’s coming into the world
to die for us; the other is our. coming to Christ to live in Him. Mercy let down
from heaven must be grasped by the needy on earth while it is within their reach.
3. When you neglect this great salvation you mar the Saviour’s joy. (W. Arnot,
D.D.) Refusing life :—I. Tu UNWILLINGNESS OF MEN TO COME TO CHRIST. What
is the cause of this reluctance? 1. It is not the Saviour’s fault. He not only
invited but went, and does so to-day. 2. Scoffers say it arises from the visionary
nature of the gift which Christ offers. 8. What too despondent friends of religion
say amounts to the same thing, viz., that men are too gross and worldly to care for
such a thing as immortality. But how then shall we account for the pilgrimages
and endless mortifications of devotees. 4. No, the cause lies deepér, even in the
sinfulness of the human heart. Just as darkness is opposed to light, so is sin to
holiness. II. WHat IT IS THAT MEN GAIN BY comING To Cunist. 1. It is inferred
that life out of Christ is transient, unsubstantial, and must die. However fair and
moral a man’s outward life may be, if sin is busy in his heart he must perish. 2.
But if you come to Christ in heart you shall obtain life. (1) The life of holiness.
(2) Of Christ. (3) Of heaven. III. THe GREATNESS OF THIS GAIN OUGHT TO REMOVE
ALL UNWILLINGNESS TO COME To CHrist. Those who obtain life obtain—1l. Perfect
security, and all things work together for their good—loss, sickness, bereavement,
death. 2. Constant progress in time and in eternity. 3. Happiness now and for
ever. (G. Colborne, Ph.D.) Unwillingness to come to Christ :—J. THE PLAN oF
SALVATION, coming to Christ. There must be personal contact between Christ and
your spirit. Faith, like a hand, must spiritually grasp Him. 1. The text implies
that we are to come to Jesus Christ for everything, for life includes all that is
needful to salvation and salvation itself. 2. Christ gives us actual spiritual life and
judicial life, so that we are saved from condemnation. 3. This way of coming to
Christ is the only way, for ‘‘there is none other name,” &c. 4. It is a sure and
open way. None have ever tried it and failed. The Fountain has never been
closed. II. Your PosITION IN REFERENCE TO THIS PLAN OF SALVATION. 1. I would
have you get alone and say deliberately, ‘‘ I will not come,” &c. 2. You will not
because you have not. (1) Some of you say softly, ‘I cannot.’”’ This is the same
as ‘‘will not.” If you had the will you would have the power. (2) Others, “I
dare not.” ‘Turn that the other way, ‘‘I dare not refuse to come.” 3. Think of
what you are spurning. (1) Life eternal, and the day will come when you will
think with anguish that you have despised it. (2) Christ Himself, incarnate, dying
glorified. (3) You refuse to come to Him. Not to Sinai, but to Calvary. Salvation
is worth Christ dying for, but not worth your thinking about. 4. Think of why you
will not come. (1) Do you hope to find salvation somewhere else? This is what
the Jews did and failed: so will you. (2) Is itsomesecret sin? (3) Sheer frivolity
perhaps. If you must play, play with something cheaper than the blood of Christ
something less precious than your souls. II. WHat WILL BE THE RESULT OF THIS?
I suppose some of you think you will come to Jesus some day. Why not now?
Every day adds to the chances that you never will come to Christ. And if not you
must dieeternally. Whatisthat? Ask those whoknow—Dives. IV. Ler us Hops
THAT THERE WILL BE A CHANGE TO-NIGHT, 1. Youmaycome. Christ invites:
Spirit and the Bride say, Come! 2. Respond, “I will come.”” (C. parte
Men by nature unwilling to come to Christ :—I. Mun BY NATURE ARE FAR FROM CHRIST
In respect of—l. Knowledge. 2. Union. 38. Participation. 4. Converse. II.
SINNERS ARE UNWILLING TO ComE To Carist. 1. Many think they have already come.
2. Many do not fully apprehend their need of Christ. They think it enough to be
sorry, reformed, mean well, &c. 3. Many are too busy, and so have no leisure
for such a journey: pleasure, business, care, &c., prevent (Luke xiv.), 4. Many will
not part with that which keeps them at a distance from Christ, viz., sin. 5. Man
are possessed with prejudice against Christ as represented in the gospel. va THE
uses. 1. Of information, (1) Man’s wretchedness, (2) Man’s helplessness to
deliver himself. (3) The sufficiency of Christ and His salvation, 2. For examina
tion. Those who come to Christ—(1) Are sorry that they were so long ere they
came to Him, (2) Are acquainted with the way to Christ, having walked in it.


——


CHAP. V.] ST. JOHN. 483


(3) Have a high esteem of Christ. (4) Are in a new condition. (5) Walk with
Christ. (6) Are at a greater distance from sin and the world. (7) Have renounced
their own righteousness. 3. Of exhortation. Consider—(1) The necessity of coming
to Christ. (a) You are under the power of Satan. (b) You are under the guilt of
sin. (c) You are under God’s wrath. (d) You are under the curse. (e) The
justice of God is engaged to destroy you. (f) Your outward enjoyments and
accommodations in the world are uncomfortable, unsanctified, accursed. (2) The
advantage of coming to Christ—freedom from all these disadvantages ; and—(a)
Union with Him, real, happy, everlasting. (b) Communion with Him. (c) Parti-
cipation of Him in all He is and all He has: His obedience, miracles, prayers,
resurrection, &c. (3) The equity of coming to Christ. (a) You lose nothing, but
gain enough by it: health from sickness, liberty from captivity, beauty instead of
deformity, sanity for madness. (b) He waits till you come, condescendingly,
industriously, patiently. (4) The danger of not coming: the guilt of soul murder.
If you will not come to Christ—(a) He will come against you either in a severer
way to reclaim you or to destroy you. (0) He will depart from you, and you know
not how soon. (c) You shall not come hereafter. (d) Ye shall not have life. IV.
THE convERSE. Those that come to Christ will have life. What life? All that
is opposite to the death Adam brought into the world. Those who come to Christ
—1. Have another kind of temporal life. (1) In respect of its tenure. The sinner’s
title is common providence ; the saint’s that of the covenant of grace. (2) In respect
of its blessing. Life is not a blessing special but in Christ. (3) In respect of its
comfort. (4) In respect of its usefulness. 2. Spiritual life. (1) The life of
righteousness (Rom. v.18). (2) The life of holiness in its principles, increase,
acts, continuance. 3. Eternal life in respect to—(1) Its title. (2) Hope. (3)
Barnest. (4) Possession. Conclusion: Have you this life? If so, where there is
life there is—1. Breath; 2. Motion; 3. Sense—seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting.
(D. Clarkson, B.D.) The reasons why men do not come to Christ:—I. Taxy
PLACE NO VALUE ON THE BLESSINGS He orrers. These blessings are—1. Remote.
2, Of a spiritual nature. (1) Pardon of sin. (2) Peace of conscience. (3) A joyful
hope of immortality. (4) Holiness. II, THEY HAVE NO CONFIDENCE IN THE POWER
oF CHRIST TO GRANT THE BLESSINGS Hz promises. III. THEY OBJECT TO THE
TERMS UPON WHICH Hz oFFERS saLvaTION. 1. Self-denial and the taking up of the
cross. 2. Repentance. 3. Faith. 4. Purity and spirituality. (J. Venn, M.A.)
Christ’s lamentation over those who will not come to Him:—The discourse from
which these words have been taken arose out of a conflict between our blessed
Lord and the Pharisees respecting the observance of the Sabbath. I. We have,
in the words before us, CHRIST’S EXPLANATION OF MAN'S INVETERATE SPIRITUAL
Matapy. 1. Apart from Christ, men are spiritually dead. In forms, more or less
repulsive, we find spiritual death wherever we look, in the world at large or in our
own circle of friends. Intellectual life is not wanting. Never, perhaps, was there
a period in the history of our race when intellectual life existed in a form ee
vigorous. Moral life is not wanting. One of the indirect results of the qi a
the gospel is to enlighten the conscience even of those who do not receive it. cae
they have no spiritual life. God is not the object of their supreme affection. ;
las! this spiritual death is not confined to the world. Look for a moment at the
Binich 9. Now, what is our Lord’s explanation of the solemn fact that spiritual
death thus so generally obtains, notwithstanding that He has brought life within
i d offered it to them in His gospel? He does not say that it is
ee even d the revelation of the Father’s love in Him, that they
because they have never rea a l Dia ated iiclit vei:
are as they are. But He says, ‘“‘ Ye will not come to Me, Uaat ye mis ;
3. But let us look at this solemn truth as it affects the anxious inquirer Bae ini
tion. It is only because men do not come to Christ for salvation, and Abe ore
have no life, that the ordinances of a house - paiydel ee Ae segline ts
many, empty, fruitless exercises. gain: with | é ae POTTER aR
inguizer after salvation often tro0t}e ae reife simply and in faith to. Christ
gs ee: i he nature of conversion, and
For instance, he sometimes perplexes himself as to the n Pee aon
wonders, and asks himself whether it has taken place _in his case. g %
ace i i hrist as our life. Coming to Jesus for life
takes place in the very act of receiving C Rata Wis hee
and salvation is not the tesa ane aION Oran THE CAUSE. OF HE comme
eee ne ight have life.”
H OF MEN. ‘Ye will not come to Me, that ye mig
eee scekns my brethren, in the utterance of these words by our blessed Lord,


484 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. | ' [cHaP. ¥.
the tones of wrath. Oh, no! sadness must have covered His face with gloom as,

looking over the reckless multitude, He said, ‘‘ Ye will not come to Me, that ye
might have life.” Christ might justly have spoken in anger. He would probably
have done so had He been less holy and Divine than He was. 1. This complaint
seems to open to us the very heart of Christ in its aspect towards men. It reveals
to us the intensity of His love. The greatest joy He can possess is to impart
Divine life to sinners, who are perishing because they have it not. The greatest
grief which can oppress Him is to find His love, which would have given this life,
despised and spurned. This has been so beautifully illustrated by a living writer,
by a reference to one of the most familiar scenes of domestic life, that I must adopt
his illustration, though not in his words. One of the deepest joys of a mother’s
heart is to nourish her babe from her own breast. It is a double grief! He
grieves for the death of the dead, and the loss of His own life-giving! How deep
and tender, therefore, the love of Jesus for perishing men! 2. In the second
place, the complaint of Jesus suggests the solemn thought that the sinner’s death
is the sinner’s fault! Possibly, you sometimes think that a portion of the fault,
at least, may lie upon your minister. Possibly you sometimes blame the Church,
There are so many frailties in those who compose it, that they are a stumbling-
block to you! The fault of your death is not to be found anywhere but in your-
self! (H. J. Hartland.) Hindrances to conversion :—I. Some refuse Christ from
IGNORANCE OF THEIR TRUE SPIRITUAL CONDITION. Content with lip-knowledge.
Need to realize that ‘‘ respectability is not conversion.” II. Some are hindered by
what they deem opposine Forces. 1. Pre-occupation. 2. Mistaken ideas of
religion. 8. Inconsistency of professing Christians. 4. Fears—of God, of man,
of self, of the danger of falling. III. All these are summMED uP IN CuHrist’s WORDS,
“ Ye will not.” How long is this tolast? Why give everything to gain the world,
and take no step to save your soul? IV. Your Lossis Lire. Christ came to rescue
from death. Appreciate His love by appropriating His salvation. (John Edwards.)
Christ alone is rejected :—When the dove was weary she recollected the ark, and
flew into Noah’s hand at once: there are weary souls who know the Ark, but will
not fly to it. When an Israelite had slain, inadvertently, his fellow, he knew the
city of refuge, he feared the avenger of blood, and he fled along the road to the
place of safety ; but multitudes know the refuge, and every Sabbath we set up the
sign-posts along the road, but yet they come not to find salvation. The destitute
waifs and strays of the streets of London find out the night refuge and ask for
shelter: they cluster round our workhouse doors like sparrows under the eaves of a
building on a rainy day; they piteously crave for lodging and a crust of bread ; yet
crowds of poor benighted spirits, when the house of mercy is lighted up, and the
invitation is plainly written in bold letters, ‘‘ Whosoever will, let him turn in
hither,’”’ will not come, but prove the truth of Watts’s verse: ‘‘ Thousands make
a wretched choice, And rather starve than come.” ’Tis strange, ’tis passing
strange, *tis wonderful! - (C. H. Spurgeon.) Shall we refuse life?—Many years
ago, when the great war was raging in America between the Northern and
Southern States, no cotton came to supply the Lancashire mills, and hundreds
of thousands of people were reduced to great poverty and suffering for want
of food and clothing. Oh! how fervently they prayed that the war might soon
be over, and that God would send them “cotton.” At last the war closed, and
the ssa was again white with the sails of cotton-bringing ships, and soon a railway
train laden with the precious thing arrived at Preston, in Lancashire. The town
was filled with joy, and when the first load of cotton was brought through the
streets on a dray, the people went out by hundreds to welcome it. They marched
on either side of it, and many of them kissed the bales of cotton as they moved
along, and sang: ‘‘ Praise God from whom all blessings flow,’ for now there
would be work, and food, and comfort. And when in the year 1871 the gates
of the famine-stricken Paris were thrown open after the terrible siege, and a
drove of fat cattle were driven along the streets to be killed for food, the women
rushed from their doors and, throwing their arms around the necks of the sleek
oxen, kissed them a welcome to their ruined city, for their coming was life to them
and to their children, And is not Jesus “Life” to us? Is He not a thousand times
more to us than cotton or cattle were to the’ people of Preston and Paris? And
shall we refuse Him, or receive Him coldly? What think you? (R. Brewin.)
Sinners will not come to Christ :—Since I have been watching the sea a wind has
sprung up, and suddenly the ocean is dotted with ships. This little town has a
harbour, and trading vessels of small tonnage evidently expect a storm, for here they


ET eee eT "
1


CHAP.Y ST. JOHN. 485


come. Like sea-fowl borne on white wings they are flying for the harbour. Differing
in their tacking, yet it is evident that they are all making for one spot. Howbeautiful
it is to see them enter the haven, cast anchor, and rest! Oh, that our fellow-men
were equally wise as to spiritual things! A thousand signs betoken the approaching
tempest; they know there is a place of refuge, will they not hasten toit? They
will suffer loss, nay, they will be wrecked totally, if they try to weather the last
dread storm ; the harbour is free, there is time to reach it, there is ample room
within its shelter ; why will they refuse the safety? Ah me! this is cause for tears.
Are my fellow-creatures mad? Do they despise Jesus, the appointed haven of
souls? Do they so despise Him as to perish to show their contempt? My God,
help me to mourn for them, if I cannot persuade them, and do Thou give them
understanding enough to accept their own lives. (C.H. Spurgeon.) Sinners will
not come to Christ :—If there is any man here who says, ‘‘I cannot come,” I beg
him to express himself properly, and speak out the sad fact as it ought to be spoken.
Here is the style: ‘‘ Unhappy wretch, I cannot come to Christ! Millionsin heaven
have come, but I cannot come. My mother died in a good hope; but, ‘ Mother, I
cannot come.’ My father has gone home to be with Jesus ; but I cannot come.” I
thank God that this statement is not true; but if you say it, and believe it, you
ought never to rest any more; for if you cannot come to Christ, you are the
unhappiest person in the world. May I ask you to do another thing? If you still
intend to say, “I cannot come,” will you speak the truth now? Will you alter a
word, and get nearer the truth? Say, ‘I will not come.” ‘I cannot come,” is
Greek, or double Dutch; but the plain English is, ‘I will not come.” I wish you
would say that rather than the other, because the recoil of saying, ‘I will not come:
I will not believe in Jesus: I will not repent of sin: I will not turn from my wicked
ways ”—the recoil, I say, from that might be blessed by God to you to make you see
your desperate state. I wish you would then cry, ‘‘1 cannot sit down and make
my own damnation sure by saying that I will not come to Christ.” (Zbid.)
Christ’s desertions and complaints :—Jesus, Mediator between God and man, suffers
two desertions, and utters two complaints. On that side, God forsook Him ; and on
this side, man. The answer to the first desertion, ‘‘ My God, My God, why hast
Thou forsaken Me?” came in a strong cry from His dying lips; the answer to the
second is written here, “ Ye will not come to Me that ye might have life.” The
desertion by the Father in the utmost agony of the Son was the greater—was incon-
ceivably, infinitely great; but the lower and lesser—the desertion by sinners whom
He seeks that He may save—pierces His heart more painfully, because the last
desertion makes the first for that case of no avail. When we come to Him for
life, He sees, He tastes of the travail of His soul and is satisfied; when we refuse,
He complains that so far His soul has travailed in vain. The disciples were glad
when they saw the Lord “risen from the dead”; the Lord is gladder when He
gees disciples coming to Himself as doves to their windows. (W. Arnot, D.D.)
Will, the seat of inability :—Nelson could not see the signal for suspending battle
because he placed the glass to his blind eye, and man cannot see the truth as it is
in Jesus because he has no mind to do so. Ungodly men are, as the country people
say, ‘‘like the hogs in a harvest field,” who come not out for all their shouting ;
they cannot hear because they have no will to hear. Want of will causes paralysis
of every faculty. In spiritual things man is utterly unable because resolvedly
unwilling. (¢. H. Spurgeon.) Will—not violated by grace:—When we see a
casket wrenched open, the hinges torn away, or the clasp destroyed, we mark at
once the hand of the spoiler; but when we observe another casket deftly opened
with a master-key, and the sparkling contents revealed, we note the hand of the
owner. Conversion is not, as some suppose, a violent opening of the heart by grace,
in which will, reason, and judgment are all ignored or crushed. This is too barbarous
a method fu: kim who comes not as a plunderer to his prey, but as a possessor to
his treasure. In conversion, the Lord who made the human heart deals with it
according to its nature and constitution, His key insinuates itself into the wards ;
the will iz not enslaved but enfranchised ; the reason is not blinded but enlightened,
and the whole man is made to act with a glorious liberty which it never knew till it
fell under the restraints of grace. (Zbid.)


Ver. 41. I receive not honour from men.—Lest they should think that in com-
mending Himself and challenging them He was hunting after vainglory, as false
teachers do, Christ obviates that mistake, and showeth that He was seeking no such
thing, nor was capable of any addition of honour from the creature. Whence learn


=...


486 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. Vv.


ina eee ee


—1. Christ is so omniscient that He knoweth and marketh the thoughts of every


one that He dealeth with ; so much doth His obviating their thoughts teach. 2. ie


is the usual fault of men that they have but low and base thoughts of Christ, and
that they measure and judge of Him and His followers by themselves, for this sus-
picion of Christ imported that they looked on Him as a mere man, and as they were
themselves ambitious (ver. 44), so did they judge of Him, and so are His servants
judged of. 3. Christ was no hunter after vainglory, nor is He capable of any addition
of honour by men’s acknowledging of Him; nor ought men to think that He seeks
them because He hath any need of them, or that they add anything to Him, when
He makes them somewhat; for albeit men are bound to manifest and declare His
super-excellent glory; and men by sin do what they can to dishonour Him, as who
would cast dirt or spit against the sun? Yet His infinite glory is neither capable
of addition nor diminution from the creature; for ‘I receive not honour from men.”
(G. Hutcheson.) Vanity of worldly honours:—The subjects of Charlemagne,
after his death, set his corpse on a throne in a sepulchre, and puta sceptre in
his stiff hand and a crown on his bloodless temples; but long ago he came down
to a prostrate condition. At the Tuileries, in Paris, during the revolution of July,
when the mob broke in, a boy, wounded to death, waa laid on the emperor’s
throne, and his blood gave deeper crimson to the imperial upholstery ; but, after
all, he came down into the dust where we must all lie. (Dr. Talmage.) Worldly
honours delusive and dangerous :—Heliogabalus, the Roman emperor, being jealous
of the power of the senate, invited the senators to a great feast. When they
were overcome with wine, Heliogabalus left the hall. The doors were fastened
without; yet the carousal continued. The emperor shouted to them from a glass door
in the ceiling, that, as they were ever aspiring after fresh laurels, they should now
be satisfied. Wreaths and flowers began to rain uponthem. The senators cried,
‘Enough, enough!” but the rain continued. Terror seized them. They flew to
the doors; but they were immovable. Escape was impossible. The relentless
storm continued till all were buried and suffocated beneath the murderous sea of
flowers. (EH. Foster.)


Ver. 42. Ye have not the love of God in you.—The sin of not loving God :—I.
Wat Is IT To LovE Gop? MHereunto is required—l1. Knowing of Him. 2. Our
choosing Him as our portion and sovereign good (Deut. xxvi. 17; Psa. xvi. 5,
Ixxiii. 26), 3. Our exercising all the acts of love towards Him. (1) Good will.
(2) Desire of union. (3) Complacency. II. How arr we To Love Gop? 1. With
all our hearts (Deut. vi. 5; Matt. xxii. 37). 2. Above all things (Matt. x. 37 ; Luke
xiv. 26). 3. At all times. Because—(1) Of the infinite perfections of goodness
in Himself. (2) Of His infinite expressions of goodness towards us. III. How
DOES IT APPEAR TO BE SIN NOT TO LOVE Gop? Because—l. God has commanded
it (Deut. vi. 5). 2. We have so many obligations to love Him. 3. The want of
this turns everything else to sin. IV. Wxo arg auiuTy oF THIS SIN? 1, They
that acknowledge Him not. 2. That think not of Him (Psa. exix. 97). 3. That
long not after Him (Psa. lxxiii. 25). 4. That rejoice not in Him. 5. That love
anything as much or more than Him (Luke xiv. 26). 6. That love not His
(1 John iv. 12; v. 1), 7. That do not endeavour to be reconciled to Him. 8.
That do not obey Him (John xiv. 15). V. Mortves ro nove Gop. 1. It is the
first and great command (Matt. xxii. 38). 2. We can perform no duty aright
without it (1 Cor. xiii. i). 3. It will make all other duties easy and pleasant.
4. Consider how infinitely God deserves our love for what He is in Himself;
and also for what He is tous. He—(1) Made us; (2) Maintains us; (3) Protects
us; (4) Redeemed us; (5) Sanctifies us; (6) Prepares heaven for us. 5. If we
love God all things shall work together for our good. (Bp. Beveridge.) Marks
of the love of God :—I. In suggesting various marxs by which you may ascertain
whether you love God or not, I would mention—1. The general bent and turn
of your thoughts when not under the immediate control of circumstances. These
afford clear indications of the general temper and disposition. It is impossible
that such a Being should be absent long from your thoughts unless you are
decidedly indifferent to Divine things; the charge against the ungodly is that
‘God is not in all their thoughts.” Consider this, ye that forget God. 2. How
you stand disposed to the exercises of religion: if God is the Object of your love
you will gladly avail yourselves of the opportunities for cultivating a closer
friendship with Him. 3. How you stand affected towards His Word. We can
derive no just thoughts of God but from that. All, therefore, who sincerely love


cHaP. v.] ST. JOHN. 487


Him study that. ‘How I love Thy law; it is my meditation all the day.” A
neglected Bible is an unambiguous sign of an unsanctified heart. 4. With what
sentiments do you regard the people of God? If you do not love the image which
you see, how can you love the unseen original? 5. Consider the disposition you
entertain toward the Son of God. ‘If ye had loved the Father, ye would have
loved Me also.” 6. Examine how you are affected by His benefits. These are so
numerous and distinguished that they ought to excite our gratitude; and yet are
they the only benefits we receive without thankfulness. 7. In what manner are
you impressed with a sense of your sins? 8. How are you affected towards this
world? II. Supposing a conviction to be produced that you have not God’s
love in you, let me make the proper improvement. 1. It should be accompanied
by deep humiliation. 2. Let this humiliation be accompanied with concern
and alarm. 3. This is an awful, but not a helpless state. Jesus is the
way to the Father’s heart. (Robert Hall.) The absence of the love of
God:—There are some charges which cannot be advanced without exciting
the strongest feelings, such as cowardice and falsehood. And yet there are
graver charges which excite no emotion, or, if perchance the conscience be
aroused to the sense of their truth, anodynes are applied and men return to reckless-
ness and indifference. It was so with the Jews and the allegation of the text, and
it is so to-day. Observe—1. Tuat THE LovE oF GoD IS THE PRINCIPLE WHICH OUGHT
TO ACTUATE ALL His INTELLIGENT CREATURES. 1. Deut. vi. 1-6 six times repeated
and confirmed by Jesus Christ. 2. God’s revelations of His character and proceed-
ings, show the reasonableness of this command, for they show His love for the
purpose of making us happy. Contemplate—(1) Providence. (2) The scheme of
grace. 8. This should lead us to recognize His claim upon our love. JI. Tuat
THERE ARE MULTITUDES OF THE HUMAN RACE WHO ARE DESTITUTE OF THE LOVE OF Gop.
1. This is proved from Scripture. How multiplied are the charges against men
that they forsook God, departed from, hated, denied Him! Christ said, ‘‘ They
have both seen and hated Me and My Father,” and Paul, that they are “haters of
God.” 2. This will always be the case where men are left to the influence of their
own minds without the counteracting principle of Divine grace. 3. This accounted
for by man’s fall, which introduced in the human mind a dislike to God and
His commandments (Rom. viii. 7, 8). III. Toar THERE ARE SIGNS BY WHICH THE
ABSENCE OF THE LOVE oF GoD MAY BE DETECTED. 1. A rejection of the Divine
testimony respecting the Person and work of the Son (see the whole context), 2.
The infraction of the judicial or moral commandments of the law (chap. xiv. 21,
&c.). 3. Inordinate desires for and pursuit after worldly gain (Matt. vi. 24, xix.
16, &c.; 1 John ii, 15-17; James iv. 4). 4. Destitution of true practical kindness
towards other men (1 John iii. 14, &c.; iv. 7, 12, 19). IV. THar THOSE WHO ARE
DESTITUTE OF THIS LOVE ARE LIVING IN AN AWFUL STATE WITH REGARD TO THEIR ETERNAL
inrerEsts. The absence of the love of God—1. Abandons man to the dominion of
those passions whose uniform tendency is the production of abasement and sorrow.
9. Excludes men from the fayour of God and exposes them to future punishment.
(J. Parsons.) The emptiness of natural virtue :—1. Jesus knew what was in man,
had a faculty of perceiving what lay under a semblance that would have imposed on
other men. 2. In the exercise of this faculty Jesus came forth with the utterance
of the text. He saw, in spite of their zeal for the Sabbath and God’s honour, that
the Jews had not the love of God in them. 3. It is mortifying to the man who
possesses many accomplishments of character to be told that the most essential
accomplishments of a moral being is that in which he has no share, and wanting it,
he wants not merely obedience to the first and greatest commandment, but the im-
pregnating quality of all acceptable obedience, 4. There is no more useful exercise
than that of carrying round this conviction amongst all conditions of humanity.
The pride of the Pharisees was opposed to such a demonstration, nor do men of
taste, feeling, and morality understand how they should require the same treatment
in preparing them for immortality with the profligate. 5. But the Bible everywhere
groups men into two classes,with one clear line of demarcation between them, and
this we can find out to be in accordance with the actual exhibition of human nature.
There are men who do and men who do not possess this love of God. I, Take AN
EXTREME CASE, A MORAL MonsTER, who, in addition to every other vicious feeling and
practice, can steel his heart against the atrocity of murder. We have no difficulty in
assigning his place. It werea monstrous supposition that the love of God were to be
found in him. I. DerTacH FROM HIM ONE OFFENSIVE FEATURE. He recoils from
murder, Has he thereby become 2 spiritual man? Is the difference assigned to


488 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. _ [enar. v.


a


him due to the love of God? Your consciousness will tell you that the heart ha

constitutional feelings unaccompanied by any reference to even the existence of
God. IIL. If this natural recoil from murder be experienced by the man who has
no love to God, why may it not be carried further and yet the same love be absent?
Let THERE BE THEN A FURTHER TRANSFORMATION. Endow the man with natural
tenderness and make him a fair every-day character. Still he only constitutionally
revolts from crime without any movement of affection towards God. IV. ProczED
IN THIS woRK. Conceive of an exquisite softening of affection and tenderness over
the whole character. Do these refined sensibilities constitute a spiritual man? ;
The feeling heart if unaccompanied by the love of God is no better evidence than
the circulation of the blood. V. Gostm. FurTHER. Let the heart be filled with
uprignt and Lonourable principles. But there is a principle of honour in the
human mind apart altogether from any reference to God. V1. But it may beasked,
Wuat BETTER EVIDENCE CAN BE GIVEN OF OUR LOVE TO GoD THAN THE EXISTENCE AND
PRACTICE OF THESE VIRTUES? It takes us to the bottom of this delusion to observe
that though the religious principle can never exist without virtuous conduct, yet
such conduct may be due—l. To natural disposition. 2. To a perception of its
beauty. 3. To secure friendships. 4. To a perception of it as part of a fashion-
able deportment. But it is only when he is virtuous, because it is a prescription of
Divine law that there is any religion in it. If you do what is virtuous because God
tells you, then only do you give an example of the authority of religion over your
practice. God cannot reward you in the capacity of Master when His service is not
the principle of it, nor as Judge when your virtue has no reference to Hislaw. And
the highest sense of duty towards society will not be received as an atonement for
wanting a sense of duty to God. He gave you your virtuous faculties and provided
a sphere for their exercise, yet you do not love Him. Conclusion: 1. Virtue with-
out religion, from the want of an adequate motive, is at best imperfect and breaks
down under the severe pressure of temptation. Christian virtue sustained by the
love of God is invincible, perpetual, permanent. 2. If Scripture and all experience
are on the side of our text, should not this be turned by each of us to personal
account? 3. The love of God may be, and can only be, shed abroad in the heart
by the Holy Ghost. (Z. Chalmers, D.D.) Anathema Maranatha (in conjunction
with 1 Cor. xvi. 22):—Our Lord is remonstrating with the Jews for their desire to
slay Him. By taking His life they would be taking their own (ver. 40). This was
attempted under the pretence of love to God. Our Lord here exposes its hollowness.
The other verse is a prediction of the inevitable consequence of impenitence. In
1 Cor. xii. 3 Paul tells us that the Jews called Jesus Anathema, 7.e., a person
devoted to destruction. How He turns their doctrine uponthem! ‘It is not Jesus
who shall be destroyed, but those who do not love Him.” I. THe mmnp DELIGHTS IN
SOME SPECIFIC AND ABSORBING PURSUITS, and the range of its search will widen, and
its standard rise in proportion to the purity, reverence, and the devoutness of the
desire. II. Tu1s rENDENCY FINDS ITS REWARD IN THE CONTEMPLATION OF THE HIGHEST
Goop. Finite intelligence can rest only in its infinite source. III. Tam parnway To
SUCH AN ISSUE IS OPENED IN THE GosPEL. 1. With unobtrusive step. There is no
vulgar ceremonial, no wild or harsh Eureka. 2. With surprising grace. 3.
With convincing luminousness. Christ is ‘‘the Way, the Truth, and the Life.”
4, With unembarrassed access. Willinghood is the only condition. ‘“ The
Spirit and the Bride say, Come.” IV. TH REVELATION WHICH THE GOSPEL
MAKES IS THE GREAT MORAL TRIBUNAL AND TEST. 1. It tries our estimate of law.
He who underrates the gospel lowers the standard of the law. A low estimate
of moral law means a low estimate of God. 2. It tests our reverence for God.
The mind which shrinks from the obligations of the gospel is deficient in its
veneration for the Supreme. 3. It tests our susceptibility to transcendent worth,
Without a sense of our utter worthlessness there can be no appreciation of Christ.
Any sense of personal righteousness detracts from our estimate of His. Just asa
man dwindles in His own esteem Christ rises and expands. Christ came not to
dower the rich and cleanse the pure, but to enrich the poor and wash the filthy. V.
To SET THIS GOSPEL AT NAUGHT IS TO BE LEFT WITHOUT EXCUSE. 1. Unless we can
find a substitute; but all substitutes hitherto have been like the cup of Tantalus.
Read the “Transactions of the British Association” beside a sick bed, or take them
as a light to the feet, and where is your consolation? 2. Unless we can silence
clouds of witnesses. Could a lie have filled the martyr with new faith? 3. Unless
we can do all this without misgiving. 4. But to yield to this gospel is to pass within
the range of everlasting love. (A. Murseil.) Love the supreme test:—As a man


cHaP, v.] ST. JOHN. 489


loveth so he is; for the lover is in the thing loved, more properly than in himself:
wherefore, if a man love earthly things, he may be called an earthly man; but if he
love heavenly things, or God, he may be called an heavenly or a godly man.
Therefore love God and heavenly things, for undoubtedly that is the best and most
assured love; for they be, and ever shall be, permanent; and all earthly things be
soon vanished and ended; and so the love of them is in vain (1 John ii. 15-17).
(Dean Colet.) The tests of love:—1. We take delight in pleasing the object of our
affection. 2. We delight in the society and conversation of those we love. 3. We
naturally prize the approbation of one whom we love. 4, We have reference to the
feelings of one whom we love, in all our conduct. 5. We naturally love to think of
the object of our affection. 6. We delight in conversing about an object of our
affections. 7. We are pained when separated from those we love. 8. We naturally
love the friends of the object of our affection. 9. We naturally avoid the enemies
of our friends. 10. We are grieved when our best friend is abused in our presence.
11. We are naturally credulous and pleased if we hear any good of those we leve.
12. We love to see means used to promote the interest and happiness of those we
love. 13. It is difficult for us to believe an evil report of one whom we love.
14. When we are compelled to believe an evil report of the object of our affection,
we are careful not to give it unnecessary publicity. 15. We naturally try to put the
most favourable construction upon any event that might be injurious to the interest
or reputation of a friend whom we love. 16. When any of the friends of one whom
we greatly love fall into any conduct that is greatly dishonourable to the object of
our affection, it distresses us, and we are disposed, as far as possible, to prevent a
repetition of the event. Nothing is more common than for impenitent sinners to
affirm that they do love God; and yet nothing is more certain than that they do
not love Him. (C. G. Finney.) The world does not love God:—I have been
reading Chinese books for more than forty years, and any general requirement to
“ love God,” or the mention of any one as actually ‘‘ loving Him,” has yet to come
for the first time under my eye. (J. Legge, D.D.) The awful charge :—I.
Here 18 AN AWFUL cHARGE. “Ye have not,” &c. To whom does this apply?
1. To those who are habitually unmindful of Him. Our thoughts as naturally
follow the object of our regard as the needle the loadstone. Says David,
“I love Thee, O Lord, my strength.” Observe what follows: “ How precious
are Thy thoughts unto me,” &c. But of the wicked it ig said, ‘‘God is not in
all their thoughts.” 2. To those who do not trust in Him, We cannot confide
in one we dislike, and we know not how to distrust one whom we truly esteem. 3.
To those who are unconcerned for His honour and interest. Is our friend mis-
represented? We naturally stand forth in his defence; we could not see him
injured or wronged without pain, and without endeavouring to have him righted.
But what lamentable unconcern do we witness for God and the things of God!
4. To those who are indifferent about His presence and favour. We value the
regard of those who are dear to us. II. ConsIpDER THEIR SIN AND DANGER. God
has the highest claims to our love, and not to love Him is a sin of no ordinary
magnitude. 1. It isa most comprehensive sin. Love is the fulfilling of the whole
law, and hence the want of it is a sin which violates the whole law. It is the
want of everything that is morally good, the root of all evil, the spring or root of
all disobedience. 2. It is a most inexcusable sin. For can any plead want of
ability? Is not the passion of love implanted in our nature? 3, It is a most
ruinous and destructive sin. All who die without love to God must be excluded
from His presence, shut out from His kingdom. Apply the subject—1. To those
who are destitute of this love. Humble yourselves before God. 2. To those whose
love to God is low and languid. Let them seek to have it revived and invigorated
by a contemplation of the Divine excellencies—grace and love—as displayed in the
great Mediator. 3. To those whose love to God is increasing. ‘If any man love
God, the same is known of him.” (The Evangelist.)


Ver. 43. Iam come in My Father’s name, and ye receive Me not.— Whence learn—
I. Albeit Christ be God over all, equal with the Father, and Lord over His own
house, and so actsin His own name, yet IT PLEASED Him To conDESCEND as Mediator,
not only to purchase life to them that_come to Him, but to comm into the world
CLOTHED WITH A COMMISSION FROM “HE FatTHER to make offer of this purchased life,
that by His condescendence He might commend His love to His people, and teach
them humility, and not to run on a calling unsent, and that we might look on Him
as approved of the Father, and that such as come to Him the Father will accept


iin


490 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fcHap. ¥.


them, for saith He, “I am come in My Father’s name” (see Phil. ii. 5, 6, 7, &c.;
Matt. iii. 17; Heb. vy. 4,5). II. Cunist thus coming 18 To BE RECEIVED, His doc-
trine to be heard, Himself to be acknowledged for such in His person, offices, commis-
sion, and benefits, as He declareth Himself to be; to be rested on and embraced, to
be employed and submitted to as such, for so is imported in that they should
receive Him. III. Albeit Christ be the great Ambassador of the Father, not a
servant, but the Son (Matt. xxi. 37). And albeit He was singularin His admiration
of His office, and all tending to the good of sinners, YeT SUCH IS THE PERVERSENESS
OF THE WORLD AS NOT TO MAKE Him wetcomeE; for it is the peculiar privilege of the
elect to be druwn to Him, and others, they neither see His excellency, nor feel their
need of Him; therefore saith He, ‘‘ I am come in My Father’s name, and ye receive
Me not.” IV. Sucw as REJECT CHRIST ARE DESTITUTE OF THE LOVE OF GoD, nor
have, they any evidence of respect to Him, since Christ is the clearest image of the
Father, and cometh in His name, and the Father will not be acknowledged but in
aud through Him. Therefore by this doth He prove that challenge (ver. 42). V.
Wuen Curist manirests Himsenr to the world, ir Is USUAL WITH SATAN TO HOUND
OUT SEDUCERS AND FALSE TEACHERS, to study to bear him down, to seduce souls, and
by their courses to make the way of truth odious; for so is imported that another
shall come, pretending either to be the Christ, or to hold Him out to others (see
Matt. xxiv. 5, 24; Acts v. 36, 37). VI. ALBEIT FALSE TEACHERS PRETEND TO COME
IN Gop anD Carist’s NAME (Matt. xxiv. 5), YET THEY DO BUT COME IN THEIR OWN, aS
having no commission when they run, as making themselves, their reputation and
advantage, their chief aim in their undertaking, and as speaking the imaginations
of their own heart and brain, without any warrant from God; for ‘‘ another shall
come in His own name.” VII. SucH as EMBRACE NOT CHRIST MAY TAKE WORSE IN
His room, and will easily receive and embrace false teachers and seducers. Men’s
nature is propense to evil courses, and is readiest to be affected with what is wrong.
And seducers are more ready to serve men’s humours than faithful ministers may
be, and withal it is God’s just judgment on the world to give them up to such,
since they will not receive the love of the truth (2 Thess. ii. 10, 11,12). There-
fore saith He, ‘If another come in his own name, him ye will receive.” This is
the heinous sin of men, to affront Christ, to respect Satan in his messengers, before
God in His Son, asto prefer lies to truth. And itis their dreadful punishment to
be given up to such delusions, because they will not see the light, or do receive it
only as it may serve their turn, or weary of the light, and walk not answerable to
it. And men should be ashamed of their errors, as being their plague, and a pro-
clamation that they have not received the love of the truth. (G. Hutcheson.)
He who despises the Dove (John i. 42) falls a prey to the frogs (Rev. xvi. 13). (R.
Berser, D.D.) There is light for those loving light, and darkness for those loving
darkness. (Pascal.) Robert Owen rejected Christianity, and died a believer in
spirit-rapping. (W.H. Van Doren, D.D.)


Ver. 44. How can ye believe, which receive honour one of another ?—False and
true glory :—Something is lost in this rendering of ‘* honour”? in the place of glory.
More is lost by the substitution of ‘‘from God only” for “from the only God.”
Glory is the forthshining of light, the manifestation of a perfection inherent in the
person spoken of. What a rebuke, therefore, lies in the phrase ‘“ Receiving glory
one from another,” implying a claim of inherent excellence. To speak of it in
connection with man is to deny creation and the fall, to deify man and to dethrone
God. The other substitution is less excusable. The very object of the expression
is to show that there is none good but One, that is God. There is but one Being
who has any light to emit, any excellence to manifest. Any other glory must be
counterfeit ; to accept or profess to give it is an affront to the majesty of God as the
one Being. I. Tum TENDENCY WHICH IS IN ALL OF US TO RECEIVE GLORY FROM
anoTHER. This is a different thing from that of which St. Paul says, ‘Render
honour to whom honour is due,” or St. Peter, ‘‘Honour all men.’”? Honour is
respect, recognition of the claims of position, character, humanity, not the impious
flattery, for receiving which Herod was smitten. But much of that which men give
to or expect from another is glory—the ascription of inherent excellence. We
should call it cant to be reminded that God is the giver of that which makes a
sagacious statesman or an eloquent orator. The thought, ‘‘ What hast thou that
thou didst not receive?” though it lies on our theological shelf, is not welcome as
a monitor. We have borrowed the word “talent” from the parable, but we have
divorced it from its context—as the memento of a Lord who will hold His servants


Pe


ed 4


TO Sa Eee a eee


bola Nie


OHAP. v.] ST. JOHN. 491


in strict account. II. In contrast with this habit our Lorp sETS BEFORE US THE
ALTERNATIVE OF SEEKING GLORY FROM THE ONLY Gop. It seems strange after the
above definition of glory to seek it from God as something He can communieate.
Yet our Lord speaks of seeking from God that forthshining in ourselves The life
to which Christ calls us is no tame monotony. It is a seeking of glory; the am-
bition to be accepted; an aspiration after an applause that the world wots not of.
It is the desire for the approval of God Himself which attends upon the exercise of
the Christ-like mind. Where this life is there is elevation above lying world-
worship. Begin this ambition at once. If hitherto we have allowed the thought
of other people to come in, let us do little acts of good which no one can discover,
or form some in secret, some good habit hitherto falsely ascribed to us, and thus
seek a glory that comes from the only God. II. Tue conNnEcTION OF FAITH WITH
THESE HABITS. 1. How can ye believe who seek the one glory? To believe is to
realize the invisible. This is the direct opposite of the habit before us. To receive
glory from another is to be deaf and blind to all but sense and time. 2. How can
ye believe who seek not the other glory? Faith is a thing which presupposes @
searching after, till it finds the God in whom man lives and moves and has his
being: the half unconscious consciousness that there is a glory which God, the alone
good and great and glorious, destines for and can alone bestow on man. 3. “ How
ean ye believe?” (1) It is good for us to be sternly reminded that there are states
of mind incapable of believing. (2) The gospel may be true all the time and you
responsible for rejecting it. How can ye believe with your worldly lives and
ambitious projects? (3) Lord, convince us of the shame and folly and wickedness
of this earth-bounded, miserable creature worship, and draw our thoughts upwards
to Thy glorious presence. (Dean Vaughan.) The peril of seeking honour of men :—
1. All its attendant circumstances add weight to this remarkable utterance. It is
the statement of the hidden reasons for Jewish wilfulness. There wasa deep moral
incapacity which made Christ’s words and works powerless. 2. That which made
belief powerless in the Jews makes it powerless in us. 3,-In a very few touches He
shows the real character of this evil—the allowing man’s estimate to become the
measure of what is to be honoured. I. WHAT THIS DANGER IS THE EFFECT OF WHICH
I8 TO MAKE IT IMPOSSIBLE FOR US TO SAVINGLY RECEIVE THE TRUTH. 1. Pride.
Take, e.g., a man of high intellectual power. Poor as it is held by God’s standard,
yet when judged according to the low measures many propose to themselves, the
man has aright to be proud. Accordingly, he becomes a law unto himself and looks
on others with a calm sense of superiority. By degrees he has a secret pleasure in
going against the common forms of belief. His greater acuteness shows him errors
in creeds, and then perhaps he stoops to be a leader of babes and grows into a
heresiarch, or sinks, if truth be too strong for him, into the sadder honours of
a spurious martyrdom. But for some overpowering work of grace, belief is im-
possible to such a man. Wrapped up in the superiority of a Pharisee, or embittered
into a scofling Sadducee, how can he believe? 2. Self-conceit—a bastard growth
of the same evil root. There is scarcely any peculiarity on which such may not
ground a high estimate of themselves. Singularities of dress, bodily defect, a lisp,
&c., show the workings of this lesser devil. What is there in this empty, inflated,
irritating soul on which the gospel can lay hold when a strange dress, &c., is
enough to satisfy his desire for greatness? 3. Vanity—closely related to the two
former and yet widely different. It is a diseased desire for the good opinion of
others to mend or bolster up our good opinion of ourselves. There is no humilia-
tion to which a vain man will not stoop; he would rather be laughed at than left
unnoticed. His itching desire to bring himself into notice spreads into his religion,
and shows itself in small instances of ridiculous manner or rite. How can such an
one believe? 4. Self-consciousness:is a struggling form-of the same evil. The
self-conscious man is ever tormented with an ever-present vision of self in what he
is doing. He cannot confess sin without thinking how well he is doing it, nor pray
without thinking how others, if they only saw him, would applaud. All of these
forms have about them this deadly element, that they substitute some lower object
for the one true end of a man’s being—to do the will of God. Il. Waerz 1s ovr
DELIVERANCE? 1. We cannot find it in ourselves. The proud man cannot reason
himself out of his pride; self-conceit will survive all disgrace ; vanity will go on all
through life blemishing everything, and self-consciousness will poison a life of active
exertion and contemplative piety. 2. Self in this deceitful form can only be cast out
by our Maker. In His presence only can we see our littleness. There all self-
delusions fade. It is well, then, to get there from time to time in a solemn and


499 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [oHAP, Ve


especial manner. 3. But then you must watch in detail against the temptation.
(1) Think as little as possible about any good in yourself ; turn your eyes from self
and speak as little as possible about yourself, and specially be on your guard against
the little tricks by which the vain man seeks to secure attention. (2) Take meekly
the humiliations which God in His providence deals out to you. (8) Place your-
self often beneath the Cross. (Bp. S. Wilberforce.) Undue regard to reputation
a source of unbelief :—I. THE NATURE AND EVIL TENDENCY OF AN UNDUE REGARD TO ‘
REPUTATION. 1. There is a proper regard which is useful and laudable. This }
Samueland Paul had. We may value it—(1) As atest of our own character, and as .
an instrument for doing good. (2) But in a moderate manner, and (3) Not as the
main motive of our conduct. 2. There may be an undue regard in cases in which
the opinion of the world seems to be entirely despised. An affectation of singularity,
a contrariety to the maxims and conduct of the world, may spring from a desire of
reputation. 3. In general, however, it is by the dread of singularity that this undue
regard is evinced. We are anxious to follow the world. The evil of such a principle
is great. (1) It robs God of His proper glory. (2) It is base and mean, therefore,
and further because it is but the love of self. (3) It is highly prejudicial to others.
For it will induce us to flatter them in order that they may be pleased with us.
(4) It fails of its object. The world isa hard master. ‘Them that honour Me I
will honour, but they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed.” Il. THE
NATURE AND EXCELLENCY OF SEEKING THE HONOUR THAT COMETH oF Gop. 1. Its
nature and advantages. The man who is guided by this motive—(1) Sets God ever
before him as his supreme Lord whom he is bound by every obligation to obey. (2)
He learns to attach little value to human approbation. (3) He obtains peace, and (4)
The time is coming when he will enter upon eternal honour, while those who act
from the opposite principle will be rewarded with shame and everlasting con-
tempt. 2. Itsexcellence. It is—(1) Pure, unalloyed by any mixture of imperfection,
and consists of regard for a Being infinitely pure. (2) Simple, because it has but
one end in view. (3) Noble, because its end is the glory of God. (4) Fixed and
permanent. The tastes of men vary, but the will of God is unchangeable.
(5) Always productive of peace and happiness. JI. THE coNNECTION oF THESE
PRINCIPLES WITH A READY RECEPTION OF THE DOCTRINES OF Curist. As the under-
standing is biassed by the affections, it follows that when the love of reputation
operates the mind is predisposed to believe that system which is fairest in human
estimation. The man who follows the world has nothing to do with principle or
truth. He is a slave to those whose opinion he courts. It is not to a character
like this that it belongs to pursue the calm investigation of truth or to suffer for it.
This requires independence and unselfishness only imparted by the influence of
some great principle, such as a supreme desire for the favour of God. Hence
Nicodemus, Joseph, Nathanael, Zaccheus, &c., were already disposed by the fear of
God to embrace the gospel, while in the Pharisees, whose religion was vanity and
whose hearts thirsted for applause, rejected it. (J. Venn, M.A.) Why men
cannot believe in Christ:—I. THE HINDRANCE IN THE WAY OF THE PHARISEES.
1, The mere fact of receiving honour, even if that honour be rightly rendered, may
make faith a difficulty. He is in danger of being elevated above the conviction of
sin and of the necessity of salvation. 2. It is still more perilous if, receiving
honour, we come to expect it. Those who do are not in the condition which
renders it easy to say, ‘‘God be merciful to me, a sinner.” 38. The Pharisees received
honour, but it was quite undeserved. They extolled one another for ostentatious
religiousness, whereas they devoured widows’ houses, &c. If a man has a fine
character and doesn’t deserve it, and allows it to go on, how can he believe in Christ
whose light shows him in his true colours? How can the man who has lived in the
dark love the light? 4. Always receiving this honour, they deceived themselves
iuto believing that they deserved it. The deluded becomes self-deluded, and when
the smoke of incense makes their eyes dim with self-conceit, it is not at all
marvellous that they cannot believe in Christ. 5. The praise of men generally
turns the receivers into great cowards. To believe in Jesus is to forfeit that. Men
would no longer salute them as Rabbi, but turn them out of the synagogue. Soa
good many now cannot believe because they are afraid. The commercial traveller
would be exposed to the chaff of the commercial room; the working man to the
coarse remarks of the workshop, Some are afraid of the boon companions whom
they have led. How many live on the breath of their fellow men! II. Oruer
HINDRANCES. 1, Some are unable to believe because they have a very high opinion
of themselves. They have never done anything amiss, or have good hearts at bottom,


RO eae av


cHaP. Y.] ST. JOHN. 493
2. In many cases there is a strong aversion to confession of sin and to approach to
God. 8. In others the hindrance is indolence. 4. Many are too fond of pleasure to
believe in Christ. 5. Habitual or occasional sin. 6. Love of gain. 7. An
unforgiving temper ;—all impede faith in Christ. But they all aggravate the sin.
Dare you plead them before God? (C. H. Spurgeon.) The idolatry of genius :—
I. Descripe THE Evin. 1. The lowest and least sinful grade of it is when men
value genius and do homage to it simply for its own sake, and apart from its uses.
This evil is exemplified where men honour another, not for anything he has done,
but simply because he has received from God some quality, intelligence, beyond that
ordinarily bestowed. He may be a vain man, who is concerned chiefly to use his
gifts for display; or an indolent man, who allows life to pass away without his
doing any benefit; or a thoughtless man, who has never formed one worthy aim ;
or an irresolute man, who is driven through life as a mere waif. 2. A worse is
reached when men suffer their admiration of genius to blind them to moral distor-
tions. Sometimes the man is bold and wicked enough to employ, genius for
feathering the poisoned arrows of vice, so that they may fly the surer and strike the
deeper. At other times only the tendency of his writings saps the moral principle.
In other cases the writer may have kept his page comparatively clean whilst he has
been himself a man of notoriously flagitious life. Are such men worthy of being
held up to admiration? 3. Another stage, more daring and wicked, is when
men of superior powers are actually deified. This is exemplified in those forms of
heathen hero-worship; and something not essentially different from this may be
found in the saint-worship of the Romish Church. It may appear to some, however,
that there is no risk of this species of idolatry attaching itself to mere literary
genius. But what is to be said of the deliberate proposal of Comte—to revise the
Calendar, and appoint days for the special worship of great men, gods, heroes,
saints; in the first of which he would place such names as those of Moses, Homer,
St. Paul, Shakespeare, Frederick the Great; in the second, Buddha and Confucius;
and in the third, Hercules and Ovid? IJ. Tue Evin AND DANGER OF SUCH A TENDENCY.
The worship of genius is—l. Irrational. The difference between one man’s
intellect and another’s can never be so immense as to make it compatible with the
dignity of a rational being for the less gifted to bow down in homage and reverence
to his more richly endowed brother. Is it not a dereliction from our proper
manhood? What would be thought of us were we to treat other gifts of God after
the same fashion? Beauty, strength, &e. 2. Immoral. The first principle of
morality is, that a man is neither to be praised nor blamed for what is merely
physical and constitutional. The mere possession of a gift infers no excellence,
implies no worthiness. It is as the possessor uses them that he becomes a fit
subject for approbation or the opposite. The immorality is heightened when a man
of genius is lauded, in spite of the impurity, blasphemy, or falsehood of his writings,
or the crimes of his life. 3. Prejudicial to the moral interests of the youth of the
community. ‘‘We must put an end,” says the Platonic Socrates, speaking of the
immortal stores of the Greek poets, “We must put an end to such stories in our
State, lest they beget in the youth too great a facility for wickedness.” 4. Idolatrous.
You worship genius: Why?—Because it is the gift of God? So is nature. Because
it is attractive and brilliant? So is the sun, so are the stars, the earth, the sea.
Because it fills you with delight? So do the flowers. Where do you draw the distinc-
tion? (W. L. Alexander, D.D.) Self-seeking :—A certain king had a minstrel
whom he commanded to play before him. It was a day of high feasting; the cups
were flowing, and many great guests were assembled. The minstrel laid his fingers
among the strings of his harp and woke them all to the sweetest melody, but the
hymn was to the glory of himself. It was a celebration of the exploits of song
which the bard had himself performed, and told how he had excelled high-born
Hoel’s harp, and emulated soft Llewellyn’s lay. In high-sounding strains he sang
himself and all his glories. When the feast was over, the harper said to the
monarch, ‘0 king, give me thy guerdon; let the minstrel’s meed be paid.” Then
the monarch replied, ‘Thou hast sung unto thyself; pay thyself. Thine own
praises were thy theme; be thyself the paymaster.” The harper eried, ‘Did I
not sing sweetly? O king, give me thy gold!” But the king said, **So much the
worse for thy pride, that thou shouldst lavish such praise on thyself. Get thee gone,
thou shalt not serve in my train.” (W. Baxendale.) Happiness and humility :—
Some time since I took up a work purporting to be the lives of sundry characters
as related by themselves. Two of those characters agreed in remarking that they
were never happy until they ceased striving to be great men. (E. Payson, D.D.)


a ve


~


494 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cHaP. Vv.


Vers. 45-47. Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that
accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust.—The day of judgment is likened to
a trial, and we learn that with every verdict there will be given reasons which shall
satisfy the intelligent creation. When we read of books and witnesses, we may be
sure there will be evidence we shall not be able to contradict. 1. Conscience will
probably be the great accuser. This may now be torpid; but circumstances con-
stantly occur to show that it is not dead. 2. Conscience now awakens with
memory, and so it will be then; and so memory will reproduce every action, and
conscience will determine its character. Addressing Himself to Jews, our Lord,
notwithstanding the testimony of His miracles, avers that He will not accuse them
for their infidelity. There were such clear attestations in the writings of Moses to
Himself, that it would be sufficient only to produce them. And what a forgetful-
ness of the element of their religion, and what a stifling of conscience must there
have been ere they could profess to trust in a lawgiver whose laws they set at
nought! I. Our Lord makes it 4 NECESSARY CONSEQUENCE ON MEN’S BELIEVING Mosss,
THAT THEY SHOULD BELIEVE IN Him. 1. The law and the gospel, therefore, must
be parts of the same system. (1) If you consider the law as a system of types, and
compare it with the gospel as the antitype, it seems impossible to avoid being
struck by the correspondence. (2) The gospel furnishes us with the character in
which the law is written, and thus enables us to decipher its hieroglyphics. 2. How
can we account for this? Not by chance; for there is not here and tnere an
accidental resemblance. But when it is the business of a lifetime to find out all
the reciprocities, and the impossibility of a lifetime to detect one disagreement, we
are compelled to believe that, whoever constructed the gospel, formed it for the
purpose of adapting it to the law. 3. Let us see how the argumentstands. (1) The
founders of Christianity must, if impostors, have laboured to give plausibility to
their system by assimilating it to the law; but in order to success, they must have
had unbounded familiarity with the Mosaic institution and unbounded ingenuity
in giving substance to shadows. (2) Had the apostles been learned rabbis, they
would not have been equal to this; but they were unlearned peasants. (3) The
only theory on which we can account for this mutual adaptation, is that both come
from God. 4. Consequently, to reject one is to reject both. The Jews, indeed,
had no such acquaintance with the gospel as we have; but they had abundant oppor-
tunity of noting the correspondence of Christ with the Messianic prophecies, They
rejected the former, and hence the latter also. 5. To follow the same line of
thought further. The Bible, though composed in different ages and by different
writers, is an uniform book, presenting throughout the same truths, though with a
great variety of exhibition and marked by a surprising similarity of style. This is
convincing alike of the unity and Divinity of its authorship, and to believe one part
of it is to believe the whole. II. Tue Force oF THE REASONING THAT Ir MoszEs
WERE NOT BELIEVED NEITHER WOULD Curist BE. 1. We are wont to think that
were Christ to speak and work now as He.did eighteen hundred years ago, that His
ministry would result in widespread conviction of unbelievers and conversion of
sinners. But if the fact that the Jews resisted the writings of Moses proved that
there was no hope of them being overcome by the words of Christ, we might infer
that those who reject the preaching of Christ’s ministers would reject Christ Him-
self. The amount of necessary resistance would not be greater in the one case than
the other, except that the Jews had an incomplete, but Christians have a perfect
Bible. But would not Divine eloquence and miracles be more powerful than the
written Word? No, (1) Because the Holy Spirit is the Agent of conversion in
either case. (2) Because there being no respect of persons with God, one genera-
tion is dealt with by the same laws as another; and we have no right to believe
that in handling a miracle the Spirit would apply a greater effort than in handling
the Word. (3) In resisting the writings of Moses the Jews had resisted the Holy
Spirit speaking in those writings, and henceforward, in resisting the word of Christ
they were to resist the Spirit speaking in those words, And so now the Spirit turns
upon us sufficient evidence to convince, but not to compel. (4) ‘To think that we
should be converted by miracle who are unconverted by Scripture is to apologize
for infidelity by throwing the blame upon God.” It holds good to-day, “ If we will
not hear Moses and the prophets, neither shall we be persuaded though one rose
from the dead.” (H. Melvill, B.D.) Christ’s testimony to the Bible:—There is
much controversy about the Book. I¢ will be interesting, amid the din and tumult
to find out what Christ thought of it. If He makes it outto be a good Book, I shall
continue my faith init. If He is hesitant or doubtful, I shall not hesitate to give


OHAP, V.]} ST. JOHN. 495


it up. I. In necarp To orneRs. 1. He commended it as an object of study. (1)
Without one word of caution. He points to it as you would point your child to a
garden, where you give him liberty to roam where and eat what it may. If there
was a pit there, or a poisonous serpent, and your child came to harm, you would be
to blame. So Christ sends us to the Bible, and takes the entire responsibility.
(2) Authoritatively; not with a polite wish, but with a command. We want to do
away with the imperative mood, and are inviting people to be courteous enough to
let the sunlight into their chambers. If you have any doubt about your Bible,
then go like a crouching dog and ask people to kindly listen to your tale. But if it
be in your heart as the life of vour life, then speak it boldly and lovingly. (3) Com-
pletely. He does not say, ‘‘ When you come upon anything that taxes your fancy,
put that into the waste-paper basket, and go on; when you meet with a difficulty,
pass it by, and accept what you can accept; when something appears incredible,
reject it, and pass on to what you can accept.” Had there been anything wrong
there I know, because I know His truth and nobleness, that He would have told me
of it. 2. He declared its absolute integrity, and exactly as a truth-speaking man
would do. Persons came to Him with a difficulty, and in His answer there is this
parenthesis: ‘‘ The Scriptures cannot be broken.’ This was not special pleading.
The subject had no reference to Scripture. The remark is casual and unstudied,
and one on which those who examine witnesses place great reliance. He had the
opportunity of making annotations, of saying, ‘‘I now refer to the moral parts,” or
“] am speaking eclectically”; but His whole assumption, on the.contrary, broadens
out into an infinite confidence in the integrity cf the Scriptures. 3. He taught that
it contains the great answers to all the great questions of the soul, (1) As regards
duty. A man came to Him, asking, “ What shall I do to inherit eternal life?”
Jesus instantly replied, ‘‘ What is written in the law?” and showed that that great
question had been answered from the beginning. (2) As regards destiny. In the
parable of the rich man and Lazarus He showed that the men of olden time did
not go down to hell without warning. “If they hear not Moses,” é&c. II. In
REGARD To Himsenr. He was not a mere lecturer about the Bible. 1. He fled
Himself to it in the time of His temptation and »gony. ‘It is written.” In His
great crisis He goes to the Bible; He has it in His heart; He quotes it as if He
had written it. 2. Coming out of the wilderness into society, we find Him even
quoting it in self-vindication. Again and again He said to learned men, ‘‘ Have ye
never read?” To His own disciples, “How is it that ye do not understand?”
And when He began to read, their hearts began to burn. They had been reading
the Scriptures, and yet had made nothing of them, like many to-day. Read it with
Christ, and you will find His person, claims, promises, vindicated everywhere. 3.
Christ found Himself in the whole Bible. ‘Had ye believed Moses,” &c.,
“ Beginning at Moses,” &. And what is the Old Testament testimony to Him ?
That He is Creator, Preserver, Redeemer, Sovereign, Friend; “the same to-day,
yesterday, and for ever.” Then search the Scriptures; read them through. 1, This
alone will qualify you for criticizing it. 2. This alone will give you solid comfort
and eternal life. (J. Parker, D.D.) The unity of the Bible an argument for its
Divinity :—In reading the Bible I seem always to hear the same voice: whether
the volume is informing me how the unshapen chaos resolved itself at the Creator’s
bidding into symmetry and life—or men, who, familiar with the scenes, are gather-
ing centuries into sentences; or the lawgiver is arranging the ceremonies of the
mystic volume ; or historians are discoursing of battles and captivities; or evan-
gelists describing the institutions, and apostles unfolding the doctrines of Christianity
_-I seem always to hear the same voice, as though the words of John, the exile in
Paimos, were the echo of those of Moses, the leader of Israel. There is vast dif-
ference in the subjects successively touched on ; but, notwithstanding, there is a
tone which I always recognize, and which always impresses the feeling that I am
hearkening to the same speaker. There seems no change in the instrument, though
continual change in the sound; as if at one time the whirlwind swept the chords,
that Imay be astonished with the utterance of wrath and devastation, and at another
they were touched by an angel’s hand, that I might be soothed by the melody of
mercy. There is the same scheme carried on by the wanderings of patriarchs, the
sacrifices of priests, the ambition of kings, and the sufferings of martyrs. The
same style is preserved by the poet in his hymns, by the prophet in his visions, the
lawgiver in his codes, the historian in his annals; so that, as though the Author
never died, but appeared at one time in one character, and another in another, the
Bible comes to me as the dictate of one mind, and the writing of one pen. Inspira-


ahi ry


496 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP, VI.
tion only accounts for this; but we cannot imagine any other solution. And if (fox
it is on this our text bids us fasten) there be such a sameness between the Jewish
and Christian dispensations, that all the types in the one find exact antitypes in
the other, and thus the two have such a relationship, that they compose one uniform
system, we must receive both or reject both. If we believe Moses we must believe
Christ, and if we believe Christ we must believe Moses ; and this serves to vindicate
what might otherwise seem difficult, that no Jew can truly believe his own religion
and yet deny the Christian religion. ‘For had ye believed Moses, ye would have
believed Me; for he wrote of Me.” (H. Melvill, B.D.) The impossibility of in-
venting the correspondence between Moses’ testimony and Christ’s work :—We should
like to see a company of acute and scientific reasoners, but ignorant of Christianity,
sit down to the study of the books of Leviticus and Exodus; they shall be told,
“‘ These books are full of types, and emblems, and figures, and ceremonies, and you
must strive to devise a simple religious system, which shall give significance to
every item of this symbolic array; there are mysterious intimetions,” we will tell
them, ‘‘in every page, couched in parabolic language, or unde? sacrificial institu-
tions, and your endeavour must be to invent a scheme of theology which shall
afford a plausible and rational explanation of all that is thus obscure.” Now do you
honestly think that our company of ingenious and intelligent writers would make
much way with their task? Can you believe that, as the result of their joint labours,
there would be sent into the world any scheme of religion which should fix the
plain meaning, or at least afford a clue, to all the mysteries of the books of Exodus
and Leviticus? Yet this is precisely what is done by the system of Christianity ;
done with so unvarying a carefulness, that you cannot find a point to which there
is nothing corresponding, Themen, moreover, who effected this were ignorant and
illiterate; so that the books were compiled when there was none of those human
appliances which at best would but ensure the most limited success. Whai alterna-
tive, then, have we but that of admitting a supernatural interference, and ascribing
to God the whole system of Christianity? (Ibid.) Christ in the Old Testament
and in the New :—Christ was in the faith of the patriarchs like corn in the ear; in
the faith of the law like corn grown into flower; but since the Incarnation He is in
our faith completely as when corn is made into bread. (Bernard.)


CHAPTER VI.


THE HISTORICAL CONNECTION BETWEEN CHapters V. AND VI.—Our Lord is in Galilee.
It has been, perhaps, a year since the healing at Bethesda. His ministry in Galilee
has gone forward, as described by Matthew, Mark, and Luke, including many
miracles, the Sermon on the Mount, the early parables, and the mission of the
twelve. Returning from this mission, on which they went two and two through-
out Galilee, teaching and healing, the twelve were weary and worn, as Jesus
Himself had been when He reclined beside Jacob’s well. So He compassionately
said to them (Mark vi. 31), ‘Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and
rest awhile.’”? That project led to his feeding the five thousand. This is the first
narrative in which John has been parallel to all three of the other Gospels (Matt.
xiv. 13-33; Mark vi. 31-52; Luke ix. 10-17), and it will not be so again until
the triumphal entry. John’s chief object is to present the Saviour’s discourses
and he probably gives this one Galilean event in common with the other Gospels
only by way of introducing the great discourse on the Bread of life. (J. 4.
Broadus, D.D.) The moral connection between Chapters V. and VI. :—The record
of a critical scene in Christ’s work in Galilee follows the record of the critical
scene at Jerusalem, At Jerusalem Christ revealed Himself as the Giver of life:
here He reveals Himself as the Support and Guide of life. In the former case the
central teaching was upon the relation of the Son to the Father; in this case it ig
in the relation of Christ to the believer. The episode contains the whole essence of
the Galilean ministry. It places in decisive contrast the true and false conceptions
of the Messianic kingship, the one universal and spiritual, the other local and
material. (Bp. Westcott.)


Vzrs. 1-21. After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee.—The reason


Ea eae ee ae ee
ad it


OHAP. VI.] | ST. JOHN. 497


for this journey :—I, As REGARDS Himsetr, 1. To avoid the fury of Herod who had
just slain the Baptist. 2. That the anger of the scribes and Pharisees (Mark vi. 3)
might abate. In this He teaches us to avoid all that might needlessly irritate
sinners and thus confirm them in their sin. God withdraws at times from men
only that He may take from them the occasion of sin. Going not in wrath, but in
love. II. As REGARDS THE pDisciPLES. 1. To give them leisure and retirement.
They were somewhat too full of all the things that they had done and taught, and
harassed by the continual coming and going of the multitudes who thronged the
master. 2. To train them in philanthropical as well as spiritual work. (W. Denton,
M.A.) The great multitude waiting to be fed:—1. The great company flocking to
Christ are the unbelieving nations of the world with a glimmering sense of their
wants—a first pang of hunger for the bread of life. 2. The willingness of Jesus to
supply bread is reproduced in the Church’s obedience to the command “ Go ye into
all the world,” &c. 8. The perplexity of the disciples has a counterpart in our
acknowledgment of insufficient means and failure to propagate the gospel. 4. The
miracle shows us that the world can only be fed by Jesus Christ. Let us consider—
I. THE NUMBER AND CONDITION OF THE MULTITUDES WHO ARE STRANGERS TO THE FAITH
AND HOPE OF CHRISTIANS. 700,000,000—about two thirds of the whole race—regarded
under three great divisions. 1. Brahminism, professed by 150,000,000—ancient,
idolatrous, cruel, licentious. Not a growing religion. Energetic reformers within
its fold are leading the most intelligent away from idolatry, but not to Christ.
2. Buddhism arose in the six century s.c. Its founder a philosopher, moral and
benevolent. Disgusted with Brahminism, he invented a system of pure morality,
but without a personal God and immortality. Numbers about 400,000,000.
3. Mohammedanism numbers about 80,000,000. It borrowed a little light from
revelation ; abhors idolatry ; acknowledges Jesus as a prophet. Its morality is low,
and its dream of a future life is tinctured with sensuality. Its history is a tissue
of impurity and cruelty. II. Our coNDITION AND MEANS OF FEEDING THIS GREAT
muLTITUDE. Christians not above 300,000,000 in number, From the commence-
ment Christianity has been promulgated—l. By foreigners visiting some gospel
centre, as on the day of Pentecost, and carrying the seeds of life to their own homes.
In no country are there so many heathen visitors as in England. Were their
spiritual needs provided for here what vast good would result! 2. By colonists and
traders. Professing Christian} Englishmen are everywhere. Would that they
possessed what they profess. 3. By missions. Your duty is—(1) To pray the
Lord to raise up more missionaries. (2) To ask your self whether you could go,
and to encourage others to go. (3) To support those who do go. (4) To keep up,
by reading, &c., a living interest in their work. (W. T. Bullock, M.A.) Christ
the Refresher of mankind :—I, THE MIRACLE OF THE BREAD, 1, Our Lord here
appears as the Master of matter and natural laws. We are, in a certain sense, the
slaves of matter, and when we conquer Nature it is only by obeying her. 2. The
miracle appears to have been recorded because it led to disbelief. Now men say
that there is too much miracle about Christ; then they said there was too little.
But if you juggle away the miracles of the Book you cannot get rid of the miracle
of the man. 3. In the fulness of Christ, as here revealed, is to be found the solution
of the pressing social problems of want and pauperism. II. THE PARABLE OF THE
BREAD. Christ’s words are works, and His acts speak. We shall be better able to
understand the refreshment which may come to us from this parable if we read it
in the light of ‘‘ Give us this day our daily bread.” This means—l. Give us food
sufficient, and do not spiritualize this away, 2. But let us not gird in those words
with the narrow rim of the loaf. Give us sanctifying bread. The words of Jesus
are spirit and life. 3. There are many substitutes fot the bread of Christ—morality,
education, art ; but in these things is no abiding satisfaction. 4. There are those
who speak as though there were two breads—a manly, undogmatic, free-speaking
religion for the strong man ; and Christianity for the weak man. But the time
comes to the strongest when he feels that he has a woman’s heart within him, and
when in his hour of anguish he cries to God for bread, what will it profit him to find
a stone, though it be the whitest intellectual marble. The bread for the woman
and the child was the same here as for the strong man. (Bp. Alexander.) Christ
the best Provider :—I. Curist 18 READY TO SATISFY THE WANTS OF THE Bopy. Many
persons do not trust Him in earthly pursuits. Christianity for them is something
“very spiritual.” “ They cannot live by prayer.” “Sermons do not satisly
hunger.” ‘Godliness does not give success in trade.” The gospel and Christian
experience, however, show that Jesus is a good Provider for bodily wants. 1. He


ae
498 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (crap. vi.


has sympathy for the needs of mankind (ver. 5). Although tired and weak and
engaged in the greatest affairs, yet, like a good householder, He is mindful of the
least wants of His people, and provides an evening meal. He does not forget the
hungry raven: will He forget those who He has taught to pray for their daily bread
(Deut. iv. 7). 2. He awakens sympathetic hearts and hands to alleviate want. Here
the disciples. The apostolic Church, in the Spirit of Christ, cared for its poor,
widows, and orphans. Rome built splendid theatres: the Spirit of Christ builds
hospitals. II. Curist NEVER FORGETS THE WANTS OF THE souL. 1. Man’s
greatest want is bread for the soul—food that will be good when the world
shall pass away, that will be palatable in old age, that will strengthen in sick-
ness, and restore the dying. 2. The Saviour’s highest act of sovereignty is the
bestowment of this spiritual food. 3. His aim is to awaken desire for this
heavenly bread by means of earthly good things and providences. (C. Gerok, D.D.)
The compassion of Christ :—Christ’s mercy was not a mouth-mercy, as was that of
those in St. James’ time, that said to their necessitous neighbours, ‘‘ Depart in
peace, be warned,” but with what? With a fire of words, &c. But our Saviour,
out of deep commiseration, both pitied the people and healed them on both sides,
within and without. Oh, how well may He be called a Saviour, which, in the
original word, is so full of emphasis, that other tongues can hardly find a fit word
to express it by! (J. Trapp.) Christ feeding the five thousand:—I. THE
ZEAL DISPLAYED BY THE PEOPLE IN FOLLOWING JgEsus. 1. Although they knew
He had gone into a desert place. 2. Some were doubtless actuated by curiosity,
but others were anxious to profit by His words. 3. We may blame those who
came from improper motives, but their zeal should condemn our coldness and
neglect. II, TH READINESS OF CHRIST TO PROVIDE FOR HUMAN want. III. THE
TRIAL OF THE DISCIPLES’ FAITH. Often in this way God opens our eyes to
our own weakness and His sufficiency. IV. THE PREPARATION FOR THE FEAST.
1. Confusion avoided. 2. Women and children protected from rudeness. 3.
Quick distribution facilitated. V. THE NATURE AND METHOD OF "HE MIRACLE,
1. The quality of the food was not changed, but its quantity was increased.
Our Lord does not pamper luxury, but satisfies hunger. 2. The people received
the bread from the apostles. ‘Thus Christ taught respect for His ministers,
because they act on His behalf. 3. The same miracle is repeated every day by a
different process, and we give no heed to it (Psa. civ. 14,15). WI. The narrative
teaches us a lesson of nconomy and FrucaLity. The bounties of Providence are
never to be wasted; when we have more than we need, let it be given to others.
(J. N. Norton.) Christ feeding the five thousand :—We have here—I. A PICTURE
OF HOPEFUL PROMISE IN THE MULTITUDE. 1. They were looking for the Messiah,
and, if they did not exactly believe, they had a large idea that Christ was He.
Their notions were more or less confused ; some were influenced by gaping wonder,
but all were enthusiastic to hear Christ, and disappointed His desire for rest. 2.
Christ honoured this imperfect zeal. It was in some sort a seeking of the kingdom
in preference to earthly comfort, and evinced a confidence in Christ that He never
disappoints. And what He would not do for Himself, and what the devil could not
extract from Him, is instantly commanded by human need. 8. The murder of
John the Baptist had something to do with His retirement. When grace is
mistreated it withdraws. What is driven away by the impiety of the great is
called forth by the confidence of the poor. 4. The self-denial of the people was
commendable. They had to make a long circuit and adventure into a desert region,
The way to Christ is never smooth, but sincere devotion follows Christ in the face
of all trials. II. A prorunE oF FAULTY FAITH IN THE DISCIPLES. 1. According to
earthly reason, Philip and Andrew were right. In the common course of affairs
the thing was impossible. But they should have known Christ better. Their faith
was overborne by looking only at human helplessness instead of at Divine resources.
Trust in God suffers from mammon on one side and poverty on the other. The
rich disregard Providence because they have plenty; the others grumble at it and
undertake to make a way of their own. III. A PIcrURE OF WONDERFUL GOODNESS
in Cunrist. 1. This has been likened to 2 Kings iv. 42-44, But we see at once that
the one was the work of the servant, the other that of the Master. 2. We observe
the truly Messianic character of the miracle. The prerogative of God in the
absoluteness of the Godhead is to create what is from what is not. But redemp-
tion is the taking of what is, and a developing of something additional. It is
the making of a saint out of a sinner. Like the miracle, the redeeming process
is—(1) Inscrutable. The Incarnation, the operations of the Spirit, the conveyance


onaP. vi.] ST. JOHN. 499


of spiritual aliment through the means of grace, are beyond our comprehension.
(2) Gracious. Christ might have shown His almightiness in works of judgment.
So now. IV. TH MATERIALS OF HAPPY ENCOURAGEMENT AND PROMISE TO FAITH AND
OBEDIENCE (Phil. iv. 19; Psa. xxxvii. 3). (J. A. Seiss, D.D.) Christ feeding the
jive thousand :—I. Our Lorp oFTEN PUTS QUESTIONS TO His DISCIPLES WHICH THEY
OANNOT ANSWER, AND LAYS ON THEM DUTIES WHICH THEY CANNOT PERFORM BY THEM-
SELVES. His object is to prove them, and to reveal their ignorance and weakness,
that they may appeal to Him for help. II. Curist 1s THz GoD oF ORDER, AND NOT
OF conrusion. His methodical and orderly arrangement—1. Facilitated the feed-
ing of the multitude. ‘2. Allowed the miracle to be clearly seen. 3. Prevented
crushing. 4. Secured that none should be overlooked. 5. Enabled the disciples
to count. Note the ordiliness of Christ’s kingdom. III. Curist nxureits Divine
RESERVE IN THE EXERCISE OF His MIRACULOUS POWER. 1. He used existing materials.
2. Employed existing agencies. 3. Although He could have created food and
satisfied hunger without any aid. 4. Apologetic significance of this. IV. Cunist
TEACHES US TO RECOGNIZE GOD AS THE GIVER OF OUR FOOD AND comForts (ver. 11).
V. CuHRIsT TEACHES THOSE WHO FOLLOW Him TO EXPECT AMPLE PROVISION FOR THEIR
TEMPORAL WANTS, VI, CHRIST TEACHES US A LESSON OF ECONOMY IN THE MIDST OF
PLENTY. However little He gives there is a surplus. But whether He gives little
or much, the surplus is not to be wasted. VII. TH sprriTUAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE
MIRACLE. 1. Christ is the bread of life from heaven. 2. He fills with Himself
every hungry soul who eats. 3. He gives Himself by means of His disciples.
(Family Churchman.) The Sea of Tiberias.—Had St. John written in Galilee
for Galileans he would have limited himself to the ordinary expression; but
writing out of Galilee, and for Greeks, he adds, ‘‘ Which is of Tiberias.”
The city of Tiberias, built by Herod Antipas, and thus named in honour of
Tiberius, was well known. to strangers. It was so called by the Greek geo-
grapher Pausanius, while Josephus used indifferently the two names. (F. Godet,
D.D.) The destination of our Lord :—St. Luke alone mentions Bethsaida as the
place near which the miracle took place. It has been ‘asserted that he means
Bethsaida near Capernaum, and that the event therefore took place on the western
shore. But this would make St. Luke contradict both the other evangelists and
himself ; for he tells us that Jesus withdrew to ‘‘a desert place” belonging to a
city called Bethsaida. Now, the mention of such a purpose forbids us to entertain
the notion that Luke is speaking of the city on the western shore, where our Lord
was always surrounded by multitudes, Josephus speaks of a town bearing the
name of Bethsaida Julias, situated at the north-east extremity of the lake, and
the expression Bethsaida of Galilee, by which St. John (chap. xii. 21) designates
the native city of Peter, Andrew, and Philip, would be unmeaning unless
there were. another Bethsaida out of Galilee. This latter was in Gaulonitis, in the
tetrarchy of Philip, on the left bank of the Jordan, a little above where it falls into
the Lake of Gennesareth. It was the place of Philip’s death and splendid
obsequies. (Ibid.) A great multitude followed Him.—Here we see how eager
was the desire of the people to hear Christ. Since all of them, forgetting them-
selves, took no concern about spending the night in a desert place. So much the
less excusable is our indifference and sloth when we are so far from preferring the
heavenly doctrino to the gnawings of hunger, that the slightest interruptions 1m-
mediately lead us away from meditation on the heavenly life. So far is every one
of us from being ready to follow Him to a desert mountain that scarcely one in ten
can endure to receive Him when He presents Himself at home in the midst of
comforts. But as the flesh solicits us to attend to its convenience, we ought like-
wise to observe that Christ of His own accord takes care of those who neglect
themselves in order to follow Him. For He does not wait till they are famished and
ery out for hunger, but provides food for them before they have asked it. (Calvin.)
When Jesus then lifted up His eyes and saw a great company, He said unto Philip,
“Whence shall we buy bread.”—The compassion of Jesus :—I. Ir was WITHOUT RES-
prot oF Persons. He never raised the question as to race or religion. If people
were in trouble it made no difference to Him who or what they were. II. Iv MEANT
PRACTICAL HELP. ‘The disciples had an_ interest in the multitudes which they
expressed by their advice to them to go and buy food. That was cheap benevolence.
But Christ’s compassion never spent itself on good advice. The good Samaritan
was Himself, and His conduct is the law of Christanity. III. Ir nap REFERENCE
PARTICULARLY TO SPIRITUAL NEEDS. The miracle was only a text for the sermon on
the “ Bread of life.’ (Monday Club.) Christ's compassion :—It is related of the


500 THER BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. ‘(cHar. vi.
mighty Xerxes, that as he looked upon his countless host, and remembered how soon
all, even the youngest and stoutest must be sleeping with the dead, he gave vent to
his feelings in a flood of tears. What a far nobler spectacle to behold the Saviour
of sinners, moved with compassion for the multitudes who followed Him, with
fainting steps and sorrowing in His inmost soul, that so many whose bodily hunger He
was about to satisfy with food, would, in the end, starve their souls by refusing the
Bread of life! (J. N. Norton.) The Church and the world :—1. It was rather to
the disciples than to the multitude that the events of the day were significant.
They had been taught by degrees all that was involved in “ leaving all” to “ follow
Him.” From the beginning it has been essential that a man should forsake the
world. But the world may be forsaken in many ways. Some have done so out of
contempt for it; others for the sake of a wholly selfish personal culture. But
Christ now taught His disciples what was their mission to the world they had left.
They had left it only that they might serve it more effectually, and were now to love it
with a new love. Discipleship involved practical laborious service, not only to Christ,
but to men. 2. There was something like embarrassment in Philip’s answer to our
Lord’s question : but before we blame him let us put ourselves in his place. It was
an unexpected appeal to limited resources. The disciples had a common purse,
All their modest requirements were provided for, but all their quiet economy was
invaded by a proposal to feed 5,000. 3. Christ intercedes with the Church for the
world. His intercession is not only with God for us all, but with us for one another.
(1) We are prone to make a life of personal edification the sum total of discipleship,
turning our backs on the problems of life, suffering and sin around us. But while
Christ is carrying upon His heart the burden of the world He cannot delight Him-
self in a companionship that seeks to be exclusive and selfish. (2) Again Christ
would not have us think less of each other as Christians, but there must be no for-
getting of those who are without, the world and its terrible hunger, physical and
moral. (3) Philip’s answer betrays his impatience with the apparent unreasonable-
ness of the question. And how often have we given the like answer, and silenced
the earnest man of large faith whom Christ has made the mouthpiece for His
question. 4. Andrew’s reply was a great advance on Philip’s. From Philip’s
non-existent two hundred pennyworth to Andrew’s actual five loaves is certainly to
make progress. It is moving out of the negative into the positive, out of that
region in which our cynicism and despair so often tarries into the region of practical
endeavour. Our Lord takes him at his word as we find in the parallel narrative,
‘*Bring them to Me.” A minute ago it could have been said exactly what the five
loaves were worth, and how many men they would feed, but since the Lord’s words, all
our powers of calculation are confounded. We contemplate things in themselves with-
out seeing any touch of the Divine power upon them, and so we could never make
five loaves worth more than five loaves. We take the measure of a man—his
natural powers, education, &c., and we leave no room for another factor that may
multiply indefinitely the whole series—the living power of Christ. 5. We ought to
notice that our Lord did not say, ‘‘ Whence will you buy bread,” but, ‘ we,” you and
I, (1) Do not let us think of our Lord as throwing upon His Church dark and
difficult questions for her to solve; He is rather seeking to bring her into fuller
fellowship with Himself. (2) We must recognize here the proffer of our Lord’s own
wisdom and power for the answering of His own question. Not only does Christ
intercede with the Church for, but works with her upon the world. (F. W. Mac-
donald.) Philip and his Master :—1. Observe how careful the Spirit is that
we should not make a mistake about Christ. 2. Learn that we being apt to make
mistakes need that the Spirit should interpret Christ to us. 3. Our Divine Lord
has a reason for everything he does. I. Herz 1s A QuESTION FoR Pump. 1, Put
with the motive of proving him. Christ would then—(1) Try his faith and He
found it very little. Philip counted pennies instead of looking to omnipotence. Few of
us can plead exemption from this failure. (2) His love which was of better quality,
for he did not ridicule the question. (3) His sympathy. This was greater than
that of those who said, ‘‘ Send them away.” God seldom uses a man who has a
hard or cold heart. A man must love people or he cannot save them. 2. Why
was it put to Philip? (1) Because he was of Bethsaida. Every man should think
of the place in which he lives. A native of a village or town should be its best
evangelist. (2) Because probably Philip was the provider as Judas was the treasurer.
Even so there are ministers, Sunday-school teachers, &c., whose official
business is to care for the souls of men. (8) Perhaps because Philip was not quite
so forward as others. He was about number six. People in this middle position


en as nee wel


CHAP. VI.] ST. JOHN. 501


want much proving. The lowest cannot bear it; the highest do not need it. 3.
The question answered its purposes. It showed Philip’s inability and weakness of
faith ; but only that he might be made strong. Until Christ has emptied our
hands He cannot fillthem. 4. The question was meant to prove the other disciples
as well. Here is a committee of two. I like this brotherly consultation of willing
minds. Philip is willing to begin if he has a grand start; Andrew is willing to
begin with a small capital. Philip was counting the impossible pence and could not
see the actual loaves; but Andrew could see what Philip overlooked. II. Turrz was
NO QUESTION WITH JESUS. 1. He knew. ‘‘Ah!” says one, ‘‘I don’t know what I
shall do!” Jesus knows all about your case and how He is going to bring you
through. 2. He knew what he would do. We embarass ourselves by saying,
“Something must be done, but I do not know who is to do it!”” But Jesus knows.
8. He knew how He meant to do it. When everybody else is defeated and non-
plussed He is fully prepared. He did it as one who knew what he was going to
do. (1) Naturally. Had it been a Roman Catholic miracle the loaves would have
been thrown in the air and come down transformed. Popish miracles are theatrical
and showy. (2) Orderly: He bade the men sit down on the grass in rows. (3)
Joyfully : He took bread and blessed it. (4) Plentifully. III. Tauern ovcurT To BE No
QUESTION OF A DOUBTFUL CHARACTER ANY LONGER To vs. 1. The question that
troubles many people is, ‘‘ How shall I bear my present burden?” That is sent to
prove you; butit is no question with Christ, for “as thy days so shall,” &e. 2.
What is to be done with this great city? The Master knows and so shall we when
we begin to co-operate with Him. 3. What must I do to be saved? Inquire
“‘ What wouldst Thou have me to do and this will be solved.”” (C. H. Spurgeon).
“ Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat ?”—Why this to Philip? At the
beginning of all His ministry we read, “Jesus findeth Philip, and said unto Him,
Follow Me.” Then Philip findeth Nathanael, to tell the news. But he does not
say, “‘ We have been found,” but ‘‘ We have found Him,” &c. A fairly good con-
fession, though giving man the lead instead of God. No wonder, then, that by and
by, even at the end, Philip was but half-persuaded of our Lord’s ministry, saying,
“Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us.” Philip being thus, to Philip
teaching comes well in the question set to him, and he shall say and find whether
bread and holy living comes from earth or heaven. He still thinks it must begin
from man’s side. He calculates the bread required ; he gives an estimate of cost.
Peter comes a little nearer with a grain or two of faith ; he can get “five loaves and
two fishes; but what are they among so many?” That is a question to write up
and keep before us, if we are ever tempted to despise the day of small things.
What is the missionary among so many? or the pastor, or the Sunday-school
teaclier, or the district visitor? What is the adequacy of the writer, or the
speaker, or the worker? of the society, of the corporate body, of the home word,
or any influence of teaching or of help? They are all insufficient, palpably and
avowedly, in themselves; yet they may, like the loaves here, get a sufficiency from
Christ. One little agency may still become the grain of mustard seed He sows, the
little piece of leaven He puts into the lump. What is an help among so many? What
may it not be as it passes into our Saviour’s hands? (Canon TI. F. Crosse, D.C.L.)
The testing power of circumstances :—I. Wuat was CHRIST'S OBJECT IN PUTTING THIS
question to His piscretes. 1. The question seemed to betray perplexity, but it
was not so. He condescended to espouse this difficulty that He might bring to
light that which was working in the disciples’ spirits. The hinge of all mysteries
is not in themselves, but in their concealment for the wise purposes of Deity. They
will come out gradually and slowly, and then we shall see how marvellously past
and future coincide with each other. And all this is simply the exercise of faith.
We must wait for God’s demonstration. 2. Observe, how completely our Lord’s
urpose was answered. Three suggestions came from three different quarters. (1)
To throw the multitude upon their own resources, “ Let them go into the villages,”
&e. (2) That they should be supported out of the resources of the disciples, but
that the two hundred pennyworth was beyond their resources. (3) To make the
resources go as far as they might. ‘¢There is a lad here,” &c., and then the
difficulty arises, ‘‘ What are these,” &. Their proper course would have been to
leave the perplexity with omnipotence. That they believed in our Lord’s omnipo-
tence is certain, but though they knew it as an abstract fact, they could not bring it
to bear on the present emergency, and therefore, they threw themselves on that
which any faithless man could throw himself upon human power in human distress.
The Saviour must have asked the question, “ How is it that they have no faith?


502 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [onar. Vi.

i
This is the way man ever treats God, turning to Him as a last resource only. 3.
This is the course the Lord has taken from time to time to make men understand
themselves, throwing them into difficulties and leaving them to prove what is in
them by their extrication from those difficulties, as seen in the case of Israel at the
Red Sea and before Jericho. II. THe way IN wHicH CHRIST PUTS THE SAME QUESTION
To us. 1. In the announcement of doctrines offensive to the natural man. (1)
That of the divinity of Christ and reason protests against it. (2) That of the
atonement and our sense of equity protests against it. (3) That of man’s depravity
and man’s priderecoils. (4) That of man’s impotency, and the sense ct self-reliance
on self resources protests. And when it comes to this, a man is brevght to the
test, is he willing to put reliance upon Christ? or is he determined to trust in him-
self. 2. The infliction of trial. Previous to trial most men, like Peter, think they
ean go through anything, but when it falls upon us, how our notes arechanged! In
that way God puts the question, are you able to trust Me? 3. The successes and
prosperities of life. Riches, which do not spoil a man’s character, they simply bring
out the evil that is in him. You shall look abroad upon the face of nature, and
possibly you may see in the cold time of winter, and the chill dews of spring, the
whole surface of the meadow without anything deleterious produced upon it; and you
may look at the same field when the warm and bright sunshine of summer and
autumn comes, and you find it swarming with weeds. Why, who hath come and
planted the tares amongst the wheat? No one; they have been there all along:
only in the nipping cold times of the year they were not able to come out; but
when the sun came, that which was lurking below came to the surface. This was
how it was with Hazael, and how it has been with manya man since. (Dean
Boyd.) The arithmetic of Philip and the arithmetic of our Lord:—In the
reckoning of men there is always a deficit; in the reckoning of Christ there
is always a surplus. (Lange.) Sums proved (Children’s Sermon) :—You
know what puzzle questions are; they are questions to make you wonder, and
the more you wonder the more interested you become, and the more interested
you grow the better you are likely to understand the answer when it comes.
But is your teacher ever puzzled? No; he simply asks the question to prove
you, to find out how much you know. It was for this purpose that Jesus put
the question to Philip, viz., to find out what kind of a scholar he had become.
I. WHat was THE QuESTION? How to meet a difficulty. Philip worked it all out
in mental arithmetic. First he made a rough guess as to the number of people.
Then he remembered how much a little for each would cost. Then he worked out
a sum in proportion. ‘ Ifit cost so much for one, what will it cost for five thousand ?”
And the answer was two hundred pennyworth. II. Was THE ANSWER RIGHT? No.
1. Because it only told what wouldn’t be enough. 2. Because it wasn’t a reply to
the question that Jesus had asked. Jesus did not say, ‘‘How much money is
required ?”’? But ‘“‘ How are we to get bread?”’ If Philip had learned his lessons
properly, he would simply have said, ‘‘ Thou who canst raise the dead, Thou canst
create bread.” Conclusion: 1. Do not leave Jesus out of your calculations. 2. Look
the question carefully, ‘‘ Whence shall we?” Philip hadn’t noticed that; but.it
makes matters much simpler, for if Jesus is going to help there won’t be much
difficulty. So Philip did what ne could, brought a few loaves and fishes to Jesus.
Then Jesus did what He could, blessed what Philip had brought, and the little
became enough for the many. 3. Remember the power of that we in—(1) the
government of your temper; (2) The great question, ‘‘What must I do to be
saved.” (J. R. Howatt.) Two hundred pennyworth of bread.—The air is full
of projects for the amelioration of the condition of the poor and for arranging the
relations of capital and labour. This story will afford help in these, if its suggestions
are heeded. The spectacle of the disciples wrestling with their problem is a piteous
one, but it is deplorably familiar. Note our Saviour’s wisdom. ‘How many loaves
have ye?” A prudent estimate of our resources is the earliest thing in demand. I.
AN ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF OUR DEPENDENCE ON THE SAME PROVIDENCE oF GoD WILL
BE Of THE MOST VALUABLE ASSISTANCE IN TEACHING US THE PRACTICAL WAY IN WHICH
TO AID THE PooR. Put away all superciliousness. ‘The rich and the poor meet
together : the Lord is the maker of them all.” There is no possible philosophy by
which an opulent man can prove himself any wiser or better than one who is
reduced in income. Many a man has toiled as industriously, and planned ag
shrewdly, as ever any one of us did; but chances have been against him. Still, we
are to remember that this does not prove that we are the better-men, nor that he is
worse ; it only proves that God is sovereign over His creatures. That was a sober


CHAP. VI.] ST. JOHN. 503


TE UUE EEE EID dIEIE EEE SEER


counsel for all the ages which Moses gave Israel (see Deut. viii. 11-18). TI. Mzn
WILL COME TO MORE REAL WISDOM AND USEFULNESS IN CARING FOR THE POOR AND
THE HUNGRY WHEN THEY ACTUALLY ADMIT THAT SOMETHING MUST BE, AND CAN BE,
DONE BY THEMSELVES. There is a suggestion of great sense in the witticism of
Sydney Smith: ‘‘ Whenever A sees B in trouble, he is sure to say, with due con-
sideration, that C ought to help him.” Much of the most available and valuable
human sympathy in this world is wasted in just a blind and suffused wishing that
some plan could be made by which every relief could be given at an extraordinary
effort. What is wanted is a quiet endeavour to help one man, or one woman, or
one child, as the nearest one to our hand. Mass-meetings are valuable; great asso-
ciations awake zeal and direct it; but individual effort will go farther, and reach
the case more swiftly. It is sad to think how societies multiply, while the cry of the
lowly and the poor does not grow less. You pass blanketed puppies led by a rib-
bon, taken out by a hired man for their airing, three avenues from the streets where
human beings are shivering, uncovered and hungering in thecold. Now, something
might be done when each Christian admits he can do a proper part of it. III. Ir
MIGHT BE SAID HERE THAT IT WOULD NOT BE SO DIFFICULT TO FIND FUNDS TO PUR-
CHASE “TWO HUNDRED PENNYWORTH”’ OF BREAD WITH WHICH TO FEED THE HUNGRY,
I¥ THE RICH WOULD BE INDUSTRIOUS. Useful occupation is the rule for the race: if
any man will not work, neither let him eat, but when he has enough to live upon,
does that end his service? Might there not be some good when a merchant has
gained enough for himself to withdraw upon, if he would just stay in business for a
few years longer, devoting the gains of his gifted experience to the Lord? It is the
business of a child of God to add to the aggregate wealth of the world by a thrifty
productiveness, and then the rich people can take care of God’s poor. IV. Monzy
FOR PROCURING FOOD FOR THE HUNGRY WOULD BE FORTHCOMING EASILY, IF CHRISTIANS
PRIZED AND PRACTISED ECONOMY IN THE ScRIPTURAL WAY, AND DIVIDED THEIR
SAVINGS IN MINISTERING To oTHERS. All superfluities are mere grace, and ought to
be given away unhesitatingly when poorer people are in actual distress. We do not
yenture to say what our Lord would have remarked to Philip, in his perplexity at
not finding out how to procure two hundred pennyworth of bread, if the un-
sophisticated fisherman had come over from Capernaum with anything like
a gold-headed cane in his hand, or with a seal-ring on his finger. The
state has assumed the board and clothing of an able-bodied man for twenty
years of uselessness in prison, because he tore a jewel out of the ear of a
Wvoman who was lavishly wearing four-thousand dollars worth of ornaments
upon her own person that day in the street. (C. S. Robinson, D.D.) Christ’s
thoughtfulness :—The people took no thought for food. Christ doth it for them.
And surely if He so far provided for them that at a sudden motion came out
after Him, can we think that He will be wanting to those that seek Him con-
tinually, and with full purpose of heart adhere untoHim. (J. Trapp.) Believers
must help Christ :—Our Lord sought to stir up Philip’s sympathy. Come, Philip,


-what shall you and Ido? Whence shall we buy bread to give them to eat? I trust


that our God has also given us some communion with His dear Son in His love to
the souls of men. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Unbelief discovered by trial :—Christ had
said, ‘‘ Give ye them to eat.” “ To try them” only, as St. John hath it. And upon
trial he found them full of dross, as appears by their answer. The disciples were
as yet very carnal, and spake as men. (J. Trapp.) Jesus knows :—He knew. He
always does know. ‘‘Ah,” says one, ‘ Tam sure I do not know what I shall do.”
This is sweet comfort: Jesus knows. He always knows all about it. Do not think
you can inform Him as to anything. Your heavenly Father knoweth what things
ye have need of before ye ask Him. He knew what He would do, He meant todo
something, and He knew what he was going todo, He-was notina hurry ; He
never is. He does everything calmly and serenely, because He foresees what He will
do. (C.H. Spurgeon.) Philip and Andrew ; or, disciples may help one another :—
Philip says, “ Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient,” and Andrew
says, ‘* Well, no, it is not, but there is a lad here with five barley loaves and two
small fishes.” I like this brotherly consultation of willing minds, Philip is
willing to begin if he has a grand start ; he must see at least two hundred penny-
worth of bread in hand, and then he is ready to entertain the idea, Andrew, on the
other hand, is willing to commence with a small capital; a few loaves and fishes
will enable him to start. When saints converse together they help each other,
and, perhaps, what the one does not discover the other may. (Ibid.) Inci-
dental tests :—God puts us in the midst of a whole apparatus of tests, that those


504 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHar. vr.


ne ee
tests may bring to light that which is in us; for it is absolutely true that feelings
may be now lurking in us, just as there is fire lurking in the flint stone, which may
remain there from the days of creation undetected and undeveloped till the genial
steel strikes upon it, and then, when the blow of the steel brings to light the con-
cealed, the long concealed fire, we are amazed to find that in that cold mass there
could have lurked a thing that was so vivid and so sparkling. All this is that great
teaching, that marvellous discipline of circumstances ; for after all, it is not by
direct teaching, it is not by explanation that men ever learn to know themselves ; it
is by the wretched and by the painful instruction of circumstances. Is it not the
fact that a man shall discover more of him-elf in a short illness ef perhaps a few
days than he has learned of himself from many years’ teaching previously? (Dean
Boyd.) There is a lad here which hath five barley loaves and two small fishes.
Lessons for ordinary persons and about little things :—I. ENCOURAGEMENT FOR THE
LowLy. For the insignificant, the commonplace who make up the greater portion
of mankind, there is either no gospel or it is Christ’s. 1. For the world of wealth,
power, brute violence, sceptical intellect is inflated with its own self-importance.
The haughty beauty will scarce deign to glance at the plain neglected girl; the
proud aristocrat is patronizing or contumelious to those who ar+ uot of his own
caste; the conceitedly clever will revel in his power to wound the inierior capacity.
‘This multitude that knoweth not the law is accursed,” says religious pride.
“ These persons are not in society,’ says fashionable pride. “ Mankind is composed
of 1,000,000,000 mostly fools,” says intellectual pride. 2. See how Christ in His
every word and action set His face against all this. Despised Galilee was His
country ; Nazareth His home; the manger His cradle; the Cross His bed of death ;
women His intimates; infants His protezes; lepers the objects of His compassion ;
the depraved the recipients of His mercy. This is not only the lesson of love, nor
that He loved as none other had loved, but that He loved those whom none had
loved before, the friend of publicans and sinners. II. Nor Less COMFORTING IS THE
ACCEPTANCE BY CHRIST OF LITTLE THINGS. He instantly made use of the poor lad’s
barley loaves and fishes. His symbols of the kingdom were a handful of loaves
and a grain of mustard seed; the widow’s mite receives His commendation ;
and those whom He will finally accept will be those who have done little deeds
of kindness. Lessons: 1. Most of us have only one talent. The world attaches
importance to our deficiency, but when God comes He will not ask how great or
how small were our endowments but only how we have used them. He who
has one talent sometimes makes ten of it ; while he who has ten sometimes makes
them worse than one. The last may be first and the first last. Was it not so
with those whom He chose, ‘‘ Not many rich,’’ &c., were called. 2. Why then
should any of us be ashamed of our earthly insignificance? We have only five
barley loaves, &c., which indeed in themselves are useless, but when given to Christ
He can make them enough to feed 5,000. Take the one instance of kind words
of sympathy and encouragement. What may ghey not do? What may be left
undone if they are unsaid. (Archdeacon Farrar.) The lad and the hungry multi-
tude (Children’s Sermon) :—I. Tux INTEREST A BOY CAN HAVE IN JESUS. He may have
heard his parents or acquaintances tell about the Saviour, and, boy-like, he probably
made up his mind that, when an opportunity came, he would go where He was
and look and listen. There was evidently something about Jesus that interested
little people. We know that He loved them, and if He loved them He would be
apt to talk to them in a way to please and do them good. Children always
are quick to find out those friendly to them. II. Tae usz Jesus can MAKE oF
BVEN A BOY. No one in this multitude, it seems, except this lad, brought any-
thing to eat. Whether this was a lunch his parents put up for him, or what he
brought along with him to sell, we do not know. The fact that he had the
loaves and fishes is mentioned to Christ who considered the fact of some im-
portance. For He called the boy to Him, and then took what he had, and
made his few loaves and fishes answer for the wants of all. Nor could any one
have been more astonished than the boy himself to see how those loaves and
fishes lasted. Christ can use children if they are willing, and sometimes the

have been of great service. He can use their gifts, whether they be the pennies
which they have earned, or some piece of handiwork they have made. Noue are
too young to serve Jesus, and such have often been employed by Him to accomplish
good. Ill. Ir 1s anways BEST TO KEEPIN Goop company. This boy would have
missed a great deal if he had not gone out that day to see, Jesus. If he had
given himself up to having some fun with his comrades, he would not have been


onaP, vI.] ST. JOHN. ? 505


honoured as he was by Christ. If this boy had told his mates that he was going to
hear the wonderful Teacher whose fame was filling the whole country, they might
have ridiculed him, and tried to persuade. him to go with them; but by bravely
following out his purpose to see and hear for himself, he not only was gratified
therein but was noticed and used by Jesus. I think that proved to be the most
noteworthy day in his life. What he heard and what happened to him at that
time he could never forget, for it probably influenced him as long as he lived.
He may have become a follower of Jesus from that day, and a preacher of the
gospel to others when he grew up to be a man. It was the turning point in
his history. (M. G. Dana, D.D.) The resource of Christ :—Pythias is famous
for that he was able, at his own charge, to entertain Xerxes’ whole army, consist-
ing of ten hundred thousand men. But he grew so poor upon it that he wanted
bread ere he died. Our Saviour fed five thousand, and his store was not a jot
diminished. (J. Trapp.) Five barley loaves and two fishes :—The mention of
barley loaves gives a hint of the social condition of the multitude which followed
Jesus. Wheat is the staple grain in the East; but, like other good things, it is
apt to be absorbed by the rich. The poorer people have, therefore, to content them-
selves with the coarser barley, which they grind themselves in their stone hand-
mills, and bake into a coarse kind of flat cake. The mention of fishes is cha-
racteristic of the region. The sea of Galilee has always been famous for the
excellence of its fish supply, which is not only plentiful, but varied. Doubtless
many of the crowd who followed Jesus came from among the poor fisher-folk,
who were concerned with supplying the wants of the prosperous towns, now in
ruins, which, in the time of Jesus, kept up a fleet of small ships on the sea of
Galilee. (S. S. Times.) The barley loaves of the Jews would seem to have been
smaller than those made of wheaten bread, rough to the taste even though
nutritious, and the food of only the common people, an emblem of His own
doctrine, which the common people heard gladly, and which, however hard to
the natural man, is yet full of life for the soul. (W. Denton, M.A.) Plenty
out of Christ’s poverty :—Barley bread was so coarse that even the hearty Roman
soldiers were only required to eat it by way of punishment, and fish was the
commonest and cheapest kind of food; but so Jesus lived, and His disciples.
He was poor among the poorest. Not for Him was the purple and the feast of
Dives. He did not come to pamper the luxury or allure the appetencies of idle
men. Barley loaves and only two small fishes! But it was enough for the Lord
of all; and with that scant, poor food, blessed and multiplied, He fed the hungry,
and refreshed the weary, spread the table in the wilderness, and made them sit
on the green grass in the sunset, and gave them that which to their hunger
was sweet as manna, and sent them rejoicing on their way. (Archdeacon Farrar.)
Christ’s acceptance of the meanest gifts: —At a flower festival, not long ago, one
little, shrinking child laid on the altar-step her tiny offtring—it was but a single
daisy. The little one had nothing else to give, and with even such an offering,
given in a single and with a simple heart, Christ, I think, would have been well
pleased. When Count Zinzendorf was a boy at school, he founded amongst his
schoolfellows a little guild which he called the “ Order of the Grain of Mustard
Seed,” and thereafter that seedling grew into the great tree of the Moraviar
Brotherhood whose boughs were a blessing to the world. The widow’s mite!
When they laughed at Saint Theresa when she wanted to build a great orphan.
age and had but three shillings to begin with, she answered, ~ With three
shillings Theresa can do nothing: but with God and her three shillings there is
nothing which Theresa cannot do.’ Do not let us imagine, then, that we are
too poor, or too stupid, or too ignorant, or too obscure to do any real good in the
world wherein God has placed us. Is there a greater work in this day than the
work of education? Would you have thought that the chief impulse to that
work, whereon we now annually spend so many millions of taxation, was given
by a poor illiterate Plymouth cobbler—John Pounds? Has there been a nobler work
of mercy in modern days than the purification of prisons ? Yet that was done by
one whom a great modern writer sneeringly patronised as the ‘ dull, good man
John Howard.” Is there a grander, nobler enterprise than missions? The
mission of England to India was started by a humble, itinerant shoemaker,
William Carey. These men brought to Christ their humble efforts, their barley
loaves, and in His hand, and under His blessing, they multiplied exceedingly.
« We can never hope,” you say, “to lead tu such vast results.” So they thought.
« We cannot tell whether this or that will prosper.” But do you imagine that they


—
>


506 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. V1.
Se
ever dreamed that their little efforts would do so much? And, besides, they knew
that the results are nothing, the work, everything—nothing the gift, everything the
willing heart. But have you ever tried? If you bring no gift, how can God use
it? The lad must bring his barley loaves to Christ before the five thousand can
be fed. Have you ever attempted to do as he did? Have you, even in the smallest
measure, or with the least earnest desire, tried to follow John Wesley’s golden
advice: ‘Do all the good you can, by all the means you can, in all the ways you can,
to all the persons you can, in all the places you can, as long as ever you can.” (Ibid.)
The young should be used as well as amused :—The Church ought to use the young
as well as instruct and amuse the young. Young people can be made to do
good; they have something they can give up, they have something that when
they see Jesus they will allow Jesus to take without a word. (7. Green, M.A.)
Distrust of self, and trust in God:—There is really nothing little with God. In
His hands the feeblest and simplest instruments are sufficient. If His blessing
goes along with our efforts, there is no limit to the greatness of the work which
they may accomplish. Take, e.g., our endeavours to relieve the sorrows and
sufferings of our fellow-creatures. What are we in the presence of such calamities ?
What can we say or do to alleviate the suffering or the sorrow? We are but too
likely to shrink back in despair. But let us think of ourselves in such cases as
instruments in His hands, with whom all things are possible ; let us bring what we
have. God can make use of what in itself is useless. Miserable comforters we
may seem to ourselves. Yet God may send comfort through us. Or, to take
another case; this thought of the greatness of little things, what an encouragement
may it afford us in our missionary efforts! But,once more; the principle of which
I am speaking may be applied to the work which has to be“ajgied on in our indi-
vidual souls. God does not make us holy all at once. Nor does%Je work His will
in us solely by His own a¢t. He requires our co-operation; He makes use of our
efforts. But our feeble endeavours, our half-hearted prayers, our faintest resolu-
tions—what are they? What can they do? They seem to us nothing; and in
truth they are as nothing. But God desires them; He kindly looks on them; He
blesses them, and they are effectual through Him. It is by such endeavours,
inspired and strengthened by the Holy Spirit, that the saints of God have attained
whatever degree of holiness they have reached. We are all tempted, when we
reflect on the great work of our lives, namely, the renewing in ourselves of the
image of God, to say, ‘‘ What can I do?” Our best efforts are utterly inadequate ;
and it is right that we should feel and acknowledge this. But, such as they are, God
requires them, as Christ demanded the five loaves; and He can and will bless even our
imperfect efforts and work His will with them. Bring what you have, and leave it
with perfect confidence in His hands. Let us trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord
Jehovah is our strength and our song; He also is become our salvation. (P. Young,
M.A.) Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the place.—It all
depends upon the season in which one comes to the north-eastern shore of the lake
of Gennesaret as to whether or not he will find much grass there. The note of
time (‘now the passover . . . . was at hand”) shows that our Lord was there in
the spring. At that season the grass in that region is plentiful and green; a few
months later, and it is burned up by the heat, and the country presents a dreary
aspect. It cannot be said of many places in the Orient that there is much grass
there. In England, and in the well-watered regions of the United States, one of
the chief charms of the landscape is the soft carpet of green which covers the soil.
In a characteristic Oriental scene, this charm is lacking, The grass may straggle
here and there, or at special seasons it may show an unwonted luxuriance in certain
places ; but the universal carpet of green is chiefly conspicuous by its absence,
(S. S. Times). The scene on the mount :—The disciples understood their instruc-
tions, and immediately arranged the vast throng on the sloping sides of the
mountain, in ranks, a hundred in number, each rank containing fifty persons in file.
The ranks, as we may easily conceive, wére placed at such convenient distances
from each other, that the disciples could easily pass between them. In this form
the five thousand men were disposed of—the women and children being, in all
probability, placed by themselves in some convenient situation, As when He
created the wine at Cana, the six waterpots were set in order preparatory to that
miracle, so here His request for order was obeyed, preparatory to the work which
He was about todo. As the many thousands of Israel, in their encampings and
marches were so arranged that all alike enjoyed the full advantage of having the
tabernacle, and pillar of cloud, and brazen serpent lifted up full in their view,


CHAP. VI. ] ST. JOHN. 507


so now the whole multitude, by the arrangement effected, were placed in a position
to enable every man to see and to hear Him who was the True Tabernacle, the
True Pillar of Cloud, and the True Brazen Serpent lifted up. He stands at the
bottom of that green mountain slope, and the twelve are round about Him.
Receding from the place which they occupy, fifty men are seated, each behind, but
a little raised above, his companion, in file, and in close order. On the right hand
there are fifty ranks thus arranged. On the left hand there are fifty ranks. Jesus
stands in the centre, and His eye with ease ranges over the whole company, whilst
His voice distinctly reaches them. If we may suppose the sun about to set, the
surrounding mountains glowing with his departing rays, the waters of the lake still
retaining the lingering reflection of the sun’s fading beauty, we have before us a
scene such as we may believe Jesus Himself delighted to survey, and such as we
may well long to see often recurring in our fallen world—multitudes waiting for the
“true bread,” and the Lord Himself present to bestow it in rich abundance.
(A. Beith, D.D.) And Jesus took the loaves and when He had given thanks,
He distributed.—Feeding the multitude :—I. WHATEVER WE HAVE IS THE GIFT OF
Gop: money, talents, time, influence, &c, I. WHATSOEVER GOOD THINGS GOD HAS
GIVEN US, WE MUST GIVE THEM ALSO To oTHERS. Nothing is given exclusively for
self. III. No GIrr MUST BE UNDERVALUED BECAUSE IT IS SMALL. What is insigni-
ficant to us may be made vastly useful by the blessing of God. IV. Tuerz is 4
HUNGRY MULTITUDE AROUND US WAITING FOR ouR GIFT. 1. Some are starving for
want of peace and comfort in religion—neighbours, friends, members of our own
families. 2, Some are starving for want of a little kindly sympathy. 3. Some are
starving in sickness and pain for the want of loving help and ministry. V. Tus
GIFT MUST BE DISPENSED WITH SELF-FORGETFULNEsS. It was this forgetfulness of
self that made Henry Lawrence, the gentle, godly hero of the Indian Mutiny, the
best beloved of all his soldiers. When he was dying, the General whispered, as his
last words, “let there be no fuss about me, bury me with the men.” When
another hero, Sir Ralph Abercromby, had got his death-wound, in the battle of
Aboukir, they placed a private soldier’s blanket under his head, thus causing him
much relief. He asked what it was. He was answered that ‘it was only a soldier’s
blanket!” He insisted on knowing to whom it belonged. They told him it belonged to
Duncan Roy, of the 42nd. ‘Then see that Duncan Roy has his blanket this very
night,” said the dying man; he would not, to ease his own agony, deprive a common
soldier of his comfort. (H. J. W. Buwton, M.A.) Thankfulness and distribu-
tion:—I. Tue pury or THaNKsGiIvine. 1. Christ is our example in this. He
placed Himself voluntarily in a condition of need, and when the need was supplied
as here He expressed His gratitude to God. 2. Christ is the object of our
thanksgiving. This miracle expresses Christ’s continuous power to relieve human’
want. This is now regularly done and consequently is over-looked. Sometimes
He reduces men from affluence to indigence in order to teach them grateful depen-
dence on Himself. 3. This thanksgiving is due to Christ for temporal and spiritual
mercies. II. Tuz Dury or pistripution. 1. Here also we are instructed by the
example of Christ. 2. In temporal good things we must remember that we are
stewards of God’s bounty. 3. We must distribute our spiritual goods—(1) Personally.
(2) By supporting the ministry, missions, schools, &c. (S. Robins, M.A.) The
maintenance of natural and spiritual life :—This miracle differs from others—1. In
that it is not so open to the cavils of unbelief. The others are often explained on
the theory of Christ’s superior knowledge and skill. Here this utterly breaks
down. 2. The miracles of healing were wrought to draw the minds of men to
Christ as Creator; this to show Himself the maintainer of both the natural and
spiritual life, I. CurisT THE PRESERVER OF MEN. 1. Of their bodies. Life can
no more maintain itself than create itself. 2. Of their souls, by His Spirit.
II, Curist EMPLOYS MEANS IN PRESERVING MEN. He consulted His disciples, He
employed bread, He gave bread to the disciples for distribution. So—l. Physically
Christ preserves men by the employment of natural resources utilized by intelligence
and industry. 2. Spiritually by means of His Word, public worship and sacra-
ments. III. Curist PRESERVES MEN SEPARATELY. There was a multitude to the
disciples, but there was no multitude to Him. He saw each in the singularity of
His own Being and need. He who gave the individual life of the millions of our
race, maintains it second by second, It is needful to remember this—1l. In order
that we may recognize that our individual life is His. 2. That we may recognize
His hand inall our gifts. (1) Of prosperity. (2) Of adversity. (Bp. S. Wilberforce.)
Christ’s arithmetic :—I. He multiplied by division, “distributed.” II. He added


Ln


508 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. vi.
by subtraction, “ filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves.”
(iV. H.VanDoren,D.D.) Giving and receiving :—The disciples grudged not of their
little to give others some, and it grew on their hands, as the widow’s oil did in the
cruse. Not getting, but giving, is the way to thrive. Nothing was ever lost by
liberality. (J. Trapp.) A constant miracle:—An analogy, and, so to speak, a
help to the understanding of this miracle, has been found in that which year by
year is accomplished in the field, where a single grain of corn multiplies itself and
in the end unfolds in numerous ears. And with this analogy in view many
beautiful remarks have been made; as this, that while God’s every-day miracles
had grown cheap in men’s sight by continual repetition, He had therefore reserved
something, not more wonderful, but less frequent, to arouse men’s minds to a new
admiration. Others have urged that here, as in the case of the water made wine,
Christ did but compress into a single moment all those processes which in ordinary
circumstances, the same Lord of nature, causes more slowly to succeed one another.
(Archbishop Trench.) Christ the Lord of nature :—He took a fragment of a barley
loaf into His hand, and to teach His Church that His grasp had in it the fecundity of
the earth, the moisture of the flowers, the influence of the sun, the comprehension
of all times and seasons, and the excellency of all power, as He broke it, it enlarged
itself far beyond those goodly ears of wheat which Pharaoh saw in his dream, and
every crumb became an handful. (Bp: Hacket.) Christ’s use of means :—The
five loaves were almost nonentities, but He nevertheless took them. Jesus
appears always to have acted on the same principle. He used what came to hand.
What man could do, man must do. As far as Nature could go, Nature must perform
her part. He came in where man and nature stopped. See how, at this moment,
God is dealing with every one of us. He has wrought for us a free and perfect
salvation, by no merit, by no act of ours. He requires in you repentance and faith.
True, they both come from Him, so did ‘the five loaves,” they came from Him.
But you must give to Him first a willing and free act of yourown. He ‘takes the
loaves’’; and then, over and above He feeds your soul and makes it live for ever
and ever by the bread of life. You have a little grace. A mere nothing compared
to what is wanting ;. to what it might have been if you had used well what God had
given you. But God has given yousomething. You have some good desires, convic-
tions of sin, power to pray, and to deny yourself, sparkles of love. Do you want this
to become more? Then put what you can into Christ’s hands constantly and the
transforming and magnifying will multiply it. You have some thoughts, feelings,
powers, capacities, actions, which you can now in a solemn way give to Jesus. Con-
secrate them. Do not say, ‘Oh, I have not got anything worth the giving; it is of
no use at all.” Give Him the little, and He will make it much. (J. Vaughan, M.A.)
Christ’s economy :—Christ did not provide great delicacies for the people, but they
who saw His amazing power here were obliged to rest satisfied with barley bread,
and fish without sauce. (Calvin.) Christ the Bread for the world:—I. Tu
PREPARATION FOR THE SIGN. ‘‘ Whence shall we buy bread, that these may
eat?” Now, notice what a lovely glimpse we get there into the quick rising
sympathy of the Master with all forms of human necessity. Before we call
He answers. But, farther, He selects for the question Philip, a man who
seems to have been what is called—as if it were the highest praise—an
‘intensely practical person”; who seems to have had little faith in anything
that he could not get hold of by his senses, and who lived upon the low
level of ‘‘common sense,” ‘‘ This He said to prove him.” He hoped that the
question might have shaped itself in the hearer’s mind into a promise, and that he
might have been able to say in answer, ‘“‘ Thou canst supply ; we need not buy.”
So Christ does still. He puts problems before us too, to settle; takes us, as it
were, into His confidence with interrogations that try us, whether we can rise ‘above
the level of the material and visible, or whether all our conceptions of possibilities
are bounded by these. And sometimes, even though the question at first sight
seems to evoke only such a response as it did here, it works more deeply down
below afterwards, and we are helped by the very difficulty to rise to a clear faith
Philip’s answer is significant. He was a man of figures; he believed in what you
could put into tables and statistics. Yes! And, like a great many other people of
his sort, he left out one small element in his calculation, and that was Jesus Christ
And so his answer went creeping along the low levels, dragging itself like a half.
wounded snake, when it might have risen on the wings of faith up into the
empyrean, and soared and sung. So learn that when we have to deal with Christ’s
working—and when have we not to deal with Christ’s working ?—perhaps proba-


eS a


x


CHar, v1.] | ST. JOHN. 509


bilities that can be tabulated are not altogether the best bases upon which to rest
our calculations. Learn that the audacity of a faith that expects great things,
though there be nothing visible upon which to build, is wiser and more prudent
than the creeping common sense that adheres to facts which are shadows, and
forgets that the one fact is that we have an Almighty Helper and Friend at our
sides. Still further, under these preliminaries, let us point to the exhibition of
the inadequate resource which Christ, according to the fuller narrative in the
other Evangelists, insisted upon. Christ’s preparation for making our poor re-
sources adequate for anything is to drive home into our hearts the consciousness
of their insufficiency. We need, first of all, to be brought to this: “All that I
have is this wretched little stock; and what is that measured against the work that
I have to do and the claims upon me?” Only when we are brought to that can
His great power pour itself into us and fill us with rejoicing and overcoming
strength. The old mystics used to say, and they said truly: “ You must be emptied
of yourself before you can be filled by God.” And the first thing for any man to
learn, in preparation for receiving a mightier power than his own into his opening
heart, is to know that all his own strength is utter and absolute weakness. ‘* What
are they among so many?” And so the last of the preparations that I will
touch upon is that majestic preparation for blessing by obedience. Sit you down
where He bids you, and your mouths will not be long empty. Do the things He
tells you, and you will get the food that you need. IL. Tux sian rrsezr. 1. As
to the first, there is here, I believe, a revelation of the law of the universe, of
Christ as being through all the ages the sustainer of the physical life of men.
What was done then once, with the suppression of certain links in the chain, is done
always with the introduction of those links. It was Christ’s will that made this
provision. And I believe that the teaching of Scripture is in accordance with the
deepest philosophy, that the one cause of all physical phenomena is the will of a
present God, howsoever that may usually conform to the ordinary methods of working
which people generalize and calllaws. The reason why anything is, and the reason
why all things change, is the energy there and then of the indwelling God, who is
in all His works, and who is the only will and power in the physical world. AndI
believe, further, that Scripture teaches us that that continuous will, which is the
cause of all phenomena and the underlying subsistence on which all things repose,
is all managed and mediated by Him who from of old was named the Word ; ‘‘in
whom was life, and without whom was not anything made that was made.” Our
Christ is Creator, our Christ is Sustainer, our Christ moves the stars and feeds the
sparrows. 2. And so, secondly, there is in the sign itself a symbol of Him as the
true Bread and food of the world. Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed for us, and
we feed on the sacrifice. Let your conscience, your heart, your desires, your
anticipations, your understanding, your will, your whole being, feed on Him. He
will be cleansing, He will be love, He will be fruition, He will be hope, He will be
truth, He will be righteousness, He will be all. 3. And notice finally here, the
result of this miracle as transferred to the region of symbol. ‘‘ They did all eat,
and were filled ”; men, women, children, both sexes, all ages, all classes, found the
food that they needed in the bread that came from Christ’s hands. If any man
wants dainties that will tickle the palates of Epicureans, let him go somewhere
else. But if he wants bread, to keep the life in and to stay his hunger, let him go
to this Christ, who is ‘human nature’s daily food.” The world has scoffed for
eighteen centuries at the barley bread that the gospel provides; coarse by the side
of its confectionery, but it is enough to give life to all who eat it. And more than
that; notice the inexhaustible abundance, ‘They did all eat, and were filled.”
Other goods and other possessions perish with the using, but this increases with
use. The more one eats, the more there is for him to eat, And all the world may
live upon it for ever, and there will be more at the end than there was at the
beginning. (A. Maclaren, D.D.) The feeding of the five thousand :—What is
it, what is it in us, that will ensure this taking of the supplies and bestow them
upon us? First of all, what was it in this people? 1. They would not have sat
down, you may be very sure, if they had not been very hungry. Desire draws
blessing. 2. Confident expectation brings Him with all His supplies. Yes, expec-
tation of blessing fulfils itself in a great many regions, in @ great many common
things of life, If a man expect to be successful, he will bé in a great many of
them. It is what you are making up your mind to do you will do. And in the
spiritual region the measure of the expectation is the measure of the success. The
expectation which has got the essential element of faith in it is the confidence ip


a“,


810 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fcHar. vt.


ee


the things unseen, as though they were present. Expectation, yea, an expectation
right in the teeth of sense, is the sure way to bring down the blessings. 3. Well,
then there is another last point, and that is: the use of the appropriate means,
which are appropriate simply because they are appointed. ‘‘ Make the men sit
down; and Jesus therefore took the loaves.” Well, in regard to some things in
this world, yes, some outward things, we very often do come to a point where the
only thing is to sit still and see the salvation of God; and in a very profound sense
they also work, as well as they also serve, who only stand, or sit, and wait. But I
think that this generation wants a lesson, and the Christian communities of this
generation want the lesson—sit down there and be quiet, and let His grace sink
into you, as it won’t do with you for ever fuss, fuss, fussing, and moving from this
place to the other. Why, if you go into the woods, and into a coppice, the
nightingales, and the thrushes, and the whole of the quick-eyed creatures that
rustle among the leaves there, shyly hide themselves there as long as your foot is
rustling over the leaves; no other living creature will stir. Sit down quietly, don’t
even move your eyelids, and when you have sat for awhile, still as any stone, one
after another they begin to peep out of their copses, and come out into the open,
and in an hour’s time the whole place will be alive with beauty and with happi-
ness. Yes, and so it is in a loftier fashion in this great kingdom of our Master’s.
The men that go hurrying through the gospel sphere see nothing of its beauty,
nothing of its delicate, recondite beauties and mysteries. You have got to be quiet.
And so go ye into a desert place and rest—sit still. That does not mean any
vacuous indolence, drowsing and dormant, but it means suppressing the sensuous
life, the life of the enemy that belongs to the outer world, in order that the life of
the-spirit may rise stronger and stronger, for as the eye of the fiesh closes, the eye
of the spirit opens. They are like the doors in banks, you shove one open and the
other shuts. And so to be quiet is to hear Christ speak. (Zbid.)


Vers. 12-13. Gather up the fragments.—Sermon for the New Year :—The natural
thought would be—let the fragments lie; a divine munificence can again be equal
to a similar emergency ; henceforth we will be in sublime disdain of fragments—a
niggardly economy. But Christ prevents any such bad generalization from the
abundance of His great gifts, by the command, ‘gather up the fragments.” I,
Here then emerges the great law that Gop Is ALWAYS AND EVERYWHERE PARTICULAR
ABOUT FRAGMENTS. This law God Himself obeys. God is particular about fragments
in—l. Keeping them. You cannot destroy matter. 2. In using them. The little
things at the basis of nature. 3. In adorning them. You shall find even a Divine
lavishing of adornment in things so minute that only a microscope can reveal them.
II. We are confronted by a new year. How may we make it a happy one? By
becoming ourselves OBEDIENT TO THE GREAT LAW WHICH Gop oprys. 1. Seize frag-
ments of time for self-culture and in the consciousness of growth find the new year
a happy one. Emerson says, ‘ One of the illusions is that the present hour is not
the critical, decisive hour. Write it on your heart that every day is the last day in
the year. No man has learned anything rightly until he knows that every day is
doomsday.” 2. Seize fragments of chance for doing good, and in that conscious-
ness find the year a happy one. This was said by a member of one of the Protestant
churches in Paris: ‘‘ For you must know it is a rule in our church that when one
brother has been converted he must go and fetch another brother ; and when a
sister has been converted, she must go and fetch another sister. That is the way
120 of us have been brought from atheism and Popery to simple faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ.”” If you would but feel that ‘‘must go and fetch another ”—
you would find for yourself a radiant year. 3, Seize fragments of happiness as
they lie about you day by day. Happiness does not come so much in nuggets as in
the minuter golden particles. Do not despise them. Look for the securing of the
little happiness. 4. If you have not done it yet, seize the fragment of time left
you to make your peace with God through Jesus Christ. (W. Hoyt, D.D.) Frag-
ments :—There are certain matters in society that may be called fragments, certain
customs that stand isolated and yet are very closely connected with religion. I.
Humanity To anmmans. All animals must live, and are entitled to consideration.
They have rights of their own. 1. The insect world. Why should we destroy a
spider for killing a fly when we organize shambles for the sake of slaughtering the
animals on which we live? There are many insects that we are not obliged to
preserve, but which we need not go out of our way to destroy wholesale. They
have just one day of existence, and it is a pity to abridge it. 2. Those animals


2 2a adrete eee


Crap, v1] ST. JOHN. 511


that sfand nearest man have been comparatively left to his passions or selfishness.
It is not right that they should be transported and slaughtered without the least
care for their suffering. 3. The wholesale destruction of birds for the personal
adornment of ladies is not only inhuman but is wasteful. The development of
insects is so enormous that if ‘they were not reduced by birds it would be fatal to
our wheatfields and gardens. II. THz LAw oF HUMANITY TOWARDS SUBORDINATES IN
INDUSTRY is more than a fragment, it is half aloaf. 1, The law of sympathy should
regulate the law of wages as well as the law of profit. Men have no right to pay
their employees at starvation rates, nor in the cheapest currency. 2, Times of
payment ought to be considered and wages paid not on Saturday, when there is
every temptation to spend them in the public house, but on Monday. 3. Ought not
a portion of every man’s wages to be secured to his wife, as his partner and the
family provider, by the state? 4. According to the spirit of the gospel whoever
employs men becomes responsible, as God’s overseer, for their movals and instruc-
tion and happiness. We are our brothers’ keepers, particularly where for our profit
they are led into circumstances of such severe temptation as exist in large houses
of business. 5. When young women are compelled to stand all the day it is time
the law, in the interest of future generations, stepped in. (H. W. Beecher.)
“‘ Fragments” or, ** broken pieces ?” (see R. V.) :—The general notion, I suppose, is
that the “fragments” are the crumbs that fell from each man’s hands as he ate,
and the picture before the imagination of the ordinary reader is that of the
apostles carefully collecting the débris of the meal from the grass where it had
dropped. But the true notion is that the ‘‘ broken pieces which remain over” are
the unused portions into which our Lord’s miracle-working hand had broken the
bread, and the true picture is that of the apostles carefully putting away in store
for future use the abundant provision which their Lord had made, beyond the
needs of the hungry thousands. And that conception of the command teaches far
more beautiful and deeper lessons than the other. I. We have that thought to
which I have already referred as more strikingly brought-out by the slight altera-
tion of translation, which, by the use of ‘ broken pieces,” suggests the connection
with Christ’s breaking the loaves and fishes. We are taught to think of THE LARGE
SURPLUS IN CHRIST’S GIFTS OVER AND ABOVE OUR NEED. Whom He feeds He feasts.
His gifts answer our need, and over-answer it, for He is able to do exceeding
abundantly above that which we ask or think, and neither our conceptions, nor our
petitions, nor our present powers of receiving, are the real limits of the illimitable
grace that is laid up for us in Christ, and which, potentially, we have each of us in
our hands whenever we lay our hands on Him. II. Then there is another very
simple lesson, which I draw. This command suggests for us Curisr’s Tarirr (if I
may use the word) IN THE EMPLOYMENT oF His mrracuLous PowER. Christ multi-
plies the bread, and yet each of the apostles has to take a basket, probably some
kind of woven wicker-work article which they would carry for holding their little
necessaries in their peregrinations ; each apostle has to take his basket, and, perhaps
emptying it of some of their humble apparel, to fill it with these bits of bread ; for
Christ was not going to work miracles where men’s thrift and prudence could be
employed. Nor does He do so now. We live by faith, and our dependence on Him
can never be too absolute. Only laziness sometimes dresses itself in the garb and
speaks with the tongue of faith, and pretends to be trustful when it is only slothful.
“Why criest thou unto Me?” said God to Moses, ‘ speak unto the children of
Israel that they go forward.” ‘True faith sets us to work. It is not to be perverted
into idle and false depending upon Him to work for us, when, by the use of our own
ten fingers and our own brains, guided and strengthened by His working in us, we
can do the work that is set before us. III. Still further, there is another lesson
here. Not only does the injunction show us Christ’s thrift in the employment of
the supernatural, but it teaches us our duty of THRIFT AND CARE IN THE USE OF THE
SPIRITUAL GRACE BESTOWED UPON us. Christian men! be watchful stewards of that
great gift of a living Christ, the food of your souls, that has been by miracle
bestowed upon you. Such gathering together for future need of the unused residue
of grace may be accomplished by three ways. 1. There must be a diligent use of
the grace given. See that you use to the very full, in the measure of your present
power of absorbing and _ your present need, the gift bestowed upon you. Be sure
that you take in as much of Christ as you can contain before you begin to think of
what to do with the overplus. If we are not careful to take what we can and to
use what we need of Christ, there is little chance of our being faithful stewards of
the surplus. The water in a mill-stream runs over the trough in great abundance


512 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omar vr.


when the wheel is not working, and one reason why so many Christians seem to
have so much more given to them in Christ than they need is because they are
doing no work to use up the gift. 2. A second essential to such stewardship is the
careful guarding of the grace given from whatever would injure it. Let not world-
liness, business, care of the world, the sorrows of life, its joys, duties, anxieties, or
pleasures—let not these so come into your hearts that they will elbow Christ out of
your hearts, and dull your appetite for the True Bread that came down from heaven.
3. And, lastly, not only by use and by careful guarding, but also by earnest desire
for larger gifts of the Christ who is large beyond all measure, shall we receive more
and more of His sweetness and His preciousness into our hearts, and of His beauty
and glory into our transfigured characters. The basket that we carry, this recipient
heart of ours, is elastic. It can stretch to hold any amount that you like to put
into it. The desire for more of Christ's grace will stretch its capacity, and as its
capacity increases the inflowing gift greatens, and a larger Christ fills the larger
room of my poor heart. IV. Finally, A soLEMN WARNING IS IMPLIED IN THIS COM-
MAND, AND ITS REASON ‘‘ THAT NOTHING BE Lost.” Then there is a possibility of
losing the gift that is freely given to us. We may waste the bread, and so, some-
time or other when we are hungry, awake to the consciousness that it has dropped
out of our slack hands. The abundance of Christ’s grace may, so far as -you are
profited or enriched by it, be like the unclaimed millions of money which nobody
asks for and that is of use to no living soul. You may be paupers while all God’s
riches in glory are at your disposal, and starving while baskets full of bread broken
for us by Christ lie unused at our sides. (A. Maclaren, D.D.) Gather up the
fragments :—I. FRAGMENTS OF TRUTH. Precious fragments! with which we need
not quarrel because fragmentary, for we are taught by degrees, we are fed as able
to bear it. No one could reasonably complain of crumbs that they were not bread,
because not each of them a whole loaf. The smallest portions of God’s word are,

notwithstanding their smallness, His word, and to be valued as such—not one to
be lost. Precious fragments! concerning which we need not murmur, because we
have the fatigue of gathering. ‘If any will not work neither shall he eat.” II.
FRraGMENts oF TIME. Now there are two reasons which should more especially
incite us to endeavour to redeem time. 1. We have need to treasure up its very
minutes, for they are the fragments of a gift which God bestows. 2. For every hour
of it He will call upon us to render an account, that He may “ receive His own with
usury.” 3, And there is another reason which ought to influence us, but which is
often overlooked, and that is, that in course of time we become the result of the
time we live. Time leaves its mark upon us; not merely those outward marks of
change and scars of decay, but those still more indelible features and lineaments
of character which are constantly stamping us for eternity, and which give force to
the assertion that ‘‘time has a quality, as it has a quantity.” Time improved
moulds and shapes the mind after the fashion of those improvements. III. Again
(as connected with the thought of time, its fragments, its waste, and its use), there
is also the consideration that there are certain MEANS OF GRACE, which we may
regard in the light of fragments, and which have to be carefully gathered. ‘Gather
up the fragments that remain,” value and employ the holy seasons which may yet
be granted you, and for which you will have to render an account. It is the same
with regard to private prayer. What use have we made of the means of grace? I
remember to have read a book entitled ‘‘A Dying Man’s Regrets,” and he was a
very good and holy man, singularly devoted to the service of his God, and yet what
did he say? ‘These are his words, ‘‘ Ah! if I were to return to life, I would, with
the help of God, and in distrust of myself, give much more time to prayer than I
have hitherto done. I would reckon much more upon the effect of that than on
my own labour, which, however much it is our duty never to neglect, yet has no
strength except so far as it is animated by prayer. I would especially strive to
obtain in my prayers that fervour of the Holy Spirit which is not learnt in a day.

but is the fruit of a long, and often a painful apprenticeship. Oh my friends” (he
added, raising himself with energy on his sick bed) “lay hold of the opportunity
and redeem it, cultivate new habits of prayer. Bring into prayer, with a spirit of
fervour, a spirit also of order and of method that will increase its power, as it
increases the power of all human things, and co-operated with the Divine agency
itself.” IV. Lastly, there are the acts or puty that.we are to perform, and these
also often present themselvés to us in very small fragments. The lives of most of
us are made up of such fragments. It is not a great thing that is required of us.
It is ‘the trivial round, the common task,” that is,.for the most part, ‘the calling


CHAP. VI.) ST. JOHN. 513


in which we are to abide,” and “therein to abide with God.” We are often apt
to despise common things because they are so common, forgetting that we might
- lift them to a much higher dignity, if we but infused into them a nobler principle,
doing them as in God’s sight, by God’s help, and to God’s glory. (J. M. Nisbet.)
Fragments of instruction (Sermon to the Young) :—There are many fragments of
truth, any one of which, perhaps, is not large enough for a whole discourse, but
which ought not to be wholly lost. There are a hundred small things any one of
which does not seem to be of much importance compared with the great Gospel
themes, but which, taken together, amount to a great deal, e.g.—I. Hvury onE sHouLD
BE WILLING TO CREEP BEFORE HE wALKs. There is hardly a young man that goes
out from his father’s house that who does not want money before he earnsit. Who
does not want a reputation for being smart before he is smart? But you need not
be ashamed because you do not know more than those of your age are expected to
know ; above all you need not be ashamed of frugality. Do not let your pride be
hurt by living within your means. Make two things a matter of pride. 1. That
you will not live one farthing in debt. 2. That you will be the richer if only by
one shilling at the end of the year than you were at the beginning. II. Evury one
SHOULD EDUCATE HIMSELF. The school, books, teachers, give a man a chance, but
after all he is his own schoolmaster. 1. A handworker ought not to be content
with handwork, but should teach his hand to think as well. 2. Every man ought
to have some general knowledge (1) of his own body and mind ; (2) of the structure
of the earth; (3) of the history, geography, and policy of his own country and of
others; (4) of the sciences. 3. But all education does not come from reading. (1)
God gave men eyes that they might see; and yet very few people see anything.
(2) What was your tongue put into your head for but to inquire with? Learn the
art of asking questions. III. Bz careruL ABOUT THE COMPANY YOU KEEP. Pick
your company from those who are superior to you and can teach you something.
Life will go ill with you if you look down for your company. IV. Aim aT REFINE-
ment. This belongs to no place or class, You ought to be refined, not because of
your trade, but because of yourself. A mechanic may be a gentleman if he likes,
‘VY. CunrrvaTe cuivaury. Always take the side of the weak. VI. Do Nor DESPISE
ETIQUETTE. Life is made a great deal pleasanter and intercourse a great deal
smoother when men observe the little forms of propriety in life. VII. Rrsprcr
womanhood. No matter how a woman looks, she is of the same sex as your mother
and sister or wifeand daughter. VIII. Cunrivark THE HABIT OF UNIFORM GENEROSITY
IN socIAL INTERCOURSE. Be on the look out to make others happy. (Zbid.) The
fragments that remain :—Every dispensation of Providence is a kind of miracle.
We must make the most of it. I. Every Position IN LIFE may be made great or
little, as we desire to make the most or the least of it. To do the necessary duties
of each station is easy enough, but to gather up all its outlying opportunities; to be
ready to lend a helping hand here or give a kind word of counsel there; to fill our
place in life instead of leaving it half empty; to be in our work entirely make all
the difference between a useful and a useless man. II. We may have A siGNau
VISITATION OF JOY oR sorrow. It is possible to drive it out of our thoughts and cut
off all its consequences ; but it is better to gather up the fragments and see what it
has taught us of our strength or weakness, God and our soul, III. We may have
known A NOBLE CHARACTER AND EXAMPLE, It has gone from us. Shall we blot it out
of our remembrance or gather up the fragments, the sayings, doings, memories
that may cheer, sustain, guide and warn. IV. Consider our feelings of RELIGION
rrsenr. Few and far between may be our prayers and thoughts of serious things ;
but do not despise what you have. One verse from the Bible may be enough to
sustain us in sore temptations; one prayer may stick closer to us than a brother ;
one tixed determination to do right may be a rallying point round which our whole
better nature may form itself. True “ we are not worthy so much as to gather up
the crumbs” of our heavenly Father’s table; but His ‘“ property ” is alway s to have
mercy, and will bless and own our humbled efforts. (Dean Stanley.) The
fragments that remain :—I. Fragments of time. Myriads waste hours, days, years,
and find themselves becgars at death. II. Fragments of INFLUENCE. “ No man
liveth unto himself.” It may be unconsciously exercised; like magnetism it never
slumbers, like gravitation it knows no Sabbath, Itis ever drawing to the Cross or to
ruin. III. Fragments of conscience. Oursins weaken and scatter the power Divine.
Some benumb its energy, others flatter it by deceit. IV. Fragments of FraitH. Christ
its faintest beams, they lead to heaven. V. Fragments of nove. Gather up every
fragment of reiiring lingering affection. VI. Fragments of consecration. As the


“s/


514 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, (cHAP. VI.
ee
needle always turns to the pole, so our life should centre in God. (W. H.Van Doren,
D.D.) Love enriches itself :—This which remained over must have immensely
exceeded in bulk and quantity the original stock ; and we thus havea visible symbol
of that love which exhausts not itself by loving, but after the most prodigal out-
goings upon others abides itself far richer than it would else have done; of the
multiplying which there always is in a true dispensing, of the increasing which may
go along with a scattering. (Archbishop Trench.) Wastefulness :—Having by
the miracle taught a lesson of beneficence, Christ now inculeates economy. I. THE
SIN OF WASTEFULNEsS. 1. It breaks the law which bids us “ use the things of this
world As not abusing them.” 2. It is shameful ingratitude to our Father in heaven to
waste that daily bread given to us in answer to prayer. 3. Every shilling needlessly
squandered is a.diminution of our power to do good. II. THE NATURE OF WASTE-
FULNESS. It is not confined to the destruction of the necessaries of life, but may
fairly be extended to unprofitable consumption. 1. Fashion and vanity are great
wasters. 2. Intemperance is waste—(1) Of bodily health. (2) Of the means of
saving others from starvation. 3. Luxury is waste because (1) Frequently un-
uecessary. (2) Encouraging extravagance in children. III. How To auarp AGarnst
WASTEFULNESS. 1. Not by niggardliness to the neglect of the duties of Christian
hospitality, but in general by the rational enjoyment as against the perversion of
the blessings of providence. 2. By every one “ ruling well his own house,” impressing
servants with the sin, folly, and dishonesty of wastefulness. 3. By preventing what
is perishable from being spoiled through carelessness. 4. By preventing a con-
sumption of the fruits of the earth by overfeeding such animals as are kept chiefly
for pleasure. IV. Tue BENEFITS oF FRUGALITY. 1. The cultivation of good habits ;
temperance, charity, &c. 2. Addition to the sum of human happiness. (J.
Hewlett, D.D.) Fragments not to be wasted:—1. This is the command of
the last gospel of the last Sunday of the Church’s year. 2. This command
in its connection shows us the union of the vastness of God’s liberality with
the minuteness of the accuracy of His economy. He ‘provides you all things
richly to enjoy,’ but He looks to see what you do with the cup of cold water.
His are “the cattle on a thousand hills, but a sparrow cannot fall without His
notice.” 3. The text may be applied to the use of—I. THINGS THAT CAN BE MEA-
SURED By MONEY. II, Crumss or trutTH. III. Tae means or crack. IV. Scanty
opportunities. V. Lirrne sures. (J. Vaughan, M.A.) Divine avoidance of
waste :—Many things that appear useless have some hidden value. In jeweller’s
shops every particle of filing is preserved for the assayer. Paper trimmings of large
establishments become of value to the extent of thousands of pounds, In Copen-
hagen a hospital is supported by the money raised from cigar tips. The pieces of
bread swept into the dust heap from the tables of England would, if saved and
given to missions, double the means at present at their disposal. I. Noricz THE
ECONOMY IN THE DIVINE ADMINISTRATION. 1. In nature there seems to be waste in
great stretches of uncultivated ground, rocky ridges, unseen flowers, unfathomed
depths; and in stellar regions there seems to be infinite waste of ligkt and force.
Why all this? Because there must be no appearance of niggardliness on the part
of omnipotence. Yet no part of this lavishment is really waste. No atom is lost
All is used over and over again, as vapours, heat, sand, soil, &c. 2. In the world
of thought there is no waste. From Copernicus, Tycho, Brake, Kepler, Newton
&c., men now gather power to gain further knowledge. Watts, and Stephenson and
Moore are only founders of inventions on which others build. 3. In the spiritual
sphere, devotion, faithfulness, endurance, suffering, is not waste. John in prison
Stephen stoned, Christ crucified, are all incentives to fealty and love. II. Tam am
IN THE DIVINE ECONOMY OF FRAGMENTS. 1. It is a benefit to man that he is required
to % gather.” Christ could have created more bread, but it had not been good for
the disciples to live on miracles. Eden could have been kept right, but it was
better for man to keep it. Birds and animals are provided with clothing and food;
man has to provide for himself because a higher being. Difficulties enable us to
value things more. 2. Christ here warned men of the great losses that may attend
trifling neglects : Ships sink by little leaks. Constant trifling wastes may ruin the
best business. 3. He showed more power in the gathered fragments than in feeding
the five thousand. 4. He taught the disciples His care for those whom others would
despise. (Homiletic Magazine.) No waste in Nature or Art :—Nature isa rigid
economist. In her household there is no waste. Everything is utilized to the
utmost. The decay of rocks forms the soil of plants; and the decay of plants
forms the mould in which future plants will grow. The sunlight and carbonic acid


CHAP. VI, J ST, JOHN. 515


gas of past ages which seemed to be wasted upon a desert world, have been stored
up in the form of coal for the benefit of man. The water that seems to be dissipated
in the air descends in the dew and rain to refresh and quicken the earth. Tha
matter that has served its purpose to one object goes by death and deeomposi-
tion to form another object with a different purpose to serve. The materials which
the animal kingdom receives from the mineral and vegetable kingdoms must be
restored in order that they may be carefully circulated without diminution or waste
over the whole earth. The gases that disappear ia one form reappear in another.
Forces are changed into their equivalents. Heat becomes motion, and motion heat,
Nowhere is there any waste. In the ashes of every fire, in the decay of every plant,
in the death and decomposition of every animal there is change, but not loss, death,
but not waste. Everything is made the most of. The fragments of every product
of nature are gathered up carefully and made to serve a useful purpose in a new
form at nature’s feast. Amid all her lavishness nature is very saving. The brilliant
hues of flowers which the poet and artist love are not mere idle adornments, but
have a practical purpose to fulfil. The beauty and fragrance which we so much
admire appear only when the fertilization of the plant by insect agency is necessary ;
and when this task is accomplished, she withdraws them, as we put out the lights
and remove the garlands when the banquetis over. In the most economical manner
Nature gets her new effects not by producing new objects, but by effecting a few
modifications upon the old ones; and when she makes a blossom upon an apple-
tree she simply shortens and alters what would otherwise have been a common leafy
branch; all the parts of the inflorescence of the commonest wayside weed, the
bract, the calyx, petal, stamen, pistil, and seed, in spite of all their differences of
form and colour, are but successive transformations of the leaf. Thus our Lord
teaches us by the common processes of Nature the lesson of economy. In the
sphere of human art we find that there is a growing tendency to economize
materials. The distinguishing characteristic of our arts and manufactures is
economy. Substances which our forefathers threw away are now converted into
useful and valuable products. We extract beautiful colours from the dung-heap,
and delicious perfumes and essences from the offal of the streets. Every day we are
finding out more and more that nothing is useless; that even the waste and refuse
of our manufactures may be turned to profitable account, and made to minister to
the necessities or the comfort of man. By the work of our own hands, therefore,
our Lord is teaching us the lesson of economy. (H. Macmillan, LL.D.) The
economics of Nature :—Though the wealth of God is uncountable, He takes care even
of His pence. There is no waste in his workshop. All things go towards the up-
building of some newer life. Whatsoever you behold is but part of the great wheel
of life everywhere returning. The cloud becomes the rain, the rain the river, the
river the sea, the sea the cloud again. One of the glories of science is to abolish
the word “ waste.” Even the rag-picker has his function to perform, a higher one
perhaps than yours. It is better to gather rags than to wear overmuch finery,
because those rags go to the mill and become paper, on which the lovely and heroic
deeds of men are inscribed. When death comes he will make mock of your fine
clothes, and you will go your way to the rag heap. He who rescues rags is often
more useful than he who wears them, and he might have written across him ‘“ Gather
up the fragments,” &c. He gathers rags, bones, &c. He sorts them. Then they
are sold and made into new materials, which in their turn come round again to rags.
I take up a sheet of paper upon which to write, and I say of it, ‘‘Rags of my youth
come back again—come to clothe my soul this time.” (George Dawson, M.A.)
Utilization of waste :—An apprentice made a gorgeous cathedral window from the
fragments of glass his master threw away. When David Cox used to sketch many
things on paper and then cast them aside as not being up tohis ideal, they were cast
into the waste-paper basket or scattered on the floor. His old housekeeper, how-
ever, from reverence to her master, collected these torn and crumpled pieces. When
the gifted artist died, and his effects were sold, the old housekeeper had her relics
framed and realized some thousands of pounds, on which she was able to pass the
rest of her days in comfort. There was unexpected value in fragments and scraps !
Were we as careful to try and save time, or to seize opportunities of winning souls,
what glory might not be brought to Christ! (Homiletic Magazine.) Twelve
baskets :—The word for “ basket” in all the places where this miracle is mentioned
(Matt. xiv; Mark vi. ; Luke ix. ; John 6), kophinos ; in the two places where the
later miracle of feedingis described, the word for basket is spuris. These two words
indicate two different kinds of baskets. It was in a spuris basket that Paul was let


{


ee a Dat Sin
516 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. _ {cHar. vi *


down from the walls of Damascus; so that we can hardly err in recognizing in the
spuris the large, deep, and round woven basket which is used for so many purposes
in Palestine, and into which a man could, on occasion, be packed. The kophinos,
on the other hand, which in the classics sometimes indicates a fish-basket, seems to
be the light, flat woven tray-basket, which is in use among fisher-folk and others who
had light burdens to carry. (S. S. Times.) Nothing lost :—I. In all the PROCESSES OF
nature. In the ravages of oceans, the flow of rivers, the crumbling of mountains,
“nothing is lost; the drop of dew that trembles on leaf or flower, is but exhaled to
fall anew, insummer thunder shower.” II. OF ALL THE COUNTLESS FORMS OF LIFE
that have flourished and died since the beginning—


“The little drift of common dust,
By the March winds disturbed and tossed,
Though scattered by the fitful gust,
Is changed but never lost.”


III. Or ANY worK DONE FoR Gop, however humble. Sermons, prayers, contribu-
tions, &e. (Isa. lv. 11; Acis x. 4; Matt. x. 42). Whatan encouragement to parents,
teachers, ministers, reformers. (W.H. Van Doren, D.D.)


Vers. 14-21. Then those men when they had seen the miracle.—T ve sequel to the
miracle:—I. THE EFFECT OF THE MIRACLE ON THE MIND OF THE MULTITUDE. They,
like all Jews of the time, were expecting the Prophet like unto Moses. The Divine
commission of Moses was authenticated by the miraculous manna; what then could
this miracle mean but that He who worked it was the antitype of Moses. And
then Moses had been king 2s well as prophet. Who could be better qualified for
“leader and commander of the people” than Jesus? Time and place were both
favourable for raising the standard of rebellion, and five thousand resolute hearts
formed no mean nucleus of an army which would soon include every Jewish patriot.
Measures, therefore, were taken to compel Christ to yield to their wishes. 1. In
this incident we have an example of zeal without knowledge. Christ was indeed a
King, but had they apprehended in what sense nothing would have been further
from their wishes. 2. Zeal without knowledge must at all times be most injurious
to the true interests of the cause of Christ. JI, THE PRocepuRE or Curist (ver.
15). 1. He withdrew. (1) To frustrate their purpose. (2) To show that His
kingdom was not of this world. (3) To ascend a higher throne, not by popular
election, but by the cross. 2. He withdrew to pray, thus indicating the nature of
the glory He sought. He had much to plead for on behalf of the multitude on
whom the miracle had been lost, and in behalf of His disciples who had more than
half taken the infection, Lessons: (1) Those who misuse Christ and His blessings
must not wonder if they are deprived of His presence. (2) Spiritual safety is closely
connected with retirement from dangerous associations. Christ not only withdrew
Himself but sent the disciples away (Matt. xiv. 22; Mark vi. 45). III. Taz pancur
OF THE DISCIPLES (vers. 17, 18). 1. Those who seek and find their delight in
Christ’s presence know the bitterness of His absence. How often are Christ’s
disciples tossed with tempests and constrained to hard and apparently fruitless
service! 2. The Master is ever at hand when the storm is fiercest and where the
labour is hardest. IV. Tus apvenr or Currst. 1. Aroused their fears. 2
Elicited their prayers. 3. Secured their safety. 4. Brought them safely to shore.
(A. Beith, D.D.) Three views of Christ :—I, Amip Tu MouNTAINS (ver. 15). 1 A
couch of repose after the physical exhaustion of the day. 2. A temple of prayer
(Matt. xiv. 23; Mark vi. 46). (1) For Himself that He might resist the temptation
Ee had just escaped as in the wilderness (Matt. iv. 8-10), and that He might be
supplied with strength for the coming miracle. (2) For the people who were as
sheep without a shepherd. (3) For the disciples gone on their perilous voyage. 3
A tower of observation of His disciples as now He watches us from heaven. II. Upon
THE sHA (vers. 19, 20). 1. The mysterious apparition, (1) Whatit was. Christ
really walking on, not swimming in, the sea, not walking on the shore. ‘Thereisno
difficulty here to those who believe the previous miracle. (2) Why it came. ‘To
proclaim Christ Lord as the Controller of nature, as the bread had proclaimed Him
its Creator. (3) When it appeared. Between three and six o’clock in the mornin
when the rowers were at their wits’ end. So Christ interposes when our need is
greatest (Amos v. 1), (4) How it was regarded. With fear, as Christ’s unusual
appearances often are. 2, The familiar voice, (1) What it said (ver. 20). A note


CHAP: VI.) 1 ~ST. JOHN. 517


of assurance (Isa. xliii. 2; liv. 11). (2) Howit acted. It dispelled their alarms.
III. In THE Boat (ver. 21). 1. The wind was hushed (Matt. xiv. 32). To lull the
soul’s hurricanes when Christ steps within (chap. xiv. 27). 2. The disciples were
amazed (Mark vi. 51), and led to worship (Matt. xiv. 33). Christ’s supremacy over
nature unmistakably betokened His Divinity. 3. The voyage was completed.
Learn: 1. The dependence Jesus ever felt on prayer. 2. The notive Christ
continues to take of His people. 3. The ability Christ possesses to help in the time
of need. 4. The glory Christ shall yet bring to His people and to this material
world. 5. The object of all Christ’s manifestations to lead men to recognize His
Divinity. (TI. Whitelaw, D.D.) This is of a truth that Prophet.—The distin-
guishing characteristics of Christ as a Teacher :—I. THose WHICH CANNOT BE
IMITATED. 1. His originality. 2. His miraculousness, 3. His authority. II.
THOSE WHICH MUST NOT BE IMITATED. 1. His positiveness. 2. His self-assurance,
8. His self-representation. III, Tsosz wHicH sHOULD BE IMITATED. 1. His
naturalness. 2. His simplicity. 3. His variety. 4. His suggestiveness. 5. His
definiteness. 6. His catholicity. 7. His spirituality. 8. His tenderness. 9. His
faithfulness. 10. His consistency. 11. His devoutness. (W. H. Van Doren,
RTE The misinterpretation of the Divine sign by the perverseness of the carnal
mind :—They draw from the sign a correct conclusion (a true doctrine) and a false
application (a bad moral). So with orthodox faith a false (ecclesiastical or secular)
morality is often associated. (J. P. Lange, D.D.) This is of a truth the
prophet :—1. They beheld in Jesus the fulfilment of prophecies fondly remem-
bered, of hopes long deferred. The Law-giver who was to be a second Moses;
the Deliverer who was to be a more mighty conqueror than Joshua; a King
more glorious than David, wiser than Solomon, was come at last. 2. They who
said so were not men learned in the Scriptures, like the Jewish scribes and rulers ;
book-learning, even of the highest sort, is apt to make those who have it slow in
forming their judgments, backward and cold in declaring them. Nor were they
men of the city, who might have gained some knowledge at second hand from those
who had searched the Scriptures. But they were a crowd of rude, simple folk,
come together from the hill country of Galilee, where old traditions had been
handed down from age to age by word of mouth. With an instinct more true, more
strong, than the opinions of the learned, they perceived that the bread which they
received in such abundance could only have been supplied by God Himself, and
that in Him who fed them thus God was revealed as clearly as when He spake by
the profits to their forefathers. 3. Confessions of this kind, all the more impres-
sive from their being artless and involuntary, are often to be met with in the four
Gospels, and are just such as we might expect men would make on ‘seeing of a
sudden the supernatural power and wisdom of Christ (see chap, i. 49; Luke v. 8;
Mark xv. 39). 4. It is not to be supposed that the like effects should be wrought
in us, who have heard and read a hundred times the record of these things.
Miracles the most amazing, discourses the most persuasive, the heartrending tales
of sufferings inconceivable, sound in our ears as old familiar truths ; and familiarity
too often leads to neglect, even though it may by no means breed contempt.
They who live in sight of a beautiful landscape lose in some degree the perception
of its loveliness. They would like to view it with fresh eyes; as the strangers do
who come to visit them. There is stealing over us a spirit of indifference, which
for any saving purpose is as dangerous as the spirit of downright unbelief. 5. God
does not suffer us to remain without a warning in this deadly stupor. Not by
miracles, not by the visitation of angels, but in the course of His providence, by
what we call the accidents of life, He arouses us and makes us see the Saviour as
plainly revealed to our inward vision as He was to those men sitting on the grass
and eating the bread which He gave them in the wilderness. 6. And what sort of
things are they which bring us to see in His beauty and majesty that Saviour who
hitherto has had no form or comeliness in our sight, so that we have even hid our
faces from Him? Have we been led to look with abhorrence on one of our darling
sins and yearn for the purity which once we had, and which we cannot of ourselves
recover? And has a ray of comfort from Him been shed upon us, kindling a new
hope in our breasts, making us embrace as a living truth what had become to as a
dead form of words, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners? Or
has the heavenly ray reached you by another path? It is in love that thon art
chastened, that the weight of thy affliction, which is but for a little moment, may
gain thee the exceeding and eternal weight of glory. I have been the Man of
sorrows, and now am at God’s right hand. I know thy afilictions, and even iz My


~~


518 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cHap. vt.


NNO ATS PARTIE
glory here am touched with a feeling of them. But such is God’s law, equal for all;
“ only through tribulation canst thou enter the kingdom here above. Have such
consolations given a new turn to your thoughts, and thrown some light on the deep
mystery of your life? If so, you might well exclaim, “This is of a truth the
Prophet that cometh—that Herald of life and joy, so greatly needed by the sons
and daughters of affliction, so longed for by me, sorrow-stricken, sick at heart as
Iam! This is He, the Desire of all nations!” And if, in any of these ways, the good
impression has been made upon you, take care to keep it by giving good heed to it, and
especially by often calling to mind the circumstances under which you first received
it. Otherwise it will soon wear out like the stagnant pool of Betheuda, troubled for an
instant by the angel’s wing. (W. G. Humphry, B.D.) When Jesus therefore per-
ceived that they would come and . . . make Him a King.— Christ not a King by

force:—1, Some men have greatness thrust upon them. From all such Christ separates

Himself, knowing that what is done by compulsion may by compulsion be undone.
So He would not have a kingdom forced upon Him, nor would He be forced on a
kingdom. Wonderful words are written on His royal banner: “ Put up thy sword,”
“ My kingdom is not of this world.” 2. This is the second time that He declined
acrown. It is not every man who has two such chances. Everything depends on
how you get hold of your kingdom. If you have offered false worship for it, it will
rot in your grip; if you have been forced on reluctant hearts, they will cast you off
in the spring tide of returning power. 3. There is something in this Man more
than in any other man. The more His character is studied, the more independent
we shall be of theological evidences. The grand claim of Christ to supremacy goes
right up to the centre and necessity of things. I. NoTHING HAS TO BE DONE IN THE
KINGDOM OF HEAVEN BY VIOLENCE, by mere force. Did not Christ come to be a
King? Yes. What matter then the way of becoming one? Everything. A man
must prove his title to his seat, or he may be unseated. 1. It is not right to do
right in a wrong way. It is right that you should come to church: it would be
wrong to force you to come. The end does not sanctify the means. 2. Force is
powerless in all high matters. (1) You can force a man to kneel, to repeat
devotional words while you stand over him sword in hand; but he defies you to
make him pray. (2) You can force a man to pay his debts, but you cannot make
him honest. Honesty cannot be created by force, nor dishonesty be punished by
it. (3) You can compel a nation to build a church, but you cannot compel it to be
religious. The very attempt to force a man to be religious destroys the temper
which alone makes religion possible. II. While all this is true on the human side,
the real point to be considered is that Jesus Curist HIMSELF WOULD NEVER REIGN BY
MERE FORCE. If you could force men to Christ, you could never force Christ to men.
It is the Infinite that declines. Jesus reigns by the distinct consent of the human
mind. ‘If any man will open to Me, I will come in.” ‘Come unto Me all ye,”
&e. II. If He will not be a King by force, By wHAT MEANS wit HE BECOME
Kina? 1, Preach Me, is one of His injunctions. Show My doctrine, purpose,
spirit, throughout the world. That is a roundabout way, but the swing of the Divine
astronomy isinit. It is not the thought of acommon man. 2. Live Me: “ Let
your light so shine,” &c. ; ‘‘ I have given you an example ;” ‘* Follow Me.” 3. Lift
Me up. ‘“IfI be lifted up,” &c. (1) On the Cross of Atonement. (2) By us when
we love His law, submit to His bidding, reproduce His temper, receive with unques-
tioning heart all the gospel of His love. IV. Now for the philosophical explanation
of allthis. ‘Ws Love Hm secausn He rirst rovep vs.” This Man lays hold of
our entire love, and thereby secures an everlasting reign. The man who proceeded
to capture human nature as this Man proceeded is presumably a true king. No
adventurer could have acted as Jesus Christ. 1. Little child, Jesus would not have
you forced to be good. He says, ‘“‘I am knocking at the door of your heart; let Me
in.* 2. He makes no proposition about going out. 38. The Church, like the
Master, should not rule by force, but by love. (J. Parker, D.D.) Secret prayer :—
Secret prayer feeds the soul as secret morsels feed the body; therefore it is said to
be the banquet of grace, where the soul may solace itself with God, as Esther did
with Ahasuerus at the banquet of wine, arid have whatsoever heart can wish or need
require. While the disciples were perilling and well-nigh perishing, Christ was
praying for them; so He is still for us at the right hand of the Majesty on
high. (J. Trapp.) Jesus on the mountain above the political designs of men :—
He alone. I. He alone rau rrez Onz who is more a King than any prince on earth.
Il. He alone THE cLEaR-stcHTED Ong, who sees above all craftiness of policy. III.
He alone THE SILENT BUT DECISIVE DIsPosER OF ALL THINGS. (Lange.) Tha


CHAP. vI.] ST, JOHN. 519
kingship of Christ :—Like Joseph our Lord suffered for the sin He so carefully
avoided. The charge of claiming to be King was brought up against Him at. His
trial. Yet while shunning the bauble of an earthly sceptre, He was King of kings, and
will for ever wear many crowns. To muke Him King was of the Father, not of poor
mortals. How low their ideas of Messiah’s kingdom! What had loaves and fishes mul-
tiplied to do with “‘Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever”? (W. H. Van Doren,
D.D.) And when even was now come His disciples went down unto the sea and
enterei into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum.—4d night upon the
deep :—I. OF DISAPPOINTED HOPE. IJ. OF UNSUCCESSFUL EFFORT. III, Or DEEPEN-
ING ALARM. IV. Or Divine MANIFESTATION. V. OF SUPERNATURAL DELIVERANCE.
(T. Whitelaw, D.D.) Jesus absent in darkness :—It is sometimes worth while to
try to meet the mournful and worried state of mind in the churches, when the good
are longing, and perhaps waiting, for a revival of religion to come. I. THE PicTURE.
In the course of description of the scene on Lake Genesaret, it will not be difficult
to suggest these points: 1. The close and rather humiliating connection between
wistful souls and weary bodies. 2. The disheartening result of a rapid transition
from exhilarating crowds to unromantic and lonely labour. 3. The feeling of de-
sertion when, perhaps, Jesus is praying for us all the time. 4. Desolate frames of
feeling give no release from diligent duty. Our question now is, What did those
disciples do? II. Tux xresson. 1. They kept on rowing. That is, they did pre-
cisely what they would haye done if Jesus had arrived. 2. They headed the boat
for Capernaum. That was what He bade them do (see Matt. xiv. 22). 3. They
bailed out the water if any rushed into the boat. All the worldliness in the world’s
sea cannot sink Christ’s Church, if only the waves are kept on the outside of it. 4.
They strained their eyes.in every direction for the least sign of Christ’s coming. 5.
They cheered each other. (C. S. Robinson.) The absent Christ :—It is always
dark until Jesus comes to us, or until we go to Jesus. This is the case with—I.
THE AWAKENED SINNER who, in contact with Jesus, passes from darkness into light.
Il. Tue pesronpine CurisTIAN (Psa. xliii., li., cxxx.). III. Tue aFFLIcTED CHRIS-
qian. IV. THE BEREAVED. “If Thou hadst been here our brother had not died,”
But when He comes He is the Resurrection and the Life. (W. M. Taylor, D.D.)
Christians in darkness when Christ is not near :—I. CHRIST’S THOUGHTS ABOUT His
prsciptes. 1. He leaves men for a time in fear and danger. (1) After the fall the
whole world was thus left till Christ came in the flesh. (2) After the Incarnation
He remained thirty years in obscurity. He remained far distant from Bethany till
Lazarus was dead. He lingered on the mountain while His disciples were strug-
gling with the storm. (3) At this day His people wonder at His absence, and
exclaim, ‘Thou art a God that hidest Thyself.” 2. His delay is no proof of His
neglect. His delights were with the children of men before His abode was among
them. When absent from Lazarus His heart was full of a brother’s love. Here
His purpose was to allow their extremity to become His opportunity. So when He
left the world it was that the Comforter might come. And now it is only love that
detains Him within the veil. 3. Never, and nowhere, do they who wait on the Lord
wait in vain. To weary watchers the time seemed long but the coming was sure.
«« Faithful is He that promised.” ‘‘He that keepeth Israe! shall not slumber.” II.
HE DISCIPLES’ THOUGHTS ABouT CuRisT. 1. It was a matter of the heart. In
knowledge they were children ; and like children, too, in single-eyed, confiding love.
Afterwards they became more enlightened. But their first love was not weaker
than their last. 2. Observe how this child-like love operates in time of trial. (1)
The waters were permitted to swell and frighten the children, although their Elder
Brother held those waters in the hollow of His hand. But these true men would
neither be bold in the:absence of their Lord, nor faint in fear when He was at their
side, (2) The storm and darkness made their hearts quiver, and all the more surely
did these hearts turn and point toward the mountain-top when Jesus, the Daysman,
stood laying His hand upon God. (3) But these dangers though great were material
and temporal; whereas the dangers which induce us to seek a Saviour are our own
sin, and the wages that it wins. But these burdens will make you doubly welcome.
(4) The example of these Galileans is shown here as in a glass, that every mourner
may thereby be encouraged to long for the presence of the Lord (Psa. 1. 15). (5)
Love to Christ in a human heart, kindled by Christ’s love to man and laying hold
of the love that lighted it, is the one thing needed. (W. Arnot, D.D.) Christ,
though absent, has not deserted us :—Jesus was absent all the while. He leaveth them,
as it were, in the suburbs of hell. Howbeit as the eagle when she flieth highest of
all from the nest doth ever cast a jealous eye upon her young, so doth this heavenly


‘ *. u e< ert Fatah ine
520 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. ronAP.


eagle. (J. Trapp.) _ Night with Jesus :—1. It was night. The disciples were alone,
which made it double night. 2. It was night at sea. To be without Jesus in the
day and on land was sad, but this was sadder. 3. It was a night of toil: rowing
four miles in the teeth of the wind; and Christ’s absence made their labour doubly
hard. 4. It wasa night of danger. The storm had broken loose and there was no
Jesus. Let us look at these works in their more general aspect in relation to the
Saint and to the Church. I. Nicut. 1. The sinner’s history is one long starless
night. 2. The saint has his night, too, of sorrow, bereavement, and pain. 3. The
Church, too, has her night—poverty, persecution, desertion. There shall be no
night there, but there is night now. II. Nicur wirnout Jesus. 1. The sinner’s
night is altogether without Him. 2. The saint has night when Jesus seems distant.
Without Him altogether we cannot be—‘“‘ Lo, I am with you always.” But there
are times when He is not realized; and the issue of these is to bring Him nearer,
Ill. NiegHt wit Jesus. With Him the darkness is as the light. For having Him
we have—1. Companionship. 2. Protection. 3. Safety. 4. Comfort. 5. Strength.
6. Assurance of the coming day. IV. Day witH Jesus. He does not say, ‘‘ Let Me
go, for the day breaketh.” And if His presence has made the night pleasant, what
will not that presence make the coming day! (H. Bonar, D.D.) They see Jesus
walking on the sea.—Does He not always walk upon it? Is not His majestic tread
on the Galilean waters typical—I. Or His Marcu ALONG THE AGES? No figure seems
more literal than that by which we speak of the waves, the current, the sea of time.
How constantly is the lapse of years, obliterating races, memorials, great names,
the dykes set up by arms, laws, industries and enterprise. Of the civilized nations
now on earth but one in Christ’s time had a name or a place except the Jews. The
languages then spoken are now dead. The manners and religions have passed away.
Meanwhile, Jesus has walked upon the waves. The gospel has neyer been sub-
merged or been less than the one shaping, controlling power. 1. At the outset
fierce and bitter persecution assailed Christianity, but from beneath the heel of the
Cesars it mounted their throne. 2. Then commenced the severer trial of corrupting
prosperity ; and still its ordinances, doctrines, and influence could not be wholly
corrupted. 3. Invading races threatened to destroy it, but yielded to it. 4. During
the dark ages it gave birth to noble charities, home life, &c. 5. In these latter ages
how many and powerful have been the assailing forces, scientific and infidel; but
no sooner has any fountain of knowledge become deep and clear than it has invited
His tread and rolled tributary waves to His feet. 6. And lo! as centuries roll on
His circuit widens. His steps lay hold on the ends of the earth and the islands of
the sea. II. Or His way IN THE HEART oF MAN. 1. How fierce the waves that
threaten our peace aid well being! Passion, appetite, lust, pride, desire, fear.
What power but Christ’s can walk these waves? But let Him enter and these
billows know their Lord. 2. What miracles of mercy has He not wrought in these
subject souls! (1) Here was intemperance or lust. No love could stem the torrent; but
Christ entered and appetite was quelled and all is now pure and peaceful. (2) In
that spirit passion raged; Christ entered and vengeance has given place to love
and forgiveness. 3. In every soul into which He enters, He walks as sovereign. The
forces of character mould themselves at His command. III. Or His parns As HERALD
AND GUIDE TO THE LIFE ETERNAL. (A. P. Peabody, LL.D.) Christ in the night
storm :—I. Many of my hearers may be just now in a FEARFUL NIGHT-STORM OF
TROUBLE. 1. One is in the darkness of a mysterious providence. 2. Another is
under a tempest of commercial disaster. He has lost “the rigging” of his
prosperity ; and his pride has come down as a top-sail comes down in a hurricane.
3, Another one is toiling with the oars against a head-sea of poverty. 4. The
guiding rudder of a dear and trusted friend has been swept away by death. 5.

till another one is in a midnight of spiritual despondency, and the promise-stars
seem to be all shut out under gloomy clouds. My friend A is making a hard
voyage, with her brood of fatherless children to provide for. Friend B—— has a
poor intemperate hushand on board with her; and Brother C——’s little bark
hardly rises out of one wave of disaster before another sweeps over it, There are whole
boat-loads of disciples who are ‘‘ toiling at rowing” over a dark sea of trouble. II.
THE HOUR OF THE CHRISTIAN’S EXTREMITY IS THE HOUR OF CHRIST’S OPPORTUNITY. At
the right moment Christ makes His appearance. We do not wonder at the disciples’
astonishment andalarm. But straightway Jesus speaks unto them, and in an instant
their fears vanished and “ the wind ceased.” Now, good friends, who are breasting
a midnight sea of trouble, open the eye of faith, and see that Form on the waves!
It is not an apparition ; it is not a fiction of priestly fancies. It is Jesus Himself }


v¢


ouar. v1] | ‘ST. JOHN. 521


‘One who has been tried on all points as we are, and yet without sin. Christ comes
to you as a sympathizing, cheering, consoling Saviour. His sweet assurance is,
“Lo! Iam with you. Fear not; I have redeemed thee.” Receive Him into the
ship. No vessel can sink or founder with Jesus on board. Let the storms rage, if
God sends them. Christ can pilot you through. ItisI! There may be a night
coming soon on some of you, when heart and flesh shall fail you, and the cnly shore
ahead is the shore of eternity. If Jesus is only in the bark, be not afraid. Like
glorious John Wesley, you will be able to cry aloud in the dying hour, ‘‘ The best of
all is, God is with us!” III. Tur TEAcHINGS OF THIS INSPIRING SCENE TO THOSE WHO
ARE IN A MID-SEA OF CONVICTIONS OF SIN AND TROUBLINGS OF CONSCIENCE. The storm
of Divine threatenings against sinis breaking upon you. You acknowledge that
you are guilty. Alarming passages from God’s Word foam up around your distressed
and anxious soul. You cannot quell this storm, or escape out of it. Toiling at the
oars of self-righteousness has not sent you a furlong nearer to the ‘‘desired haven.”
You have found by sore experience that sin gives no rest, and that your oars are no
match against God’s just and broken law. Friend! Listen! Thereis a voice that
comes sounding through the storm. MHearken toit! It is a voice of infinite love,
“Tt is I!’? ‘* Whosoever believeth in Me shall not perish, but shall have everlasting
life.” If you will only admit this waiting, willing, loving Jesus into your tempest-
tossed soul, the ‘‘ wind will cease.” Christ can allay the storm. Receive Him.
Do all He asks, surrender the helm to Him, and you can then feel as the rescued
disciples did when they knelt down in the drenched bottom of their little boat, and
cried out, “Truly this is the Son of God!” (7. L. Cuyler, D.D.) It is I, be
not afraid.— The Lord’s voice to His people:—I. Procuarmine His presence. 1. In
unexpected places. 2. At unwonted times. 3. In unfamiliar forms. II. Disprn-
LING FEAR—1. Of danger. 2. Of death. 3. Ofevil. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.) The
recognition of Christ in the hour of death :—The recognition of Christ coming to
help and comfort in the hour of severest trial is ever the Christian’s privilege. If
he see Him not in the storm, he must look again and again, for he has but failed to
recognize Him. This truth we would apply only to that last fearful storm which
wrecks the bark in which the soul has been crossing the sea of life. I. To rEcoa-
nize Him we must Expect Him. 1. He has promised to be there, ‘Lo, I am with
you alway.” ‘When thou passeth through the waters, I will be with thee.” 2.
He who has given His life for us will not fail us in that most trying moment. II.
By WHAT SIGNS MAY THE CaRIsTIAN KNow Him? 1. The Christian soul knows Him
by His visage. Infinite love breaks through every disguise when viewed by the soul
fitted to recognize it. 2. Knows Him because He announces Himself: ‘It is I, be
not afraid.” 3. Knows Him because of the calm that comes with Him. Conclusion :
Martyrs and Christians in all ages have borne testimony to the recognition of Christ
in the last hour of life. (Homiletic Monthly.) The symbolism of the voyage :—A
believer must have on the sea of life, Patience for his tackling, Hope for his
anchor, Faith for his helm, the Bible for his chart, Christ for his captain, the breath
of the Spirit to fill his canvas. (J. Trapp.) Afraid of Christ: —Of Him in whom
was laid up all their comfort. How oft are we mistaken and befooled by our fears!
(J. Trapp.) Timely comfort :—He waits to be gracious. Our extremity is His
opportunity. God brings His people to the mount, with Abraham, yea, to the very
brow of the hill, till their feet slip, and then delivers them. When all is given up
for lost then comes He in, as oil of an engine, (Ibid.) The storm on the lake :—
My experience in this region enabled me to sympathize with the disciples in their
long night’s contest with the wind. I have seen the face of the lake like a huge
boiling cauldron. The wind howled down the valleys from the north-east and east
with such fury that no efforts of rowers could have brought a boat to shore at any
point along that coast. To understand the cause of these sudden and violent
tempests we must remember the lake lies low—six hundred feet lower than the
oeean—that water-courses have cut out profound ravines and wild gorges, con-
verging to the head of the lake, and that these act like gigantic funnels to draw
down the cold winds from the mountains. On the occasion referred to we pitched
our tents on the shore, and remained for three days and nights exposed to this
tremendous wind. We had to double-pin all the tent ropes, and frequently were
obliged to hang with our whole weight upon them, to keep the quivering tabernacle
from being carried up bodily into the air. No wonder the disciples toiled and rowed
hard all that night. (W. M. Thomson, D.D.) The disciples and their absent
Master:—I have observed that a shipmaster, especially when the presence of
currents and the proximity of land make his burden heavy, shakes the compass


—s
ba


522 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fcHaP. VE


i


sharply, and then watches the point on which the quivering needle finally settles
down. The shaking makes the master more sure that the needle points truly to its
pole. In those days the magnet was not known. No trembling compass on the
deck that night told the steersman how to hold his helm, after the mountains
had disappeared in night; but an instrument more mysterious and equally true
within those simple seamen had once been touched by divine, forgiving mercy,
and pointed steadfastly now to the Source of saving power. (W. Arnot, D.D.)
The pathway of the King:—I. Tue struceiine torers. Is it not the history of
the Church in a nutshell? Is it not the symbol of life for us all? The solemn law
under which we live demands persistent effort, and imposes continual antagonism
upon us; there is no reason why we should regard that as evil, or think ourselves
hardly used, because we are not fair-weather sailors. The end of life is to make
men; the meaning of all events is to mould character. Anything that makes me
stronger is a blessing, anything that develops my morale is the highest good that
can come to me. And so be thankful if, when the boat is crossing the mouth of
some glen that opens upon the lake, a sudden gust smites the sheets and sends you
to the helm, and takes all your effort to keep you from sinking. Do not murmur,
or think that God’s Providence is strange, because many and many a time when
“it is dark, and Jesus is not yet come to us,” the storm of wind comes down upon
the lake and threatens to drive us from our course. Let us rather recognize Him
as the Lord who, in love and kindness, sends all the different kinds of weather
which according to the old proverb, makes up the full summed year. The solitary
crew were not so solitary as they thought. That little dancing speck on the waters
which held so much blind love, and so much fear and trouble, was in His sight, as
on the calm mountain-top He communed with God. No wonder that weary hearts
and lonely ones, groping amidst the darkness, and fighting with the tempests and
the sorrows of life, have ever found in our story a symbol that comes to them with
a prophecy of hope and an assurance of help, and have rejoiced to know that they
on the sea are beheld of the Christ in the sky, and that ‘‘the darkness hideth not
from’’ His loving eye. II. Tue approacuine Curist. If we look for a moment at
the miraculous fact, apart from the symbolism, we have a revelation here of Christ
as the Lord of the material universe, a kingdom wider in its range and: profounder
in its authority than that which that shouting crowd had sought to force upon
Him. His will consolidates the yielding wave, or sustains His material body on
the tossing surges. Two lessons may be drawn from this. One is that in His
marvellous providence Christ uses all the tumults and unrest, the opposition and
tempests which surround the ship that bears His followers as the means of achiev-
ing His purposes. We stand before a mystery to which we have no key when we
think of these two certain facts; first, the Omnipotent redeeming will of God in
Christ ; and, second, the human antagonism which is able to rear itself against
that. And-we stand in the presence of another mystery, most blessed, and yet
which we cannot unthread, when we think, as we most assuredly may, that in some
mysterious fashion, He works His purposes by the very antagonism to His pur-
poses, making even head-winds fill the sails, and planting His foot on the white
crests of the angry and changeful billows. How often in the world’s history has
this scene repeated itself, and by a Divine irony the enemies become the helpers of
Christ’s cause, and what they plotted for destruction turned out rather to the
furtherance of the gospel. Another lesson for our individual lives is this, that
Christ, in His sweetness and His gentle sustaining help, comes near to us all across
the sea of sorrow and trouble. A sweeter, a more gracious sense of His nearness to
us, is ever granted to us in the time of our darkness and our grief than is possible
to us in the sunny hours of joy. It is always the stormy sea that Christ comes
across, to draw near to us; and they who have never experienced the tempest have
yet to learn the inmost sweetness of His presence. Sorrow brings Him near to us.
Do you see that sorrow does not drive you away from Him. III. Tue terror anp
THE RECOGNITION. I do not dwell upon the fact that the average man, if he fancies
that anything from out of the Unseen is near him, shrinks in fear, I do not ask
you whether that is not a sign, and indication of the deep eonviction that lies in
men’s souls, of a discord between themselves and the unseen world; but I ask you
if we do not often mistake the coming Master, and tremble before Him when we
ought to be glad? Let no absorption in cares and duties, let no unchildlike mur-
murings, let no selfish abandonment to sorrow, blind you to the Lord that always
comes near troubled hearts, if they will only look and see. Let no reluctance to
entertain religious ideas, no fear of contact with the Unseen, no shrinking from


Te ee Ce


*


cHap, v1.] ST. JOHN. 623


the thought of Christ as a Kill-joy keep you from seeing Him as He draws near to
you in your troubles. And let no sly, mocking Mephistopheles of doubt, nor any
poisonous air, blowing off the foul and stagnant marshes of present materialism,
make you fancy that the living Reality, treading on the flood there, is a dream or a
fancy or the projection of your own imagination on to the void of space. He is real,
whatever may be phenomenal and surface. The storm is not so real as the Christ,
the waves not so substantial as He who stands uponthem. They will pass and melt,
He will abide for ever. Lift up your hearts, and be glad, because the Lord comes to
you across the waters. And hearken to His voice: “It is 1! Be not afraid.” The
encouragement not to fear follows the proclamation, “It is I!’ What a thrill of
glad confidence must have poured itself into their hearts, when once they rose to
the height of that wondrous fact! There is no fear in the consciousness of His
presence. It is His old word, “Be not afraid.” And He breathes it whithersoever
He comes; for His coming is the banishment of danger and the exorcism of dread.
IV. THE END OF THE TEMPEST AND OF THE VOYAGE. It ig not always true, it is very
seldom true, that when Christ comes on board opposition ends, and the purpose is
achieved. But it is always true that when Christ comes on board a new spirit
comes into the men who have Him for their companion, and are conscious that
they have. It makes their work easy, and makes them ‘more than conquerors ”
over what yet remains. With what a different spirit the weary men would bend
their backs to the oars once more when they had the Master on board, and with
what a different spirit you and I will set ourselves to our work if we are sure of His
presence. The worst of trouble is gone when Christ shares it with us. Friends!
Life is a voyage, anyhow, with plenty of storm, and danger, and difficulty, and
weariness, and exposure, and anxiety, and dread, and sorrow, for every soul of
man. But if you will take Christ on board it will be a very different thing
from what it will be if you cross the wan waters alone. Without Him you will
make shipwreck of yourselves; with Him your voyage may be as perilous and lonely
as that of that poor Shetland woman in the Columbine a month ago, but He will
take care of you, and you will be guided on shore, on the one little bit of beach
where all the rest is iron-bound rocks, on which whoever smites will be shattered
to pieces. ‘Then are they glad... where they would be.” (A. Maclaren,
D.D.)


Vers. 22-40. The day following.—Jesus the Bread of Life :—I. Our Lorp’s avowaL
or Hrs Divine NATURE AND His HEAVENLY ERRAND. More than thirty times in this
one discourse does He use the personal pronouns “ Me” and “I,” in such connec-
tions as that it would be blasphemy if He were anything less than really God. The
Jews saw this (vers. 41, 42), the disciples also (ver. 66). II. THE SPECIAL DOCTRINE OF
THE GOSPEL WHICH ALWAYS SEARCHES THE HEARTS OF MEN. The sacrifice of Jesus on the
cross is what universally tests pride the most severely. In this discourse our Lord
intentionally sifts His hearers. He avows with startling suddenness the most
extreme views of human helplessness without vicarious redempticn. Then He puts
the plaintive question, ‘‘ Will ye also go away?” III. THe PARAMOUNT NECESSITY
OF AN ATONEMENT FOR HUMAN sins. ‘‘ Without shedding of blood is no remission.”
So striking are these utterances of Christ, that there can be no mistaking them,
They cannot possibly be discharged of their meaning by any notion of mere pattern-
setting on His part. Bread is not example, and blood is not conduct, and eating is
not imitation. IV. Let Us BE SATISTIED WITH THE EXPLANATION FURNISHED US HERE
OF THAT SENSE OF CRAVING AND RESTLESSNESS WHICH MANY FEEL UNDER THE APPEALS
oF THE GosPEL. The soul hungers after Christ. The sound of feeding awakes
deeper pangs. Every living thing must eat or die. (C.S. Robinson, D.D.) Jesus
the Bread of Life:—I. THE SELFISHNESS OF MEN REGARDING Jesus CHRIST (vers.
92-24). The people before us, having ‘‘come to Capernaum seeking Jesus,” desired
Him only for a temporal benefit. This is like many in our day. They go to church,
pretend to be religious, make a show of piety, because it is fashionable, profitable
for trade, or a convenient method of getting “ bread ” without toil. The pious
fraud ig a more dangerous enemy to Christianity than outspoken infidelity. Il.
Mrn’s SELFISHNESS IN RELIGION REBUKED (vers. 25-27). 1. By having the shallow-
ness of their pretensions exposed (ver. 26). How keen-cutting these words are !
And so it is everywhere in the Bible—hypocrisy is condemned with severity. Any
one who would speak for Jesus must not be afraid to rebuke the pretender, 2. Pre-
sentation of the true motive (ver. 27). We must be sincere in seeking Christ as
the Saviour of the soul—i.e., ‘‘everlasting life” must be with us a deeper considera,


’ dt Pee
524 t THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cuar. vr.


tion than the life of the body. To give this eternal life, or righteousness, unto the
world was the purpose of Jesus’ coming here: “For Him hath God the Father
sealed ”—i.e., set apart and given authority to perform the high office of imparting
to all believers the Bread of Life. To secure this, salvation must be our only
motive. III, Bztrer 1n Curist MAN’s SUPREME woRK (vers. 28, 29). It is in the
human heart to think of salvation as a matter of ‘“‘ works ” (ver. 28). The Scerip-
tures everywhere declare that to be saved—i.e., “to work the works of God,” we
must believe on the Son of God (ver. 29). Man’s good works exclude this belief.
But true belief or faith, includes good works (Eph. ii., 8-10; Jas. ii. 26). Both
Jesus and Paul declare that faith saves the soul. James explains the kind of faith
that saves. IV. Man’s UNWILLINGNESS To AccEPT Jesus (vers. 30,31). From the
miracle of the loaves, the multitude would gladly have received Him as a king;
but, being informed that they must believe on Him as a Saviour, they demanded
more evidence (vers. 30, 31), intimating that Moses, in giving the manna for long
years, was greater than Jesus, who only furnished one meal. So men are always
willing to exalt Christ as a great personage, but are reluctant to receive Him as their
Redeemer. Yet He must be this or nothing. V. Jesus URGES THIS HIGH CLAIM
(vers. 32, 33). He admits of no comparison. Moses did not give the manna (ver.
32); manna did not secure life (ver. 49); Jesus was the Bread from heaven which
conferred eternal life (vers. 35, 41, 48, 50,51). His atonement secured the Holy
Spirit, who works regeneration, to experience which is to enter into life. This is
what Christ means in verse 51. VI.’ THr coNDITIONS OF OUR SECURING JESUS AS
OUR LIFE (vers, 34-36). 1. The Divine condition. The Holy Spirit must convict,
enlighten, draw (vers. 37, 45). 2. The human condition. Man must come of His
own free will (vers. 35, 36, 53). VII. Jesus raz Execuror oF THE FaTHER’S WILL
(vers. 37-40). This will was to secure etexnal life to all believers. Those who do
not take Jesus as the source of their life perish through unbelief. All who do are
kept in perfect safety. This is God’s will, and Christ is able to execute it. (A. H.

Moment.) Jesus the Bread of Life:—I. A TRUE MIRACLE MAY FAIL TO PRODUCE
ANY RELIGION, in which case it fails of its chief purpose. This one simply stimulated
an appetite for loaves and fishes, without stimulating gratitude for those already
given. II. THe puRPOSE oF GoD IN GREAT MANIFESTATIONS OF POWER IS TO TURN
ATTENTION TO THE PERSON OF Jesus Curist (chap. v. 36). The works of God in
creation and government have no greater end than this. We do not please God by
admiring His work in nature, in being awed by miracles; but in being led by the
gift of daily bread to faith in Him who is the Bread of Life. III. A wonpErrun
PYRAMID OF PROMISES POINTS THE SINNER TO A PERSONAL Saviour (vers. 35, 37).
IV. THE PERSONAL FAITH IN CHRIST DETERMINES THE CHARACTER OF OUR PERSONAL
RESURRECTION. Four times in this chapter Christ repeats this, or a similar refrain:
‘‘T will raise him up at the last day.”” Whether we share the resurrection of shame
and everlasting contempt spoken of by Daniel, or that which causes us to shine as
the brightness of the firmament, will depend on our faith in Christ now. (The
Monday Club.) The meat that endureth:—I. Curist’s KNOWLEDGE OF THE HUMAN
HEART is seen in exposing the false motives of those who followed Him. So now
He reads all secret thoughts (1 Sam. xvi. 7). The folly of hypocrisy is as great as
its sinfulness. It is not hard to deceive the wisest of men; but it is impossible to
deceive Christ (Rev. i. 14; John xxi. 17). II. Wuar Curist rorsips. Labour for
the meat that perisheth. 1. Our Lord did not mean to encourage idleness. Labour
was the lot of Adam in his innocence, and of Christ Himself. 2. Our Lord rebuked
excessive attention to the body to the neglect of the soul. One thing is needful
(Matt. vi. 33). III. Wsar Curist apvises. Labour for this meat that endureth.
1. How are we to labour? In the use of the appointed means. Bible study,
prayer, struggling against sin, &c. 2. Labour like this is uncommon. In prose.
cuting it we shall have little encouragement from men, but mach from Christ (Matt.
xi. 12), IV. War A PRoMISE CHRIST HOLDS ovT (ver. 27). Whatever we need

Christ is willing to bestow. He has been sent for the very purpose. (Bishop Ryle.)
Tiberias.—A city of Galilee, in the most beautiful part of it, on the western shore of
the lake. It was named by Herod Antipas, in honour of the Emperor Tiberius.
It was the capital of the province, from its origin until the reign of Herod
Agrippa II. Many of its inhabitants were Greeks and Romans, and hence foreign
customs prevailed. Our Lord, who spent much of His time in Galilee, appears
never to have visited this city—probably because Herod, the murderer of John the
Baptist, chiefly resided in it. After the dissolution of the State, it was for several
centuries the seat of a renowned Jewish school, and one of the four sacred cities,


CHAP. Vi.] ST. JOHN. 525
Here the Mishna was compiled (a.p. 190) by the Rabbi Judah Hakkodesh, and the
Masorah originated in a great measure at Tiberias. Coins of the city are still
extant of the times of Tiberius, Trajan, and Hadrian. The ancient name has sur-
vived in that of the modern Tubarieh, which occupies the original site. Near it
are the warm baths, which the Roman writers reckoned among the grcatest
curiosities in the world. The population at present is between 3,000 and 4,000,
and the town is the most mean and miserable in all Palestine—a picture of dis-
gusting filth and frightful wretchedness. (W. H. Van Doren, D.D.)


Vers. 24, 25. When the people saw that Jesus was not there... they took
shipping, and came to Capurnaum.—A buse of the miracle of the loaves and fishes :—
L A coMMENDABLE PuRSUIr (ver. 24). 1. Where they sought Him. At Capernaum.
Probably His abode. He has His house on earth still, and should be sought in His
own ordinances. 2. How they sought Him. They lost no time and spared no
trouble. 3. Why theysought Him. (1) Not because they were anxious for instruc-
tion. (2) Nor because, conscious of their spiritual necessities, they longed for the
bread of life. II. A REPREHENSIBLE MoTivE (vers. 25, 26). Not that self-regard is
always improper, but here it was unjustifiable. ‘Three things are shown here. 1.
Our Lord’s knowledge. 2. His faithfulness. 3. His requirement: sincerity of
purpose. III. AN mmPoRTANT EXHORTATION. 1. Whatit forbids. 2. What it enjoins.
These words contain—(1) A striking contrast. “ An encouraging assurance. (3)
A decisive pledge. (Miracles of the Lord Jesus. Seeking for Jesus :—I. TuE
CHARACTER OF THE STATE DESCRIBED. 1. It has a large amount of hopefulness in
it. (1) Indifference is gone. (2) Some kind of faith is implied. (3) The face is
turned in the right direction. 2. There is much that is doubtful, The seeker dis-
obeys the great command of the gospel, which is to believe, for Christ is not far
from any one of us. II. THE PERPLEXITIES OF THIS STATE. First seekers are very
often perplexed. 1. As the result of their ignorance of the way of salvation, which
is to take God at His word, and to believe that Jesus is what He is—the Atonement
for sin. 2. To increase their perplexity, they are often distracted with fear. Per-
sons in a panic act generally in the worst manner for their own safety. So the
sinner, conscious of guilt and God’s anger, scarce knows where to flee. 3. The
mind is usually harassed with a thousand questions—about doctrine, about Satan’s
suggestions. 4. It is also much grieved to find that it cannot even now cease from
sin, as though this could be before pardon. III. THe DANGERS OF THIS STATE.
1. Present peace and comfort is lost. 2. There is the peril of despair. 3. Seeking
may die out in indifference. 4. Something short of Christ may be taken up. IV.
DIRECTIONS FOR SEEKERS. 1. Give attention to the object of faith. Christ as pre-
sented in the gospel, 2. Clear away everything that would hinder your believing.
(1) Cherished sin. (2) Evil company. 3. Remember that, till you have believed,
your danger is of the most imminent kind. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Seeking for
Jesus :—Hear, dear friend, your true position. It is the case of a soldier on the
battle-field, wounded, bleeding, life oozing away from him. He is perishing ; but
he is sufficiently sensible to know it and to call for help. The surgeon is on the
field within hearing; the sufferer pleads for relief with many cries and entreaties.
So far well; but I pray you remember that crying and weeping will not of them-
selves heal the sick man; the surgeon must actually come and bind up his wounds.
So remember that your prayers and seekings of themselves cannot save you.
Jesus must come to you, and it is madness for you to refuse Him by your unbelief.


(Ibid.)


Ver. 26, 27. Ye seek Me not because ye Saw the miracles, but because ye did eat
of the loaves. Labour not for the meat which perisheth. The carnal eye on the
work of God :—How different are things sometimes from what they seem ! How
pleasant to see a multitude in quest of the Son of God; but our pleasure disappears
when we know that their wondering worship was a beggarly pursuit of material
food. It was not wrong for the Jews to feel the cravings of nature, or to rejoice in
the miraculous supply, if along with that went spiritual desire and gratitude. The
conduct of the Jews represents the manner in which men regard the work of God in—
I. Marermz nature. If there is not a perpetual miracle there is a perpetual display
of that byand for which miracles have been wrought. The natural is as full of God
as the supernatural; and it is an ignorant piety which cannot see God in the
ordinary and regular. Nature’s greatness is a display of His greatness, and its
beauty of His, &c. But men estimate nature as a material machine, just the


526 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. VI.
laa Ava ue ee erp nee a STE I
place for man, fitted to be his home, workshop, recreation ground. They do not
value the work for the sake of the worker. II. Tue nvents or Provipence. The
Scripture doctrine is that all things are of God and have a probationary character.
Job saw God in the loss as well as the gift of His children and property, and in the
calamities which proceeded from the elements as well as in those which proceeded
from the wickedness of men. And God’s end is not merely to enable us to eat and
sleep well, but to exercise us unto Godliness ; to make us soft by sorrow for impres-
sion, or glad by prosperity for gratitude. But the earthly sense cleaves to us. We
call things “ providential ” when they conduce to prosperity ; but who ever does so
when he loses an estate or breaks a limb? Yet the evil thing may be better than
the good. III. Soctan coop. There are those who value man only in his lowest
capacities and relations, never in his soul. Education is estimated for its influence
on labour ; morality because it would lighten the rates and give security to life and
property ; religion because of its relation to economy. They have no sense of the
dignity and destiny of our nature; and no appreciation of mental culture and
spiritual faith for their own sakes. IV. Persona copuiness. Godliness és profitable;
but the final end of God is not our good but His glory. That man has much to learn
whose supreme solicitude is how he may be enriched by the love of God, and not
how he may receive its holy impression and fulfil its holy ends. He who issaved
must think more of God than of self. But when many receive the truth it is only
because unbelief would be ruinous; they obey the law because obedience has its
recompenses, The gospel is good news, not only because it blesses us, but because
it reveals our Father. (A. J. Morris.) Christ sought from sinister motives :—
Lapidaries tell us of the Chelydonian stone, that it will retain its virtue and lustre
no longer than it is enclosed in gold. A fit emblem of the hypocrite, who is only
good while he is enclosed in golden prosperity, safety, and felicity. (7. Brooks.)
The great want of mankind :—Here are two objects set before us—the bread that
perisheth and the bread that endureth unto everlasting life—material things and
spiritual things—things temporal and things eternal. Itis characteristic of material
things that they perish, or, what is much the same thing, that our connection
with them shall very soon cease. To me there is something sad in this. WhenI
stood the other morning on Primrose Hill before breakfast, looking at the great sun,
young as ever, looking down with a smile of unutterable kindness—when I loédked
at the green fields beyond—when I cast a look, a most affectionate look, upon the
whole scene, my bosom heaved with a sigh. ‘‘ Well, I shall not see many more
springs. I must look on this for the last time. It must perish from my sight.”
You say that was weakness. Well, I cannot help it. This is a beautiful world—a
world of life and joy and affection, and there is something sad in the thought that
one must leave it. And we have not only the certain knowledge of it, but we have
the feeling that it will beso. That at once suggests to me a contrast between
myself and nature. Nature is young and old at the same time. She appears
wrinkled with age every autumn, but blooming with youth every spring. She is
dead every winter—alive every summer. But man becomes old, and not young
again. Man dies indeed, and the gloomy winter passes over him, and there is no
reviving him again in this state. The things that perish! Don’t labour too much
for this world, Why, it will make no difference to you forty years to-day what
amount of this world you have. But spiritual things endure forever. The human
spirit is immortal—the blessings of religion are eternal. In the New Tesiament
you will find that the word “eternal,” or something equal to it, is connected with
the blessings of religion. I think, then, that the lesson taught by the text is. THE
SUPREME IMPORTANCE OF RELIGION. Now, where shall I go for my illustration ?
What shall I bring in proof of this? In the first place, I could prove and illustrate
this subject from a man’s own nature. Secondly, I could do so from the design of
God’s providence. Thirdly, I could prove it from God’s Holy Word. Fourthly

from the testimony of the best and wisest and holiest men that ever lived: and in
the last place, and above all, I could prove the urutterable importance ‘of your
becoming holy and good—or, in other words, the supreme importance of religion—
from yonder cross—the life and death of the Son of God. Religion, goodness

purity, holiness, is the great want of man. Every echoing rock sends back the
sound—the great wantisreligion. 1. Let us begin then with man asan individual

Stand in the right place to look at man. Don’t look at him from the exchange or
market, but place man in the right light. Let the light of eternity fall upon him.
Place the picture in the right light. Whatis man? A moral responsible being

all whose movements are watched. This is man, in himself, a sinful, fellen being,


RA


CHAP. vr.) ST. JOHN. 527


as he knows and feels. Then there is another feature in the picture. An immortal
being is man, a person bound for an endless voyage, a pilgrim on an endless
journey. Well, now, Iask you what is the great want of sucha being? Riches?
No. Earthly enjoyments? No. Human fame and greatness and glory? No.
What is his great want? Goodness, religion. What ought he to care for fame?
What ought he to care for the glory and grandeur of the world? What ought he
to care for the enjoyments of sense—for the heaping up of gold, so much thought
of? Itis religion he wants. As an intelligent, a moral, a sinful and an immortal
being, it is religion he wants, and it is religion he must have, or he will be wretched
in the most splendid palace, and have an aching head on the easicst pillow. But
has he religion—real religion? he shall be content in the midst of poverty—he
shall have peace in the midst of the storm. Gas-light is very useful in its way,
but it is a poor apology for the sun. It gives light in the midst of the street, but
turn the corner and you are in deep shadows directly. It goeth not down to the
deep cellar. But let the sun be up and you will find light in your house. It passes
through the windows, and by its rays fills the whole house with light and cheerful-
ness. The things that perish we are thankful for. We bless God for our health
and the comforts we possess, and we use them, I hope, thankfully and prayerfully,
but they are only as the star-light. Religion is to our spirits what the sun is in a
temporal sense. It filleth the whole nature of man. It brings the highest subjects
for the contemplation of his intellect. It opens the sublimest regions for his
imagination. It meets the son of sin with a free pardon in its right hand, and as
the sense of death which {1 have described comes over him, it points him to an
eternal home and says, My child, labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for
that meat which endureth unto everlasting life. Religion alone can meet the wants
of his nature. 2. And now to pass from the individual to the family, what is the
great want there? What will make a family happy? A large estate? No, no.
Fine apparel? Not exactly. Splendid paintings? Not altogether. Musical
instruments? These things have an elevating influence, and I would not despise
them. I remember what an artist friend told me some time ago. I was looking at
his engravings—taken from some of the masterpieces of Italy—and I said, ‘* Well,
these are-very good”’; for though I was not examining them with an artist’s eye, I
liked them, and I knew what had influence over me. “Ah,” he said, ‘‘ they are
companions.” And so they are—refining, elevating companions ; but do you know
there is something more important than them—more important to a family than
the fine arts, than music, paintings, costly furniture, vast estates, noble mansions?
What is it? It is that the hearts of the family be good; that religion be enthroned
there. Why, let religion be in your family, and you have a fountain of happiness.
This would unite us all. This would create a paradise in families where there is
now discord. Oh, fathers—oh, mothers—oh, children—possess religion, that you
may meet again in the land of life and light, to be eternally with the Lord and with
each other. 3. We have passed from the individual to the family, and now let us
enter the Church. I would say, then, to you as a Church and congregation,
« Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto
everlasting life.” Labour for those mental states, those spiritual emotions, those
principles of eternal life which will make the worship of God interesting and
delightful to you. Let me add another thought, ere I pass on, Grant that the
preacher is uninteresting—that he is cola or dull; grant that his emotions are less
earnest than your own; but, allow me to ask you what business have you to come
to a chapel or a church to be merely passive at the hands of the preacher? Why,
you are not mere harps to be played upon by the fingers of the preacher—not
mere dead bodies to be galvanized into artificial life—not machines to be set in
motion by the word of a man. You are thinking, living, immortal spirits. You
must awaken cheerfulness within you by having religion, and then you will have
no more dulness in your religious services. You have observed, perhaps, that when
there has been long dry weather, clouds may float about in the sky, but will not
send down a drop of water upon the parched earth. What is the reason? There
is no attractive power in the earth to draw down the clouds towards it. Like draws
to like. A wet carth would draw down wet clouds. A true illustration this of
power in the pulpit. A congregation spiritually lifeless derives no benefit from the
sermon. The feelings of the preacher are sent back to him. The cloud pours
forth no rain. But let the earth be moist—let the church be in a healthy spiritual
state—and the cloud will burst over it, and the Church will be baptized with the
unction of the Holy One. Therefore do I say, as well to the Church as to the


528 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. {cmap. vi


family or to the individual, ‘‘ Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that
meat which endureth unto everlasting life.” 4. And, brethen, let us pass from the
individual, and the family, and the Church, to the great world. Let me, however,
name two or three classes. (1) There, for instance, is that mighty class called
“the people.” Religion, and nothing but religion, can make the English working
man what he ought to be. Why, look at your burning, parched, thirsty desert..
No trees, grass, corn, flowers, grow in that place, and why? What is wanted to
make it fertile? The husbandman may go there with his ploughs and harrows ;
he may sow the seed; but there is one great want, before which the other wants
need not be mentioned. What is that want? A noblerolling river to pass through
it—that is what it wants. Then would trees flourish in it, and flowers bloom, and
the corn wave inthe August sun. And what do English people want? Education?
Yes. A better material condition? Nodoubt they do. Better houses to live in
than some of them possess? Undoubtedly. But there is one want greater than
all others, and I tell you English people will not get the houses they ought to
have, or the material comforts they ought to enjoy, without it. They are always
looking out for good to come to them from above—from Parliament, from orators,
from the franchise; but I say to English people, ‘Look within.” What, you don’t
mean to tell us that we shall never be much better off till we have better characters ?
Ida. If you look at the history of the world you will find reason for believing that
your condition will improve as you become nobler, holier, purer, more heaven-like.
‘‘Tabour not for the meat that perisheth, but for that meat which endureth to
everlasting life.” (2) Look at the neglected ones in England. There are thou-
sands in London who have never found their place in life—well.educated and well-
disposed, but disappointed men, going up and down in the world trying to find their

laces, but unable to do so. Yes, I have known servants to ride on horses, and I

ave seen princes as servants walk. I have seen fools in high places, and scholars,
gentlemen, and able men concealed in corners. I have seen weeds—worthless,
ugly weeds—spread their large open leaves, and hiding beneath them the blushing
rose and the delicate lily; and I have always felt disposed to brush the uncomely
thing away. What do they want? They want religion; that which would cause
them to trust God, to leave the world that neglects them, and patiently to do the
little thing that is at hand, seeing that they cannot reach the great thing that
is in the distance. Religion, the great power of religion, to keep them in the quiet
path of duty. (3) I intended speaking also a word to my young friends, but I have
no time left. The young man who is just commencing life’s pilgrimage looks
forward to success in business. God bless you, my youthful hearers, and help you
to realize this; but there is one thing you want more than all. What is it?
Faith in the great Redeemer, religion, goodness—that is what you want. (4) And
then there is the ruined class. Character is gone, prospects are gone, health is
gone, and there is nothing left but remorse. What can be done for these? Oh
the beautiful vision of love—Jesus saying, ‘‘Come unto me, all ye that are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest!” (TZ. Jones.) The sermon on the loaves :—
I. A so~nEmMN REPROOF (ver. 26). 1. To-whom addressed? To the witnesses
of the miracle. Excitement is not religion, and those who to-day cry Hallelujah !
may to-morrow cry Crucify! 2. By whom spoken? By one who could search
the heart, and whose mercy on the previous day gave Him a right to speak.
3. For what given. Not for seeking Him, but for seeking Him with a bad motive
which was—(1) Sensational—they saw the phenomenon but were blind to its
significance. (2) Sensual—they followed as the ox follows the farmer for a bunch
of hay. II. AN EARNEST ExHORTATION (ver. 27). 1. Labour discommended. (1) The
import: not to discourage the toil for daily bread (Gen. iii. 19; 2 Thess. iii. 10),
but to condemn the spirit that attached supreme importance to earthly things
(Matt. vi. 25). (2) The reason. These commodities were perishing (Col. ii. 22),
and contributed at best to the support of the decaying (1 John ii. 16, 17; 2 Pet. iii.
11). 2, A labour enjoined, (1) The perfect legitimacy of human effort (Gen. ii.
15; Luke xiii. 24; xvi. 16; John ix. 4). (2) The proper object of human effort:
that which is spiritual, vivifying, permanent (Matt. vi. 20). (3) The absolute
necessity of human effort (Matt. vii. 15; Luke xiii.24; Phil. ii. 12; iii. 14; Heb. iv.
11; xi. 6). III. A cian prrecrion (vers. 27-29). 1. Whence the abiding meat
must be sought. (1) The accessibility of the source ‘‘Son of Man;” (2) The
sufficiency of the supply ; (3) The authority of the giver. 2. How the abiding meat
may be got. (1) As a gift (Rom. iv. 4-6; xi. 6; Gal. ii. 16; Eph. ii. 8,9). (2)
Through the medium of faith merit is excluded (Jobix. 2, 3; Isa. lvii.12; Rom. iii.


oe et ee ee


cHap, vr.] ST. JOHN. 529


20; Gal. iii. 11). (3) Approved by works (Rom. ii. 13; iii. 31; vi. 16; Eph. ii. 10:
Titus ii. 14; James ii. 20-26). Lessons: 1. Christ’s power of reading the heart of
man. 2. The supreme importance of motive in religion. 3. The transcendent
value of the salvation of the soul. 4. Christ’s clear conviction that faith in Himself
would lead to eternal life. (ZT. Whitelaw, D.D.) Perishable and unperishable
food :—I. Ducayine Foop loses not only—1. Its efficiency ; but—2. Its healthful nature,
and 3. Its very nature itself. II. Taz roop wHicH ENDURETH has—l. Eternal
efficiency. 2. Eternal freshness. 3. Eternal durability. (Lange.) The preference
of spiritual food to natural :—I. THE proutprtion. ‘ Labour not,” &. 1. What is
understood by meat. (1) All temporal enjoyments as carnal pleasures, popular
applause. Earthly riches. (2) Called here meat because it was the meat the Jews
then sought for (ver. 26); because all things of this world amount really to nothing
else, and to persuade them, by this notion of earthly things, not to labour so much
for them (Kccles. v. 11). 2. Why called the meat which perisheth. Because—(1)
We can enjoy it but awhile. (2) It perisheth while we use it (Matt. xv. 17). (3) It
serves but a perishing life(1 Cor. vi. 13). 3. In what sense must we not labour for
this meat? (1) Negatively. Not but that we ought to take a moderate care about
earthly things ; because—(a) It is commanded (Gen. iii. 19); (b) Otherwise we
should be worse than infidels (1 Tim. v. 8); (c) We have bodies to look after; (d)
We should not presume upon providence; (e) We are to endeavour to help others
(1 Cor. xvi. 2). (2) Positively. (a) We must not labour for much of the world
Jer. xlv. 5; Isa. v. 8). (b) Not by unlawful means (Lev. xix. 13; 1 Thess. iv. 6).
c) Not with carking care and mistrust of God’s providence (Psa. xxxvii. 5, 6; Matt.
vi. 25). (d) Not for earthly things, only for themselves, but for the glory of God
(Prov. iii. 9). (e) Not for them more than for the heavenly (Matt. v. 33). (f) Not
so as to set our affections on them (Col. iii. 2). 4. Why are we not thus to labour
for these things. Because—(1) They perish. (2) We may be deprived of them if
we do (Prov. x. 22), or God may curse them to us (Mal. ii. 2). (3) God will give
them without this sinful labouring (Matt. vi. 33). (4) By so doing we lose better.
5. The use. Consider: (1) How uncertain they are (1 Tim. vi. 17) ; in getting them
(Matt. vi. 27); keeping them (Prov. xxiii. 5); enjoying them (Psa. xxviii. 30, 31 ;
evi. 15); in improving them; in continuing with them (Luke. xii. 20). (2) How
unsatisfying: as to the senses (Eccl. i. 8. iv. 8) ; much more to the soul (Keel. v.
10). (3) How dangerous. They are apt to draw us into sin (1 Tim. vi. 9), and off
from duty (Prov. xxx. 9) ; to divert our care for our souls (Luke xxi. 34) ; to keep us
from heaven (Psa. xvii. 14), and to throw us into hell (Matt. xix. 23-26). II. THe
CoMMAND. 1. What is meant by meat? Christ Himself (ver. 35) ; His doctrine and
religion (ver. 63), which He commands to be laboured after. (1) Because they were
now seeking food. (2) To show the need of Him for spiritual life (vers. 53-55) ; to
begin it (1 Tim. v. 6; 1 John v. 11, 12); to preserve it (John xv. 4, 5) ; to make it
comfortable. (3) To show the union between Christ and His disciples (John xvii.
21-23). 2. Why is it said to endure unto everlasting life? (1) Because it is never
diminished though never so many partake of it (Matt. xi. 28). (2) It nourishes our
never-dying souls (Matt. xi. 29). (3) It brings to everlasting life. (4) Christ will
endure for ever (Heb. vii. 25). (5) It is by Him that we shall endure for ever
(John vi. 54-58). 3. Why must we labour for this? It is the only means of our
going to heaven (Acts iv. 12). For—(1) It is only through Christ that sins can be
pardoned ; (2) Our persons accepted (Gal. 11.16 ; 2 Cor. v. 21); (3) Our lusts subdued
(Act. iii. 26) ; (4) Our natures sanctified (John i. 16); (5) Our souls saved (Acts. xvi.
31). 4. How must we labour? (1) By believing in Him (Acts xvi. 31; John ii. 16) :
{2) By conforming our lives to His laws (John i, 12; xiv. 15; James il. 26;
1 John iii. 3; Gal. v. 6; Rom. xiii. 10). Conclusion : Wherefore labour for this meat,
for—1. Other things are impertinent; this necessary (Luke x. 42). 2. Others empty,
this satisfying (ver. 35). 3. Others corporeal, this spiritual (ver. 63). 4. Others
transcient, this everlasting (ver. 58). 5. Others uncertain, this most certain, for
Christ will give it. (bp. Beveridge.) Spiritual labour and food :—I. There is
something ForBIpDEN. We are not to labour exclusively, or excessively, for the
satisfaction of our bodily wants, for that food which only perishes in the using, and
only does us a little temporary good. II. There is something COMMANDED. We
ought to work hard and strive for that spiritual food—that supply for the wants of
our souls, which once obtained is an everlasting possession. IIL. ‘There is some-
thing PROMISED. The Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, is ready to give to every one
who desires to have it, that spiritual food which endures for ever. IV. There is
something DECLARED. The Son of Man, Jesus Christ, has been designated and


=
e ~


630 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHap. v1.
appointed by God the Father for this very purpose, to be the dispenser of this
spiritual food to all who desire it. (Bp. Ryle.) The fruitful labour for eternal
food :—I. THE MEAT THAT PERISHETH. 1, What is meant by it? (1) All outward
things whatsoever. The dovetous soul feeds on his money; the ambitious man,
chamelion like, on airy applause ; the sensual man, on base pleasures. All carnal
men, serpent like, eat dust—perishable things. (2) Knowledge, if it be only of
perishable things, perisheth, for the world’s frame and politics have anend. (3)
The truths of God are indeed the food of the soul, but unless the goodness of those
truths be the food of the will and the affections, and unless we are moulded into
the form of those truths they too are perishable. 2. The argument against
labouring for this. (1) We do not regayd the lustre of things, but their continuance.
All flesh is grass, and the most excellent things of Nature, wit, honour, and learn-
ing, are as the flowers of the grass. (2) In lusting after the world, the lust itself
perisheth, and the immoderate seeking after it destroys us. He that is rich to-day
may be poor to-morrow ; he may be in credit now, with Haman, and be in discredit
ere long; he may be in health now, and sick soon. 3. Consequently—(1) We
should take heed that we do not redeem any perishing thing with the loss of that
which does not perish—our soul. (2) We should not scruple to neglect any earthly
thing to gain advantage to our souls. (3) Learn here a point of heavenly wisdom:
when we are tempted to too much delight in the creature we should présent to our-
selves the perishing nature of outward things. II. Lasour NoT FoR THE MEAT THAT
PERISHETH. 1. Does Christ read a lecture of unthriftiness and negligence? No;
He meant labour not for it—(1) Inordinately; (2) immoderately ; (3) unseason-
ably. 2. How shall we know when our labour is immoderate, &c.? When they
hinder us from or in holy things; when they keep us from holy duties ; when they
fill us full of distracticns, 3. Why does Christ begin with this discussion? (1)
Because when the soul is invested with anything that must first be removed, as
thorns must be rooted before seed can be sown. (2) But here is the prerogative of
Christianity ; heathens can teach the negative part, but only Christ the positive.
III. Tor MEAT THAT ENDURETH, &c. 1. What it is? Our Saviour, as He is con-
tained in the means of salvation, with all the blessed privileges, prerogatives, and
graces that we have by andin Him, 2. But why is he so considered? (1) What-
ever sweetness, comfort, or strength there is in meat, it is for the comfort, &c., of
the body ; so whatsoever is comfortable and cherishing in Christ it is for our good.
How doth the soul feed on the wonderful love of God in Christ incarnate and
Christ Crucified, and on the privileges secured by Christ glorified? (2) Asin bodily
life there.is a stomach, a power to work out of the meat that which is for strength
and nourishment, so in the soul there is faith to act in the same way with Christ.
(8) As our life is nourished and maintained with that which has died, so that which
principally maintains the life of the soul is Christ crucified. (4) As in meat, before
it can nourish us there must be an assimilation, so Christ can never nourish us till
we be united to Him. (5) As we eat again day after day because there is a decay
of strength, and as there are new concerns that require new strength, and conse-
quently a need of a continual repairing of our strength by food, even so there isa
perpetual need to feed upon Christ, because every day we have fresh work to do.
(6) As after eating there is strength and comfort gotten for the affairs of this life, so
after the soul has digested Christ it is strengthened for holy duties. 3. Wherein
lies the difference between this and other meat? (1) As Christ is from heaven, so
all His graces and comforts are to carry us to heaven, All other things are earthly.
(2) Earthly food cannot give, but only maintain life; but Christ is such food ag
gives life. (3) The nourishment we have from outward food we turn to ourselves :
but Christ turns us to Himself, and transforms us into His likeness. (4) All other
meats are consumed, and the appetite for them eventually perishes; but Christ is
never consumed, and the relish for Him will grow eternally. 4. What is wanted is
to get a stomach for this meat. (1) A good stomach is produced by sharp things;
80 faith should be quickened by the law. (2) Exercise getting a stomach by diligence
in holy exercises. (3) To whet our appetite, consider the necessity of spiritual
strength and comfort. (4) Let us converse with those that are spiritual. (5) Let
us remember that the table Christ has spread may be removed. 5. To make a trial
whether we have, as we should do, relished Christ. If so, then—(1) We have a
baser esteem of all earthly things. (2) We are strengthened to duties and against
temptations and corruptions. (3) The desire is satisfied. (4) Thankfulness is en-
gendered. IV. Lanour ror THis meat. 1. Its necessity: we are to labour for food,
the great need. 2. Its excellency; it endureth to everlasting life. 3. Its possi-


CH Sad 73} oe


hy


i


OHAP. VI.] ST. JOHN. 581
eevee EE
bility: Christ is—(1) Willing; (2) powerful ; (3) has authority to give it. ‘‘Him
hath God the Father sealed.”” God has become man on purpose to give it you.
(R. Sibbes, D.D.) The true aim of life:—I. Is Not THE ATTAINMENT OF MATERIAL
Goop. Multitudes live as if it were. Nor is this mistake confined to the prosperous
merchant ; it is found among the poor. Strenuous efforts are put forth, but only for
that which perisheth. II. Consists IN THE ATTAINMENT OF SPIRITUAL LIFE IN CHRIST.
He is the true food of the soul. Eternal life is the result of receiving Him as the
Living Bread. III. To TzacH THIS WAS THE AIM oF CHRISI’S MISSION. “ Sealed.”
The impress of the Father’s will is in His life and words. He was sealed—1. By
His miracles. 2. By His teaching. 38. By His resurrection. (Family Churchman.)
Going to Christ for our own ends :—The lesson here set obviously checks any going
to or following of Jesus for our own ends. And it has two main applications.
1. The first of these is plainly gross, viz., that we may not make a gain of godliness
in the sense of getting direct bodily benefit by religion. A religious man is mostly
assumed to be a respectable man, and a respectable man is trusted. So, alas, oeca-
sionally some people profess religion in order togeta character for respectability and
to bring money into the pocket. 2. But the lesson before us has another application.
We cannot be told too clearly or too often that there is another kind of covetousness,
or thinking about self, which is not coarse like that which I have just mentioned, and
yet leaves us short of the real special gifts which God gives through Jesus Christ.
Should we not think less of a child whose only thought in connection with its
parents was about what it could get from them? Should we not look upon that
child as almost unnatural which was always scheming to make its father and
mother show more concern for its condition? Surely we should. And, so in a
figure, it is with God. We may be certain that we miss His best blessings when
we set about calculating what benefits He will bestow upon us. In short, God would
ever have us trust Him more, and leave all the “‘ giving” to Him. (Harry Jones, M.A.)
Worldly things are disappointing and perishing :—The fashion of this world passeth
away, as the water of a river that runs by a city, or as a fair picture drawn upon
the ice that melts away with it. Men come to the world’s felicities as to a lottery,
with heads full of hopes, but return with hearts full of blanks. (J. Trapp.) Earthly
pursuits end miserably :—As @ river leads a man through sweet meadows, green
woods, fertile pastures, fruit-laden fields, by glorious buildings, strong forts, famous
cities, yet at last brings him to the salt sea; so the stream of this world carries
along through rich commodities, voluptuous delights, stately dignities, all possible
content to flesh and blood, but, after all this, brings a man to death, after death to
judgment, after judgment to hell. (7. Adams.) Him hath God the Father sealed.—
Christ sealed :—I. BECAUSE THERE IS THE IMPRESSION OF Gop upon Him. As the seal
imprints in the wax the likeness of that which is on it, so God hath imprinted on
Christ His own image (chap. i. 14; Heb. i. 1-2). II. THE USE OF A SEAL IS TO
APPROPRIATE AND DISTINGUISH FROM OTHER THINGS, 80 God hath appropriated Christ
to be His own Son, and hath distinguished Him as Mediator by a special anointing
and qualification above all. III. Especially by SEALING IS MEANT AUTHORITY, | As
a magistrate that hath the king’s broad seal is authorized, so God hath authorized
Christ to be a Mediator, as He was foreordained ; and so, when the fulness of the
time was come, He was authorized by the greatest testimony that ever was—l. By
the Blessed Trinity at His baptism (Matt. iii. 37). 2. By His miracles (chap. x. 38).
3. By His resurrection (Rom. i. 4). IV. Tue vse of this is—l. To bless God the
Father for sealing as well as God the Son for being sealed. 2. To magnify the
offices of Christ. 3. To encourage us to seek forgiveness. (2. Sibbes, D.D.)
Christ sealed by the Father :—I. Curist was SEALED. To seal, when the act of a
sovereign, is to impress the characters of his own signet upon any instrument by
which his will is declared, and which is then treated as proceeding from him. We
behold—1. The impress of Divinity upon His doctrine, in the vastness of the
subjects, and the ease with which they are treated, the obscure manner In which the
wisest of men have always spoken of them, and the light which brightens around
them whenever our great Teacher opens His lips; in that exhibition of the secrets
of the heart; in the anxious inquiries so answered as to leave us nothing more to
ask; when to these I add the dignity so worthy of Divine majesty, the condes-
cension so accordant with an infinite love, the indignation so expressive of perfect
holiness ;—I see upon the geal the characters peculiar to God. 2. The seal of
miracles. The character of a true miracle is not that is is merely a strange and
wonderful occurrence, but that it is above all human power ; 80 extraordinary as to
ghow an interposition of God, giving sanction to the claims of His Son. 3. We


i?


632 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omar ve


see upon our Lord the broad and striking seal of fulfilled prophecy. 4. The seals
at His crucifixion. Even his enemies were compelled to give their testimony to
him. Caiaphas, Pilate, the Centurion, the people that “smote upon.their breasts.”
The sun sinking to deep eclipse, the rending of the veil, the earthquake, the
rising of the dead. 5. To the great seals of the resurrection and ascension of
Christ the gift of the Holy Ghost was the public confirmation of both ; and that
this is an evidence which remains to this day. II. THe GreaT END FOR WHICH
THIS INTERPOSITION or Gop Took PLAcE—that we might ‘‘labour for that meat
which endureth to everlasting life.” From the sacrificial death of Christ flows—
1. Pardon; and here the true life of the soul begins. 2. The heavenly knowledge,
which is the proper food of the renewed mind. A scientific knowledge is the food
of souls intelligent, so is heavenly knowledge the food of piety. It leads up all the
powers of the mind into right and vigorous exercise. 3. Love. It flows only from
this—‘‘ Christ loved me.” 4. Purity. Sin enfeebles; purity is strength. Con-
clusion: 1. If Christ is not this life and bread to your souls, how disproportionate
are the means employed to save you, and the end which has in reality been accom-
plished! 2. The aggravated guilt which is incurred by the very signs set before us,
unless they accomplish their saving end. 3. For whatever you labour beside the
bread of heaven, it is‘‘ meat that perisheth.” (R. Watson.) The authority by which
Christ as a Mediator acted: —I. THE OFFICE OR WORK TO WHICH His FaTHER SEALED Him.
In general to the whole work of mediation (1 Pet. iii. 18). God sealed Him—l1l. A
commission to preach the glad tidings of salvation to sinners (Luke iv. 17-21). 2.
To the priesthood. He calied Him—(1) To offer Himself up a sacrifice for us (chap.
x. 18; Phil. ii. 8). (2) To intercede for us (Heb. vii. 21-25). (3) To the regal office
(Matt. xxviii. 18), II. Tam mport oF THE sEALING. 1. The validity and efficacy of
His mediatorial acts. In this lies much of the believer’s comfort and security. 2.
The great obligation lying on Jesus to be faithful to the work He was sealed to.
Christ felt this obligation (John ix. 4; v. 30). 3. His complete qualification to serve
the Father’s design in our recovery, in the point of—(1) Faithfulness (Heb. iii. 2) ;
(2) Zeal (John ii. 16,17; iv. 32); (3) Love (Heb. iii. 5,6); (4) Wisdom (Isa. lii. 13) ;
(5) Self-denial (John viii. 50). 4. Christ’s sole authority in the Church to appoint
and enjoin what He pleaseth. III. Tos mannur or THE sEALING. 1. By solemn de-
signation (Isa. xlii.1; 1 Pet. ii.4; John x. 36). 2. By supereminent and unparalleled
sanctification. He was anointed as well as appointed (Isa. lxi. 1,3; Luke iv.1;
Psa. xlv. 7; John iii, 34; Col. i. 19), the type of which was the Holy oil by which
kings and priests were consecrated. 3. By the Father’s immediate testimony from
heaven (Matt. iii.; xvii. 5). 4, In all those miraculous works wrought by Him
(Acts x. 38; John v. 36; Matt, xi. 3,5). IV. Tam NEcESSITY OF THE SEALING. 1.
Else He had not corresponded with the types which prefigured Him, and in Him it
was necessary that they should be all accomplished. Kings and High Priests had
their inaugurations by solemn unctions (Heb. v. 4, 5). 2. Hereby the hearts of be-
lievers are more engaged to love the Father. Had not the Father sealed Him, He
had not come. So men are bound to ascribe equal honour and glory to both (John
v. 23), 3, Else we had no ground for our faith in Him (John y. 31), V. Tar m-
PROVEMENT OF THIS. 1, Hence we infer the unreasonableness of infidelity (John i.
ii; v. 43; Isa. lili. 1), 2. How great is the sin of those who reject such as are
sealed by Jesus Christ (John xvii. 18; xx. 21; Luke x. 16)! 3. How great an evil
it is to intrude into the office of the ministry without a due call! It is more than
Christ Himself would do. 4. Admire the grace and love both of the Father and the
Son, 5. Hath God sealed Christ for you? Then draw the comfort of His sealing
for you, and be restless till ye be sealed by Him. (1) Remember that God stands
engaged by His own seal to confirm whatever Christ hath done in the business of
our salvation. On this ground you may plead with God. (2) Get your interest in
Christ sealed to you by the Spirit (Eph i. 13), the effects of which are great care to
avoid sin (Eph. iv. 30); great love to God (John xiv. 22); readiness to suffer for
Christ (Rom, v. 3, 5); confidence in addresses to God (1 John vy. 13, 14); great
humility (Gen. xvii. 1,3). (J. Flavel.) Christ’s ecample and comfort to His dis-
appointed servants :—The missionary, Henry Martyn, at Dinapore, used to gather
around him every week a crowd of poor Hindoos. They came eagerly, but, alas !
Martyn soon perceived that they were more concerned about the loaves which he
was in the habit of distributing amongst them than about the Bread of Life in the
gospel! He was ready to despair, and had almost resolved to give up his preach-
ing. Then he remembered this 26th verse, and he said to himself, “If the Lord
Jesus was not ashamed of preaching to such bread-seekers, who am I, that I should


omar, v1] ERS TOL: «883


give them over in disgust?” The next time he preached on verse 27, and had the
delight of being asked by two or three Hindoos, ‘‘ What must we do to be saved?”
(R. Besser, D.D.) The bread and the sealing :—In order to understand the
Oriental aspect of this obscure passage, it is necessary to remember several closely
related facts. In the Hast, bakers are under more immediate official investigation
than any other tradesmen. Their weights are inspected by an official appointed for
the purpose, and the quality of their bread is tested from time to time. In these
milder days confiscation is the penalty attached to roguery in the making of bread ;
but it is not very long since cheating bakers were nailed up by the ear (Turkey), or
even by a grim pleasantry, roasted in their own ovens (Persia). Under these cir-
cumstances, it is not to be wondered at that Oriental bakers have been in the habit
of stamping their name upon their bread, or, as an Oriental would say, of sealing
(khatham, khatama, &c.) it, as a measure of precaution, lest they should be made to
suffer for the sins of their neighbours as well as their own. The talmudic word for
“baker” is nakhtom, or nakhtoma, which has been connected with. khatham, ‘‘ to
seal,” by no less an authority than Professor Franz Delitzsch ; so that it would seem
that this act of sealing or stamping bread was sufficiently characteristic in the time
of our Lord to give a name to the baker. In this view, our Lord’s words could be
paraphrased as follows: ‘‘ Work not for the food which perisheth, but for the food
which abideth unto eternal life; which the Son of Man shall give unto you, even
Himself the Bread of Life—for Him, the heavenly Bread, hath God the Father
sealed as His own, even as those who make the bread which perisheth, stamp it
with their names.’’ It has also been pointed out that, in the Roman Church, the
consecrated wafers, which the priests teach to be the real body of our Lord, are
stamped with a seal which usually bears the letters I.N.R.I.,—the initials of the
Latin meaning, “Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.” Another rabbinical
authority calls attention to the talmudical question : ‘What is the seal of the holy
blessed God? Rabbi Bibai in the name of Rabbi Reuben saith ‘ Truth.’ ‘But
what is truth?’ Rabbi Bon said, ‘The loving God and King eternal.’ . . . There
is a story of the great synagogue weeping, praying, and fasting. At last there was a
little scroll fell from the firmament to them in which was written ‘Truth.’ Rabbi
Chinanah saith, ‘ Hence learn that truth is the seal of God.’” (S. 8. Times.)


Ver. 28, 29. Then they said unto Him, what shall we do that we might work
the works of God.—Synagogue questioning :—I. THE SPIRITUAL IGNORANCE AND UN-
BELIEF OF THE NATURAL MAN, 1. When our Lord bade His hearers, ‘‘ Labour for the
meat which endureth unto everlasting life, they began to think of works to be done.”
2. When He spoke of Himself as one sent of God and the need of faith in them,
the response was, ‘‘ What sign showest Thou?” and this directly after the miracle
(Mark vi. 6). 3. We should remember all this in our efforts to do good and not be
discouraged if our words seem thrown away. II. THE HIGH HONOUR WHICH CHRIST
PUTS ON FAITH IN Himsexr. Faith and works elsewhere seem contrasted, but here
Christ declares that believing on Him is the greatest of all works. Not that He
meant that there was anything meritorious in believing; but—1. That it is the
act of the soul which specially pleases God. Without it it is impossible to please
Him. 2. That it is the first act that God requires at a sinner’s hands, 3. That
there is no life in a man till-he believes. II. Tur FaR GREATER PRIVILEGES OF
CHRIST’S HEARERS THAN OF THOSE WHO LIVED IN THE TIMES OF Mosgs. The manna,
wonderful as it was, was as nothing compared with the true bread. 1, The one
could only feed the body ; the other could satisfy the soul. 2. The one was only
for the benefit of Israel; the other for the whole world. 3. Those who ate the
former died and were buried, and many of them lost for ever ; those who ate of the
latter would be eternally saved. (Bp. Ryle.) A plain answer to an important
inquiry :—I. FarvH Is THE COMPREHENSIVE SUMMARY OF ALL TRUE WORK. 1. There lies
within it every form of holiness, as a forest may lie within an acorn. It may be
microscopic in form, but it only wants development. 2. All the graces come out of faith
(see Heb. xi.), IL. FarrH 1s IN ITSELF MOST PLEASING TO Gop. Because—l. It is the
creature acknowledging itsGod. The man who says my own good deeds will save
me sets himself up in independency of God. But when a man submits himself
to God’s way of salvation, the rebellious heart submits to the Divine authority, and
the poor erring creature comes into its right place. 2. It accepts God’s way of
reconciliation. It thus shows a deference to God’s wisdom, and confidence in His
love, and yielding to His will. 3. It puts honour on Christ whom the Father dearly
loves. That which dishonours Christ must be obnoxious to God. 4. It puts us in


Og
i


534, THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. VI.


[pn eee ee eS SS


a right relationship with God, i.e.—(1) A relationship of dependence ; (2) of child-
like rest. III. Farra in Jusus CHRist.18 THE TEST OF WORKING FoR Gop. 1. With-
out faith the spitit of work is wrong. Suppose you said to me, “I will spend my
life in your serv ce, but I am not going to believe what you say.” All that you do
must be destitute of real excellent because you begin by making God a liar in not
trusting Him (iJohn y. 10). 2. Without faith the motive of work fails and becomes
selfish ; whereas faith aims at God’s glory. IV. Farru Is THE SEAL OF ALL OTHER
BLESSINGS. 1. Of our election (ver. 37). If you believe in Christ you are one that
the Father hath given Him. 2. Of our effectual calling. If you believe the Father
hath drawn you to Christ. 3. Of our final perseverance (ver. 47). 4. Of our
resurrection (ver. 39, 49). (C. H. Spurgeon.) The people’s question :—Faith and
works are both factors in the work of salvation. Faith is the life root of which
works are the fruit. The Jew sought to justify himself by his works, and then
inferentially organized his faith to work the works of God, with Him was to drivea
bargain with God. “ What good thing mustIdo?” Christ shows that the way to
the Father was by no such circuitous route, but by faith in Himself. I. A Grave
inquiry. This is not a Jewish question. It is the question of humanity. 1. Man
has never been able to throw off a belief in God nor to escape the apprehensions
such a belief creates. Hence, in their unrest and great mental hunger, men still ask
this question. 2. Yousee evidences of this mental disquietude in the breaking away
from the restraints of creeds, in retreats from the simplicity of the present into the
traditions of the past; in the rush of various systems of mediatorial penance, in the
impossibility of successfully impugning the Divine record and in the despair which
ensues on its rejection. Philosophy in its wildest departures from God can neither
answer this question nor escape the responsibility of discussing it. Men seem to
treat it as a scoff, but they are compelled to do homage to its impressiveness in the
vague worship of the unknown. IJ. Curist’sanswer. 1. The work of God is not the
alone work of God’s appointing. It is God and man mutually working. A fractured
relation of the soul and God necessitates for its readjustment the correlation of two
forces. (1) In this work a factor is demanded that we cannot supply. ‘Aman can
receive nothing except it be given him from above.’”? That which our working
secures is just the willingness to receive what God alone can give. (2) The want
that goes in quest of God is not God’s work but ours. On the other hand,
to pacify the disquieted heart by renewing it is not man’s work, but God’s.
Our first lesson, therefore, touches the pride of our self-sufficiency. We are power-
less with all our power when power is needed most. (3) Then there are things
which we must cease to do, We must ‘cease to do evil,” get clean away from all
dependence on our own works. 2. The work of man. (1) To believe in Christ’s
mission. Christ claims to have been sent into the world by the Father to perform
a specific work. Miracles were His credentials. His own profound self-conscious-
ness of His mission explains and necessitates this supernatural signature. Now, if
Jesus believed Himself to be the “Sent” and the ‘Son of God,” and was not He
was deceived and a deceiver ; but if He was, we cannot put ourselves into harmony
with God otherwise than as we accept this mission. (2) Accepting the mission

What does a man do when he believes in the Person of Christ? What does a
blind man do when he commits himself to a guide? He puts himself out on trust

A drowning man, when he clings to his plank, lives suspensively on that to which
he clings. A penitent sinner, when he believes in Christ, does both. And this is
the work of God for all men. (John Burton.) The work of God :—There was
nothing peculiar about this question. All men are asking it, some listlessly, some
with agonizing importunity. There is much implied in it; amongst other thin 8
that there is some alienation between God and man which must be removed ie
fallen angels do not ask it. I. Man’s way OF ANSWEPING THE QUESTION. 1 One
man imagines that the works of God are to be performed by the members of the
body, by prayers, genuflexions, &c. The result is that the man blinded goes down
to death, or he is forced by experience to own that he has not found what he sought
and to turn away from externals, still saying, ‘‘ What shall Ido?” &. 2. The
next stage he reaches is that of substituting moral for ceremonial acts. Hence
the constant disposition to make social charities the test of character, and to
establish an order of irreligious saints. In this delusion thousands ‘live and
die. But to others, goaded by conscience, this is not enough. “We have
tried to do right, but we find our good works imperfect and marred by the sins that
have run side by side with them. What shall we do?” &. 3. The man has now
been brought to the necessity of expiation. He must make good his past failureg


Nea ae ee


OHAP. VI.) ST. JOHN. 535
a cee Di ee eee eine
by working the works of God. But where shall he begin? Perhaps by refraining
from sin. This unexpected difficulty drives him to repentance. He will weep over
his offences. But he finds that he can no more break his heart than change his
life. The sinner, abandoning the impossible effort, asks in despair, ‘‘ What shall I
do?” 4. This is the highest ground man ever reached by himself. If he goes
beyond he goes down. (1) Some accordingly descend to the lower ground of
meritorious abstinence and self-mortification. Because they have not been able to
appease God by renouncing sinful pleasures, they will now do it by renouncing
innocent enjoyments. (2) A descent in another direction leads to a desperate
transfer of. responsibility. As the sinner cannot work the works of God himself,
the Church or a priest shall do it for him. II. Cunisr’s way. The whole point
here is the contrast between believing and working. They would not have been
surprised had He enjoined some task. To a self-righteous spirit, difficulty,
danger, pain are inducements rather than dissuasives; but a requisition to believe
on Him was something different, comprehending as it did a belief of His Divine
legation and authority, of His ability and willingness tc save, and a full consent
to be saved by Him. 1. It was this simple and implicit trust that created the
difficulty, and the same feeling of incongruity is experienced now. “After
spending a lifetime in working out my own salvation, must I be told at last that I
have only to believe?” 2. Let this reluctance subside, and men will ask in what
sense faith is the work of God. (1) Some have taught that the act of believing
ig meritorious, and is accepted in lieu of all the rest. But how can this be
reconciled with God’s justice? (2) Men have run to the opposite extreme, and
held that faith dispenses with all moral obligation, which is at variance with the
constant requisition cf obedience. 3. The true meaning of the words may be
summed up in two particulars, (1) Our access to God and restoration to His favour
are entirely independent of all merit or obedience on our part. The saving benefit
of the atonement is freely offered to us. Unreserved acceptance of it must, of
course, exclude all reliance on any merit of our own. This is all we have to do
to begin with, (2) We are saved, not in sin, but from sin, and when belief in
Christ is represented as the saving work which God requires, it is not to the
exclusion of good works, but rather the source from which they flow. (J. Addison
Alexander, D.D.) Faith and its operations :—I. Fa1rH I8 HERE CONSIDERED AS
THE WORK WHICH GOD ENJOINS IN EVERY INDIVIDUAL. Why is it that men do not
believe the testimony which God has so clearly made? 1. A wilful turning aside
from God and a determination to take up with the nearest trifle is one reason. 2.
The deceitfulness of the human heart is another. Sin possesses in a most
astonishing degree the faculty of hiding its own deformity. 3. The reasons of
this disobedience vary in different men according to their different characters and
circumstances. 4. What does the Holy Spirit do when He introduces the
principle of faith into the heart of man? (1) He removes every obstacle
which we cherished in our natural state. (2) He fixes in us principles of
obedience, and makes duty a delight. 5. What is this faith ? A continual
reliance on Christ as a Saviour. 6 What does this faith do? It delivers
the believer from the charge and dominion of sin and purifies the heart. I.
Gop’s seNnpING His Son INTO THE woRLD. 1. This was an act of sovereignty.
9. Christ was sent as the medium of God’s moral government and as the channel
of salvation. 3. What a view this gives us of the mercy and love of God! 4.
How this heightens the guilt of the rejection of Christ! III. Tus OBEDIENCE OF
FAITH IS THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE DESIGN OF GOD AND THE COMPLETION OF THE
Saviour’s tRIuMPH. (W. Howels, M.A.) Faith the sole saving act:—1. The
Jews inquired as though there were several works of God. Christ narrows down
the terms of salvation to a single one. 2. In this as in many incidental ways
our Lord teaches His Divinity. Imagine Paul or David resting the destiny of the
soul on faith in himself. 3, The belief is natural to man that something must
be done in order to salvation. The most supine expect to have to rouse themselves
some day. Let. us examine—l. THE COMMON NOTION UNDERLYING THE QUESTION.
When a man begins to think of God and his relations to Him, he finds he owes
Him service and obedience. [lis first spontaneous impulse, therefore, is to begin
the performance of the work he has hitherto neglected. The law expressly affirms
that the man who doeth these things shall live by them. He proposes to take the
law just as it stands and to live by service. II. THz GROUND AND REASON OF
Cwrist’s ANSWER. 1. Because it is too late in any case to adopt the method of
salvation by works. The law demands and supposes that obedience begins at the


5386 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR.


very beginning of existence, and continves down uninterruptedly to the end of it
(Gal v. 3). If any man can show a clean record, the law gives him the reward he ©
has earned (Rom. iv. 4, xi. 6). But no man can do this (Psa. lviii. 3; Eph. ii, 3):
2. This is the conclusive ground for Christ’s declaration that the one great work
which every fallen man must perform in order to salvation is faith in another
work. IIL. THe DocrRINE oF SALVATION BY FAITH. 1, Faith is a work, a mental
act of the most comprehensive and energetic species. It carries the whole man in
it, heart, head, will, body, soul, spirit. 2. Yet it is not a work in the common
signification, and is by Paul opposed to works, and excluded from them. It is
wholly occupied with another’s work. The believer deserts all his own doings,
and betakes himself to what a third person has done for him, and instead of ?
holding up prayers, almsgiving, penances, or moral efforts, he holds up the ‘
sacrificial work of Christ. 3. St. John repeats this doctrine in his first epistle -
(1 John iii, 22, 33), The whole duty of sinful man is here summed up and concen- }
trated in the duty to trust in another person than himself and in another work than

his own. Inthe matter of salvation, when there is faith in Christ there is every- 4
thing; and where there is not faith in Christ there isnothing. Conclusion: 1, Faith 7
in Christ is the appointment of God as the sole means of salvation (Acts iv. 12).

2. There are enj»yments in the human conscience that can be supplied by no other
method. (1) The soul wants peace. Christ’s atonement satisfies the demands of a
broken law. (2) The soul wants purity. The blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin.

(Prof. Siedd.)'| Faith and works :—All upon which the name of Paulinism has

been bestowed is contained in embryo in this verse, which at the same time forms

the point of union between Paul and James. Faith is the highest kind of work,

for by it man gives himself; and a free being can do nothing greater than to give
himself. It is 1m shis sense that James opposes works to a faith which is nothing

more than intellectual belief; and it is in a perfectly analogous sense that Paul

opposes faith, active faith, to works of mere observance. ‘The faith of Paul is

really the works of James, according to the sovereign formula of Jesus: ‘‘ This is

the work of God that you believe.” (F. Godet, D.D.) The value of faith :-—

Faith will be of more use to us than any other grace, as an eye, though dim, was

of more use to an Israelite (b‘iten by a serpent) than all the other members of his

body. It is not knowledge, though angelical, nor repentance, though we could shed

rivers of tears, could justify us; but only faith, whereby we look on Christ. (T.
Watson.) Works are useless for our salvation:—Coin that is current in one

place is valueless in another. Suppose an Indian, far in the western wilds, were

to say, “I will become a trader with the whites. I will go to New York city and

buy up half the goods there, and then come back and sell them, and then what a

rich Indian I shall be.” He then collects all his wampum beads, which are his

money, and compared with other In“ans he is very rich, and away he journeys to

yonder city. Imagine him going into Stewart’s, and offering his wampum there

in exchange for their goods. Tley are refused. They were money in the woods—

in the city they are worthless. And there are thousands of men who are carrying

with them, to offer at the judgment, what is no better than the Indian’s beads.

They are reckoning on their generosity, their prompt payment of all their debts

their various good natural qualities; but when they present them, they will all be

found worthless trash, The things that have made them strong, and valued, and
important here, will there be worse than useless to them. (H. W. Beecher.)

Faith is trust in another:—The daughter of a celebrated physician was once
attacked by a violent and dangerous fever; but she exhibited great resignation and
tranquillity. She said she was ignorant of what might effect her cure, and if it

were left to herself to prescribe, she might desire remedies which would be
prejudicial. Shall I not gain everything, she added, by abandoning myself entirely

to my father? He desires my recovery ; he knows much better than I do what

is adapted to the restoration of my health ; and having confidence, therefore, that
everything will be done for me which can be done, I remain without solicitude

either as to the means or as to the result. Redigious faith, in like manner, trusts

itself in the hands of God, in the full confidence that it will be well in the end.

(J. Upham.) _ The preciousness of faith :—Faith is the vital artery of the soul

When we begin to believe we begin to love. Faith grafts the soul into Christ as the

scion into the stock, and fetches all its nutriment from the blessed vine. (T
Watson.) Faith and works :—That is a very instructive anecdote which St.

Simon relates respecting the last hours of the profligate Louis XIV. ‘One day ”

he says, ‘‘the king, recovering from loss of consciousness, asked his confessor,


Se ay a ee a ees


CHAP. vt] ST, JOHN. © 537


Pére Tellier, to give him absolution for all his sins. Pére Tellier asked him if he
suffered much. ‘No,’ replied the king, ‘that’s what troubles me. I should like
to suffer more, for the expiation of my sins.’” Here was a poor mortal who had
spent his days in carnality and transgression of the pure law of God. He is
conscious of guilt, and feels the need of its atonement. And now, upon the very
edge of eternity and brink of doom, he proposes to make his own atonement, to
be his own redeemer and save his own soul, by offering up to the eternal Nemesis
that was racking his conscience a few hours of finite suffering, instead of betaking
himself to the infinite passion and agony of Calvary. This is a “work”; and,
alas! ‘‘a dead work,” as St. Paul so often denominates it. (Prof. Shedd.) Faithin
God :—In the first Punic war, Hannibal laid siege to Saguntum, a rich and strongly-
fortified city on the eastern coast of Spain. It was defended with a desperate
obstinacy by its inhabitants ; but the discipline, the energy, and the persistence of
the Carthaginian army were too much for them; and, just as the city was about to
fall, Alorcus, a Spanish chieftain, and a mutual friend of both the contending
parties, undertook to mediate between them. He proposed to the Saguntines that
they should surrender, allowing the Carthaginian general to make his own terms;
and the argument he used was this: ‘Your city is captured,in any event. Further
resistence will only bring down upon you the rage of an incensed soldiery, and
horrors of a sack. Therefore surrender immediately, and take whatever Hannibal
shall please to give. You cannot lose anything by the procedure, and you may
gain something, even though it be a little.” Now, although there is no resemblance
between the government of the good and merciful God and the cruel purposes and
condact of a heathen warrior, and we shrink from bringing the two into any kind
of juxtaposition, still, the advice of the wise Alorcus to the Saguntines is good
advice for every sinful man in reference to his relations to eternal justice. We are
all of us at the mercy of God. But the All-Holy is also the All-Merciful. He has
made certain terms, and has offered certain conditions of pardon, without asking
leave of His creatures, and without taking them into council ; and were these terms
as strict as Draco, instead of being as tender and pitiful as the tears and blood of
Jesus, it would become us criminals to make no criticisms even in that extreme
case, but accept them precisely as they were offered by the Sovereign and the
Arbiter. (Ibid.) The simplicity of faith :—The complexity sometimes charged
upon the Christian doctrine of faith is not greater than exists in any analogous or
corresponding case. Tell the drowning man to be of good cheer, for you will save
him, and you call upon him to perform as many acts as are included in the exercise
of saving faith. For, in the first place, you invite him to believe the truth of your
assertions. In the next place, you invite him to confide in your ability and willing-
ness to save him. In the last place, you invite him to consent to your proposal by
renouncing every other hope and agreeing to be saved by you. There is nothing
more abstruse or difficult in saving faith. The difference is not in the essential
nature of the mental acts and exercises, but in the circumstances under which they
are performed, (J. A. Alexander, D.D.) Creed and conduct :—It is a very
eommon charge against Christianity that ‘“ it puts creed above conduct.” Whether
there is any truth in that charge depends upon what is understood by the term
« greed.” When Jesus was asked directly concerning right conduct, he answered
that a right belief is the basis of right conduct. If that be giving a first place to
“creed,” let it be borne in mind that it is Jesus Christ Himself who makes the
assignment. A popular saying nowadays is that “it doesn’t make any difference
what a man believes if he only acts right”; but a Boston clergyman once
improved on that saying by the simple change, “It doesn’t make any difference
what a man believes if he doesn’t act right.” If a man is a persistent evil-doer,
the soundness of his theological convictions will not compensate for his wrong
conduct. But when God has sent His Son to be a Saviour and a Guide, it makes
all the difference in the world whether a sinner accepts or refuses to believe on the
One who is the only Mediator between God and man. So far, a correct belief is
all-essential as a basis of right conduct and of safe conduct. That is the truth as


Jesus puts it. (H.C. Trumbull, D.D.)


Vers. 30-33. What sign showest Thou then that we may see and believe.—Christ
the Christian’s food :—Hewitson writes: “ I think I know more of Jesus Christ than
of any earthly friend.”” Hence one who knew Him well remarked, ‘One thing
struck me in Mr. Hewitson. He seemed to have no gaps, no intervals in his com-
munion with God. I used to feel, when with him, that it was being with one who


ae


538 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. VI.
i nn macnn omnia iC eR Gres ee
was a vine watered every moment.” Christ is the true manna :—Christ is
heavenly meat and drink. ‘My Father giveth you the true bread from heaven ’”’
(chap. vi. 82), Other meat and drink is terrene and earthly. Your bread grows
out of the bowels of the earth. Your wine is the blood of an earthly grape. The
flesh you eat is fed of the tender grass that springs out of the earth. If the earth
should prove barren, you would soon feel a famine. ‘The king himself is served
by the field” (Eccl. v. 9), It is true, the blessing comes from heaven, but all the
materials of meat and drink are earthly. But Jesus Christ is the Bread of heaven
and the Wine of heaven. The manna came from the clouds only; but Christ from
the beautiful heaven, even from the bosom of the Father. (Ralph Robinson.)
Christ the gift of God to all men :—When the Rev. Ebenezer Erskine’s doctrine was
impugned, and his discourses complained of before the ecclesiastical courts, he was
enabled to vindicate himself with great dignity and courage; and expressions
sometimes fell from his lips which, for a time, overawed and confounded his
enemies. On one occasion, at a meeting of the synod of Fife, according to the
account of a respectable witness, when some members were denying the Father’s gift
of our Lord Jesus to sinners of mankind, he rose and said, ‘t Moderator, our Lord
Jesus says of Himself, ‘My Father giveth you the true bread from heaven.’ This
He uttered to a promiscuous multitude; and let me see the man who dares to
affirm that He said wrong?” This short speech, aided by the solemnity and
energy with which it was delivered, made an uncommon impression on the synod,
and on all that were present. Christ gives life :—Christ is such meat and drink
as preserves from death. Other meat and drink cannot keep man from the grave.
That rich man that fared deliciously every day was not made immortal, ‘The
rich man died and was buried” (Luke xvi. 22). All that generation that fed on
manna, and drank the water out of the rock, died (chap. vi. 49). But Christ pre-
serves the soul from death (chap. vi. 50). This is the bread of God that came down
from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die. It immortalizes the soul
that feeds on it. He that believeth on Me hath eternal life (ver. 51). Other meat
and drink cannot preserve a living body from death, much less can it give life, and
restore breath to a dead body. Put the most delicate meat, the strongest drink,
into the mouth of a dead man, and they will not give him life if the soul be quite
departed. They may recover from a swoon, they cannot from death. But the flesh
and blood of Christ quicken the dead. Christ, by putting His flesh and blood into
the mouth of the dead soul, conveys life into it. His fiesh and blood make the
lips of the dead to speak. ‘‘As the Father raiseth the dead and quickeneth them,
so the Son quickeneth whom He will” (chap. v. 21). If thou hast any spiritual
life in thee, thou didst receive it from the enlivening virtue of Christ’s flesh and
blood communicated to thee by the Spirit of life. (Ralph Robinson.) Christ

like the manna, is an abundant supply :—I recollect when I was able to journey
through the country preaching, I for some years stayed occasionally with a fine old
English farmer. He used to have a piece of beef upon the table, I do not know how
many pounds it weighed, but it was enormous. I said to him one day, “ Why is it
that whenever I come here you have such immense joints? Do youthink that I can
eat likea giant? Ifso, itis a great mistake. Look at that joint, there,” I said; “ ifI
were to take it home, it might last me a month.” ‘ Well,” he said, “ if I could get
a bigger bit I would, for I am so glad to see you; and if you could eat it all, you
should be heartily welcome. I want everybody that comes here to-day to feel that I will
do my very best for you.” He did not measure my necessities to the half-ounce, but he
provided on a lavish scale. I quote this homely instance of giving heartily to show
you how, on a divine scale, the Lord makes ready for His guests. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
The mistakes of the Galileans:—I. THe SECONDARY FOR THE PRIMARY (vers. 31, 32)

Confounding the instrument with the agent; Moses with Jehovah. 1, The man of
science falls into this mistake when he talks about forces and laws otherwise than
as expressions of the Divine power and will. 2. The Christian does the same when
he ascribes conversion to the eloquence of a preacher instead of to the quickening
influence of the Spirit (Zech. iv. 6; John vi. 63; Eph. ii, 1). 3. Every person
similarly errs who forgets that every good and perfect gift comes from God (James
i.17). JI. Tue sHadowy FoR THE SUBSTANTIAL (ver. 33). This tendency followed
the Jews all through their career, and there is a like tendency when religion is mede
a thing of forms and ceremonies. III. Toe ImPERSONAL FOR THE PERSONAL (ver.
35). The Jews imagined the bread of life to be a better sort of manna (see chap.
iv. 15; the same mistake). Plainly as Christ indicated this bread to be a Person
they continued thinking of a thing. So do those who suppose that education,


OHAP, VI.] ST. JOHN. 539


moral culture, social refinement, &c., is the bread of life. IV. THE TRANSIENT FOR
THE ETERNAL (ver. 49), 1, The manna was a temporary gift; even when the
Israelites ate of it they died. The bread of life on the contrary—(1) Endures into
everlasting life (ver. 27), and—(2) Will satisfy every want of the soul. Lessons: 1.
The men who err most in life and religion are those who walk by sight and not by
faith. 2. Christ is a greater sign than any of His miracles. 3. His best recom-
mendation is the satisfaction He imparts. 4. Men may have a desire after Christ
without faith. 5. None who come to Christ in sincerity, will depart from Him in
sorrow. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) The manna a type of Christ:—I. MiracuLous
IN THEIR ORIGIN: came down from heaven. II. Coverup witH DEw (2 Cor. iv. 3).
III, APPARENTLY INSIGNIFICANT (Isa. liii, 2). IV. Mysrerrovus (Isa. lili. 8). V.
Darny (Exod. xvi. 21). “Give us this day” is founded on this repeated miracle,
Christ’s grace must be used continually. VI. GaTHERED BY MAN BUT GROWN BY Gop.
Human and Divine meet in conversion (chap. iv. 44), and Divine bounty never
supersedes man’s industry. VII. ALL GATHERING HAD ENOUGH. Sincerity not the
degree of faith avails (Exod. xvi.18). VIII. Grarurrous (Isa. lv. 1). IX. Surricrent
FoR ALL. X. OFFERED TO MURMURERS (Rom. v. 8). XI. Manna for a season the
onty food (Acts iv. 12). XII. FURNISHED IN THE WILDERNESS (Psa. lxxviii. 19; Heb.
vi. 8). (W.H.Van Doren, D.D.) | Christ the bread of life :—I. Christ 1s the bread
of God in His personal Divine life (vers. 32-40). 1. The typical and the true bread
of God (vers. 32,33). 2. The false and the true appetite for this bread (vers. 34-
38). 3. The liberating and quickening operation of this bread (vers. 39, 40). II.
Christ civzs the bread of life in His giving up of His flesh in His atoning death
(vers. 41-51). 1. He gives it not to murmurers, but to those who are drawn and
taught of the Father (vers. 41-47). 2. He gives it with the full partaking of
eternal life (vers. 48-50). 3. He gives it in giving Himself (ver. 51). 4. He gives
it in giving His flesh for the life of the world (ver. 51). III. Christ rnsrrrurzs the
meal of life in making His flesh and blood a feast of thank-offering to the world
(vers. 52-59). 1. The offence at the words concerning the flesh of Christ (ver. 52).
2, The heightening of the offence by the fourfold assertion concerning the flesh and
blood of Christ (vers. 53-56). 3. The ground of this assertion; the life of Christ
is in the Father (ver. 57). 4. The conclusion of this assertion (vers. 58, 59). IV.
Christ rransriaures the meal of life into a meal of the Spirit (ver. 60-65)—
1. By His exaltation (ver. 62). 2. By His sending the spirit (ver. 63). 3. By
His word (ver. 63). 4. By the excision of unbelievers (ver. 64). (J. P. Lange, D.D.)
The bread of life contrasted with manna :—1, The manna could not detain for one
moment the fleeting spirit of man; but the bread of life, like the tree of life, im-
parted immortality. 2. That was from the air; this from the real heaven of
heavens. 3. That nourished the decaying body; this the never dying soul. 4.
That left the multitude, after a few hours, hungry still; he who eats of this will
never hunger. (W. H. Van Doren, D.D.) Come down from heaven.—I. Wrz
nave A DIVINE LIFE IN CuRist, because He has come from God to be the author of
life for us. II, THis LIFE IS NEAR (Deut. xxx. 12, 135 Rom. x. 6-8). No man could
ascend up, therefore Christ came down. (John Calvin.) Liye in Christ :—I.
Wuart 1s ir To tive. 1. Anything lives when it fills up the capacity of its being.
Animal life does not consist in material force but in organic vitality. In man, how-
ever, we see the added element of spiritual existence. 2. Here comes up the ever-
lasting fact that man is not like the brute satisfied with meat and drink, but yearns
for what is beyond. And as there is harmony in the universe there must be some-
thing more than the material for man. II. TH& HIGHER NATURE MUST HAVE ITS FOOD,
oRiIr pres. Christ saw the spiritual nature of man in all its priceless capacity and
quenchless immortality, and to that He addressed Himself when He bade His hearers
eat of His flesh and drink of His blood. III. Each KIND OR NATURE IN THE UNIVERSE
IS LINKED IN ITS OWN CHAIN OF DEPENDENCIES. The body depends on things material;
but the moment we look on the spirit of man we must ascribe it to some higher
source than matter. The affection of the human heart ; the yearning for the beauti-
ful and the good; the intellect; the sense of sin and moral freedom, whence came
they? If you could take away every other proof of the existence of God, this spirit
proves the Being of a moral and intelligent Source over and above the material
world. IV. EacH THING IS LINKED TO THINGS 'OF ITS OWN KIND. 1.. The soul, living,
intelligent, and morally conscious, is linked to an intelligent and moral God, and by
Him, and in Him alone, can it live. It cannot link itself to mere sensation and
matter. 2. Jesus brings men into communion with that infinite intelligence, love,
and freedom by bringing man’s soul into communion with Himself, so that living


aT.


540 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omar vn


ce ee ee ee bal eee ae es OR Se ae a a a ee


in Him we live in the Father, and as Christ becomes assimilated to our inner
spiritual being, so we truly live. V. WE Nor ONLY LIVE IN, BUT BY Jesus. This
brings into view His essential personality. ‘I am the Bread, the Way.” ‘He that
believeth in Mn,” &¢. No other teacher ever so spoke. Plato or Confucius may
have said, ‘‘ Believe this truth,” but never, ‘‘I am the truth, believe in me.” Christ


saves us not merely by the truth He revealed, but by Himself. VI. Tuts Lire 1s A


PRESENT ExPentENcE. Not merely is going to live, but liveth. Religion is an
end as well as a means. It is not simply something that helps us to live
by and by, but something by which we live now. The great essential things
are those we live by, not for. Bread, water, air—we do not live for them, but
by them. So we live by religion, heaven, Christ, not for them. Conclusion : 1.
See what an argument this is for the truth of the religion of Jesus, because it shows
us how we truly live. We live by Jesus now because—(1) He fills up our higher
faculties; (2) draws out cuy best affections; (3) gives us the truth of our higher
being. 2. Have you ever really lived? (HE. H. Chapin, D.D.) Jewish traditions
connecting the manna with the Messiah :—There was a tradition that as the first
Redeemer caused the manna to fall from heaven, even so should the second
Redeemer cause the manna to fall. For this sign, then, or one like it, the people
looked from Him whom they were ready to regard as Messiah (cf. Matt. xvi. 1;
Mark viii. 11). Philo says, ‘‘ When the people sought what it is which feeds the
soul, for they did not, as Moses says, know what it was, they discovered by learning
that it is the utterance of God and the Divine Logos from which all forms of
instruction and wisdom flow in a perennial stream. And this is the heavenly food
which is indicated in the sacred records under the person of the First Cause, saying,
‘Behold I rain on you bread out of heaven!” (Exod. xiv. 4). For in very truth God
distils from above the supernal wisdom on noble and contemplative minds, and they,
when they see and taste, in great joy, know what they experience, but do not know
the power which dispenses the gift. Wherefore they ask, ‘What is this that is
sweeter than honey and whiter than snow?’ But they shall all be taught by the
prophet that this is the Bread which the Lord gave them to eat”? (Exod. xvi. 15).
(Bp. Westcott.)


Vers. 34, 35. Lord, evermore give us this bread.—I. Tur VAIN PRAYER. Because
—1l. It recognizes not the Giver in the bread. 2. It recognizes not the Bread of
Life in the giver. II. Tux answer or Jesus aims to disclose their spirit—l. By
insisting on the figure of the bread in His person. 2. By enlarging the figure:
bread for hunger and thirst. 3. By explaining the figure: ‘‘ Come to Me,” ‘ Believe
on Me.” (J. P. Lange, D.D.) Three sayings of Christ :—I. Asour HimsEur (ver.
35). II, Asour THosk wHo come To Him (ver. 37). ILI. Asour THe wm. or His
Farner (vers. 39, 40). (Bp. Ryle.) The true hunger of the soul awakened and
satisfied in Christ :—I, Man’s nuncER. There is in every finite existence one great
appetite. No creature is independent; it must draw life from another, In man,
who is a complex being, there are various kinds of hunger. 1, Natural. (1) Bodily
hunger. Even as an upright creature man was made dependent on the fruits of the
ground; and now his first question is, “‘How am I to get bread.” How much
thought and labour are expended on it! It has impelled to every crime. Hunger
pressed Israel into Egypt, and that involved mighty issues for both. Hunger brought
Ruth into view and linked her with the royal ancestry of Christ. The greatest
spiritual conflict in the world was connected with a state of hunger. The central
petition of the Lord’s prayer is ‘‘ Give us this day,” &c. (2) Mental hunger. Man’s
bodily appetite is typical of mental conditions. (a) The heart hungers for happiness.
Man, when left to himself, is an unhappy being, (b) The intellect hungers for truth.
Man has been made to inquire into, study, and know the truth of things. (c) The
will hungers for liberty. The triumpb of a man’s life is to prevail over the con-
ditions which would fetter him. (d) The conscience hungers for righteousness. We
are made to act in accordance with the supreme law of the universe, the will of
God. All altars, sacrifices, priesthoods are witnesses to that. 2. Unnatural. Great
multitudes, instead of seeking for legitimate satisfaction, lay hold of false food, and
drug themselves. For these Satan keeps a great variety of delusions. (1) For low
natures coarse animal pleasures. (2) For intellectual natures there are the sciences
&e. (3) For light and giddy natures there is the world and all its glory. (4) For
ambitious natures, principalities and powers. (5) For more serious and half-
religious natures penancies, pilgrimages, rites, ceremonies, and good works, The
result of eating such false bread is that the mere hunger of the soul is deadened,


.
:
:
:


cHaP. vi.) ST. JOHN. 541


—


and a false appetite created, which grows with what it feeds on, and this bread of
death instead of supporting the soul consumes it. 3. Supernatural; the longings
which exist with any degree of strength only in the renewed nature. Along with
the other tastes there may be a love of sin, but this partly consists of a hatred of
sin and a love of all that is good, a counting of all things but loss, so that we may
gain Christ. II. Tae Divine provision. 1. On what ground does God provide for
our bodily hunger? For the sake of Christ. He has tasted death for every man, and
thus secured an ample day of grace and every blessing, temporal as well as spiritual.
Thus in a literal sense Christ is the Bread of Life. 2. Christ is the true food for
the human mind. (1) We can only see the true beauty and deep spiritual meaning
of nature through Him. (2) He is the Bread of Life to the conscience. In Him the
sins of the past are washed away and the law magnified and made honourable. (3) He
is the Bread of Life to the heart. The heart that loves not is dead—but Jesus has
revealed and communicates the love of God. (F. Ferguson, D.D.) Bread and
water:—You call these common things. Their excellence has occasioned their com-
monness, and their commonness corresponds to a common want in humanity. I.
LET Us APPLY THIS soctaLLy. Look on the greatest feast ever prepared. What are
its delicacies? Simply an adaptation, decoration or adulteration of bread and water,
and the seated guests are compelled to say, ‘“‘ This is well enough now and then,
but only now and then,” let us have something plain. Bread and water survive.
Empires of soups, &c., which are the image and superscription of the cook’s, who
is bound like other fashionable slaves to produce something fresh, rise and fall ; but
bread and water are God’s, and they endure. II. THE APPLICATION OF THIS IS OBVIOUS
IN THE HIGHER SPHERES OF CULTURE. Reading and writing are the bread and water
of the mind. Your duty to your child is done when you have given this; let him get
the rest for himself. But fine cookery is imitated in fine intelligence, and sometimes
with like results—mental indigestion. Hence we have imperfect French, caricatured
German, and murdered music, and the native tongue and history passed by.
When will people learn to prize bread and water and see that it is better to
know a little well, than to know next to nothing about a great deal? III. Tuese
ILLUSTRATIONS PREPARE FOR THE HIGHEST TRUTH OF ALL, Viz., that Jesus Christ
is the bread and water, without which man cannot live. He never says that
He is a luxury which the rich only can afford. An adventurer would not
have seen in metaphors so humble a philosophy so profound. 1. Man needs
Christ as a necessity and not as a luxury. You may be pleased to have
flowers, but you must have bread. Jesus has often been presented as an
ornament, a phenomenon ; but He preached Himself, and would have others
preach Him, as bread and water. 2. What has been the effect of omitting
to declare Christ as bread and water? Leaving the simplicity of Christ, we
have elaborated theological sciences, worked out a cunning symbolism, filled
the Church with many coloured garments, and constituted splendid hierarchies.
All this means that man is a fool, and prefers vanity to truth. Poor souls are left
to believe that they can only get to Christ through priests, catechisms, and ecclesias-
tical mumbling. ‘Take the pure Bible and read it for thyself, and thou shalt see
the Lord and eat heavenly bread. 3, History furnishes a most graphic confirma-
tion of these views. J.S. Mill says: “Let rational criticism take from us what it
may, it still leaves us the Christ.” Exactly: it leaves us bread. It modifies the
theological cook and confectioner, but it leaves the living water. Men can’t get
rid of Christ, because they can’t get rid of themselves. The Lord allows the chaff
to be blown away, but saves every grain of wheat; yet nervous people think that
the wheat is lost because the chaff is scattered. (J. Parker, D.D.) Bread the
symbol of Christ :—He is to the soul what bread is to the body—its food. I. Bread
ig NECESSARY food. Other things may be dispensed with, but all need bread. II.
It is food that surrs all—old and young, weak and strong. III. It is the most
NOURISHING kind of food: nothing does so much good or is so indispensable to
bodily development. IV. It is food that we NEED Darux. Other foods are at best
only occasionally required. V. It is the only food we are NEVER TIRED oF; hence
it is on every table, unlike every other kind of food, (Bp. Ryle.) The bread of
life a representation of the Saviour 1. All life is valuable in its degree. Vege-
table life is superior to dead matter, animdl to vegetable life, rational to animal,
the life of God to human life. 2. This latter was man’s once ; but it was forfeited,
and is now restored by the Spirit. Hence Scripture loves to present religion under
the notion of life; not as a picture that is only resemblance, not as mechanism
that is only form. 3. The relation in which Christ stands to this life. He is


Te
542 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [oar. VI.
eee
“ bread,” its nourishment ; bread, i.e., ‘‘ bruisedcorn.” He becomes our Saviour by
His death, 4. Bread is nothing to us unless eaten, so unless we ‘“‘ eat the flesh
of the Son of God,” &. I. THe way IN WHICH WE DERIVE ADVANTAGE FROM Him.
By coming to Him or believing on Him. 1. This reminds us that Christ is acces-
sible. ‘Where two or three,” &c. 2. It teaches us that faith is not a notion,
but a principle always attended with an application of the soul to the Redeemer.
3. This application is not a single address, but a continued exercise. ‘‘ Cometh.”
II. Tue nappriness His FOLLOWERS SHALL ENJOY. 1. They shall never hunger nor
thirst again after the world. Having tasted the provisions of God’s house, their
language is, ‘‘ Lord, ever more give us this bread.” A covetous, sensual, ambitious
Christian is one the Scripture knows nothing of. 2. They shall not hunger and thirst
in vain. The new creature has appetites, but ample provision is made for them.
3. They shall not hunger and thirst always. The days of imperfect enjoyment will
soon be over. Conclusions The subject is a standard by which we may estimate—
1. Christ. 2. Faith. 8. The Christian. (W. Jay.) The bread of life:—I. In
WHAT SENSE Is OUR LORD THE BREAD OF LIFE? 1. He evidently intimated that there
was in Him that which, if properly received, would communicate eternal life (vers.
51, 53), 2. He obviously points to His sufferings and death as that from which
we were to derive our life. 3. For Him to be to us the bread of life depends on two
things—(1) That we receive the full pardon of our sins; (2) that we have a meet-
ness for glory by the sanctification of our souls. IJ. WHo aRE THOSE WHO DERIVE
BENEFIT FROM Him? Not all, but only those who come in faith. 1. Before we can
do this we must have a sense of our need of Him. 2. Those will not come to Him
who fail to see His perfections, believe in His atonement, and hear His invitation.
8. There must be moral effort. ‘‘ Labour.” We must evidently turn our backs
resolutely on the sins we loved. 4. We must come to Him by the prescribed
means—meditation on His Word and importunate prayer. III. Waar is THE
BENEFIT of which He speaks. The believer shall never hunger or thirst—1. After
sin. 2. Nor anxiously after holiness; only with such a sweet desire as serves to
animate the spirit on its road to that state where it will thirst no more. (B. Noel,
M.A.) Bread is for common use:—I remember what bread was to me when I
was a boy. I could not wait till I was dressed in the morning, but ran and cut a
slice from the loaf—all the way round, too—to keep me until breakfast; and:at
breakfast, if diligence in eating earned wages, I should have been well paid. And
then I could not wait for dinner, but ate again, and then at dinner; and I had to
eat again before tea, and at tea, and lucky if I didn’t eat again after that. It was
bread, bread, all the time with me, bread that I lived on and got strength from.
Just so religion is the bread of life ; but you make it cake—you put it awayin your
cupboard and never use it but when you have company. You cut it into small
pieces and put it on china plates, and pass it daintily round instead of treating it
as bread, common, hearty bread, to be used every hour. (H. W. Beecher.) The
soul needs to be often fed :—When people are being strengthened of God, they are
not content with one meal on the Sabbath ; they want another, and perhaps
a prayer-meeting or a Sunday-school for adessert, They are not content with just
two or three minutes’ prayer in the morning; they like, if they can, to slip out of
business and get a word with God in the middle of the day. They delight to carry
a text of Scripture in their memories to sweeten their breath all the day, and they
cannot be happy unless they meditate upon the Word. I think you make a great
mistake when you go galloping through the whole Bible, reading half a dozen
chapters every day; you do much better when you get a text and ruminate upon it,
just as the cows chew the cud. Turn the Scripture over and over, and get all the
juice, sweetness, and nourishment out of it, and you will do well. The spiritually
hungry man says, ‘‘I must go and hear some servant of God, and hear what God,
the Lord, will speak to me. I must get as much of the heavenly food as I possibly
can, for I need it so greatly.” (C. H. Spurgeon.) Hunger a sign of health :—
Men who are mending find themselves hungry between meals. ‘“ Oh,” the doctor
says, ‘‘that is a capital sign. You will get on now.” I love to see God’s people
when the Lord is strengthening them, for then they leave off being dainty and
fault-finding, and prove the truth of Solomon’s proverb, that to the hungry man
every bitter thing is sweet. Then they come to Monday night prayer-meetings and
week evening services. They used to be able to do very well from Sunday to
Sunday, and I have known some of them get on with one meal on the Lord’s day.
and like it all the better if that was quickly served and soon over. When the
gracious Lord strengthens His people they become very sharp-set. Somebody said


a


cuab. vi.) ST. JOHN. 843


on Sunday morning to me, “Did you not feel it sweet preaching?” JI replied, “I


always feel it sweet preaching the gospel of the grace of God.” ‘ Ah, but,” he
said, “the people swallowed it all just as it came from your mouth, and they
seemed so hungry after it.” Truly this makes a preacher happy. (Ibid.) Christ
the best food :—The old Grecians that had fed altogether on acorns before, after
that bread came in amongst them they made no reckoning of their mast any more,
but kept it only for swine. And leathern and iron money began to grow out
of request amongst the Lacedemonians after that gold and silver came into use.
So when a man hath once found the favour of God in his heart, and the love of
God in Christ hath once lighted on it, and got assurance of it, he ceaseth then to
be greedy of the world’s trash, which is in regard of it but dross or pebble-stones
to gold and diamonds, as mast to the best bread corn; yea, rather of far less worth
or value to that than either of these are to it. (Fuller.) Feeding on Christ :—
If anybody were to say to me, “I have a man at home who stands in my hall, and
has stood there for years, but he has never eaten a mouthful of bread all the time,
nor cost me a penny for food,” I should say to myself, ‘‘ Oh, yes, that is a bronze
man, I know, or a plaster cast of a man. He has no life in him, I am sure; for if
he had life in him, he would have needed bread.” If we could live without eating,
it would be a cheap method of existence; but I have never found out the secret,
and I do not mean to make experiments. If you are trying it, and have succeeded
in it so far that you can live without Christ, the bread of life, I fear your life is not
that of God’s people, for they all hunger and thirst after Jesus, the bread of heaven.
(C. H. Spurgeon. False food :—During the Irish famine of 1849 the Duke of
Norfolk invented a curry-powder of which he boasted that if taken by the starving
peasants it would destroy all cravings of hunger. How many remedies for the soul’s
hunger are mere mockeries of unsatisfying! Curry-powder is poor food at the
best. (H. O. Mackey.) Christ an incorruptible food :—Christ is incorruptible
meat and drink. All earthly meat and drink is of a fading, perishing nature.
The best bread grows mouldy in a little time ; the best flesh in time putrefies and
taints ; the best wine grows eager and sour in a little time, and becomes unfit for
the body of man; the very manna itself, when it was kept till the morning of the
next day, contrary to God’s command, bred worms, and stank (Exod. xvi. 20).
But Jesus Christ knows no corruption. His flesh and blood is now as sweet and
pleasant, after so many ages, as it was the first hour it was eaten and drank (chap.
viii. 27). And it will be as far from corruption at the end of the world as now it is.
The manna in the golden pot corrupted not, though kept for many generations.
Christ is manna in that golden pot; the humanity in the golden pot of the Divinity
shall see no corruption. (Ralph Robinson.) Soul-satisfying bread :—I. THE
Lorp JESUS IS TO BE RECEIVED BY EACH ONE OF US PERSONALLY ror HIMSELF. Bread
which is not eaten will not stay hunger. Water in the cup may sparkle, but it
cannot slake thirst unless we drink it. How do we receive Christ. 1. By coming
to Him, which represents the first act of faith. We return to the Christ from
whom we have been alienated with a motion of the heart performed by desire,
prayer, assent, consent, trust, obedience. 2. Believing on Him, in the sense of
trusting Him. 3. Eating and drinking Him. It is monstrous that this should be
taken literally, for what greater crime could there be than to eat the flesh of our
Saviour? What He meant was receiving Him into our hearts. Now, in eating—
(1) The food as a whole goes into our mouths ; so as a whole Christ is received into
our belief and trust. (2) We masticate it, and even in this way the believer thinks
of Jesus and discovers His preciousness. (3) It descends into the inward parts to
be digested ; so Christ is to dwell and rest in the affections till His comfort is fully
drawn forth. (4) The food is next assimilated; so the great truths of Christ are
inwardly received till our whole nature draws from them satisfaction and strength.
5) As a man who has feasted well, and is no more hungry, rises from the table
satisfied, so we feel that in our Jesus our entire nature has al) it wants. (6) The two
points about Christ which He says are respectively meat and drink are—(a) His
flesh, i.e., His humanity. Our soul feeds on the literal historical fact that ‘* God
was in Christ,” and was made flesh and dwelt among us. (b) His blood, which
clearly refers to His atoning death. II. WHERE JESUS IS RECEIVED HE 1S SUPREMELY
SATISFYING—1. To our highest and deepest wants, not to mere fancies and whims.
Hungering is no shame; thirst is not sentiment. 2. Christ meets the hungering of
conscience, which feels that God must punish sin, but is appeased as it perceives
that it has been punished in Christ. 3. Men, when awakened, have a hunger of
fear, but when they find that Christ has died for them, fear expires and love takes


= . Ny Wee elt I's


544 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. —_—oma.. Wt.


its place. 4. The heart has its hunger, but in Christ its roving affections find rest.
5. There are vast desires in us all, and when we are quickened they expand, and yet
are satisfied. 6. This perfect satisfaction is found only in Christ. (1) Some have
tried to be satisfied with themselves. (2) Some have gone to Moses, (3) Some
have dosed themselves into a torpor with the narcotics of scepticism. (4) Many
stave off hunger by indifference, like the bears in winter, which are not hungry
because they are asleep. Conclusion : All believers bear witness that Jesus Christ
issatisfying to them. 1. They never seek additional ground of trust beyond Christ.
2. They never want to shift their confidence. 3. Christ satisfies in the hour of
death. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The “I am” of Christ:—This form of expression
is not found in the synoptists. It occurs not unfrequently in St. John, and the
figures with which it is connected furnish a complete study of the Lord’s work. I.
Iam the Ligur or THE WorxpD (chap. viii. 12), II. Iam the Brean or Lire (vers.
35, 41, 48, 51), III. Iam rue Door (x. 7,9). IV. I am Taz Goop SHEPHERD (x.
11, 14). V. 1am Tus ResvuRRECTION AND THE Lirs (xi. 25). VI. 1 am THE Way, THE
TRUTH, AND THE Lire (xiv. 6). VII. 1 am tax True Vine (xiv. 1-5). (Bp. Westcott.)
Spiritual assimilation:—It is not what a man eats, but what he digests, that
nourishes him. Now, so it is with that truth which is food for the mind, which
is the soul’s nutriment. There is a certain kind of truth which needs only to be
heard, only to be received: facts about the sun or earth, about light and heat and
electricity. All that you need to do in respect to these truths is to get them, to store
them away in your mind. Thus, for instance, the sun is ninety-two millions of
miles from the earth. Receive these facts, and you need go no farther with them,
There is no necessary after process of assimilation. They are of themselves nourish-
ment for the mind, without any such after process. But not so is it with moral
truth—that truth designed to regulate and govern human action. This is worth
nothing, unless it is wrought into the life; unless it be so assimilated as to lose the
form of abstract truth, and become principle; unless it passes into, is converted
into life. This is the way with bread, when it does any good. It does not remain
bread. It turns to flesh and blood and bone. The bread of yesterday is the
myriad-hued, the myriad-sided life of to-day. It is the eloquence of the orator, and
the strength of the drayman. It is the skill of the artist, and the energy of the
ploughman. And it is all this, through the wonderful process of assimilation,
through the mysterious force of a transubstantiation, stranger than priest ever
taught, or poet ever fancied. Now, the truth of this analogy furnishes an explana-
tion of the fact that so many persons in the world have a great deal of Bible know-
ledge, an abundance of moral truth, without having much of spiritual life. Insuch
cases, truth has remained truth. Doctrine lies within them, as so much doctrine.
So moral truth remains as so much unassimilated knowledge in the minds of thou-
sands. And this analogy, besides an explanation, suggests also the great duty we
owe to our moral or spiritual being. It is this. The duty of assimilating the moral
truth which we have received, of turning it into life. This should be our daily work.
Is time nothing, and eternity everything? Do we believe this ? Then we should be
more careful for an estate there, than for building up one here, Isit true, that with-
out holiness no one shallsee the Lord? Do we believe this? Ifso, how important
that this truth should be turned into a principle of action in our daily life. And
we should come to place very little, if any, value upon the mere possession of truth.
Many a post mortem examination discloses plenty of unused food within the body.
Still, the man died—died, because his system did not take up and use the bread,
So, many a post mortem moral examination, no doubt, will exhibit an abundance of
moral truth within the soul. And farther than this I think we should go here. We
should come to place comparatively little value upon doctrines, which we are unable
to convert into life-force, from which we cannot gather spiritr.l guidance and
strength. If the truth which we possess is not digestible, it is very poor stuff. But,
without further amplification here, I ask your attention tothe great matter suggested
by the text—THE CONDITIONS OF SPIRITUAL ASSIMILATION, 1. And the first I mention
is, something to be assimilated. The process denoted by this word is only the
changing of one substance into another. Thus, the tree takes the air and the sun-
light, and the rain, and turns them into tree, into roots and trunk, branches and
fruit, into its own peculiar life, very leaf on your vine in spring-time is an open
mouth, asking for these surrounding substances, that it may convert them into life
for itself. It does not want light and heat and moisture, as such. It does not lay
them up as such, counting them treasures. No, but silently, surely, swiftly, it
assimilates them to itself. The sunbeam, when your flower gets hold of it, is no


= geetiied


omap, vi] ST. JOHN. 545


fee I LL AS Ry ne EE er
longer a sunbeam. No; but it is blood in the veins of your rose, it is the blush
upon its cheek, it is sweet odour filling the air. Now, not otherwise is it with the
life of the soul. This life, like all others, grows by the process of assimilation.
But there must be something to be assimilated ; and what this something is the
text distinctly affirms. It is Christ, who is the bread of life, the bread which is
turned into life within the soul. Christ, and not something else; not philosophy,
not art, not knowledge. Where in the history of the world has any of these sup-
ported moral life? ‘Look at ancient Egypt, ancient Greece, Christ is its food ; but
this means the true Christ, and a whole Christ. The soul cannot live on the Pope,
or what of Christ may come through the Pope. It needs a whole Christ. Then,
again, take the case where Christ is shorn of His sympathy, of His boundless
love, of His ineffable yearning, and the same result is apparent. The soul starves.
Its bread again is only half bread. Then there is another half Christ, the senti-
mental one. A Christ who is no sin-bearer, who holds no relation to the Divine
law as its atonement—a Christ, of whom it can, only by the widest possible meta-
phor, be said, that He was made acurse—a Christ with no blood! And the same sad
result of spiritual life is here again witnessed. Souls are starved. 2. The second
condition is a good moral atmosphere. This implies two things, First, that your
homes should be favourable to Christian life; and second, that your daily business,
outside the home, should be such and so conducted as to be the same. No church,
no religious privileges, can do much for any man or woman, who either hasno home,
or whose home isa bad one, Why, suppose you only gave your body one or two
hours a week of pure atmosphere. Could you preserve health? Could you live?
If you go from the church into an atmosphere of frivolity and selfishness, of acri-
mony and impurity, you will be sure to arrest the process of spiritual assimilation.
Shun evil and corrupt association. It is said that the Upas-tree is girt in with a
circle of dead and rotting carcases of bird and beast. So, upon every side of these
corrupt rings, are strewn the dead consciences, the lost souls of men. See to it,
then, that you breathe the atmosphere of love and of kindness, of purity and of
honesty, day by day. 3. The third condition of spiritual assimilation is activity,
the exercise of the new and true life. Duty isa Divine and immutable condition
of moral growth. “He that saveth his life shall lose it.” Selfish idleness will kill
any soul. Something you must do for this world in which you live, if you would
do the best for yourself. 4. A fourth condition of spiritual assimilation is thought,
intelligence, Better believe half of what you do, intelligently, with your whole soul,
than believe it all, languidly, ignorantly. 5. The last condition of spiritual
assimilation which I mention, and the great one, is the presence of the vital
principle—the vital principle which philosophy cannot find out, which chemistry
cannot detect. See those two trees. One of them lifts up its bare and shrunken
branches ; the other is covered with leaves, and the birds sing among its branches.
Yet the air, the sunshine, the moisture, all within reach of both of these trees.
What makes the ditference? Why, in one the vital principle is present, from the
other it has departed. Take two members of the same family again. One stands
before the cross, only to fallin worship, The other hunts through the soil, wet
with the blood of the Saviour, for gold, and lifts up his face to blaspheme, when he
finds it not, The crossis life to the one, but death remains in the case of the other,
Two or three remarks in conclusion. 1. It is Christ who is the Bread of Life—
not the Church, not truth, not doctrines; but Christ the personal Christ. 2.
Christ being the Bread of Life, character becomes a good test of the soundness of
faith. He who is pure, who is Christlike in conduct, must have partaken of Him
who is the only bread of such a life. 3. Many-of usare daily guilty in this matter.
We transgress, year after year, the plainest laws of spiritual health and of moral
growth. (S.S. Mitchell, D.D.) |The Bread of Life :—Hvery one acknowledges the
golden cornfields to be full of the highest spiritual teaching. It is as if He who
gave us the Written Word, which we call the Bible— the Book’”’—specially de-
signed the harvest-field to be to it a sort of companion volume; and to that purpose
filled it to overflowing with the most striking and beautiful illustrations, which
should be at the same time bright enough to catch the attention of the most un-
tutored, and profound enough to richly repay the deepest study of the thoughtful
and learned. Nor would our Saviour allow this beautiful supplementary volume to
be neglected or overlooked, Let us listen for a moment to what science has to tell
us of the character and position of corn in the economy of nature. Corn belongs
to the second great order of plants—the lily order; and according to the evolu-
tionist’s theory it is either a lily in the making, or in a degenerate and degraded form,


— a


“=


546 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cuaP. VL


——_—_—————————


This latter theory is the generally accepted one. In process of the ages the corn-
plant which was, and is still, of the lily order, gradually developed the invaluable
property of producing corn, and did this at the expense of its beauty. It separated
itself from its beautiful sisters, laid aside the glory of the coloured vesture and ele-
gance which belonged to it as of right, and took instead the russet garments in
which we see it now clad; and all in order that it might be of service in its day and
generation, and give its own life and substance for the life and support of others.
If this were so, what a wonderful little parable we have in its history of the law of
self-sacrifice, and of the blessing and reward attending such sacrifice: for what ig
it that really happens to the corn as a result of its self-surrender? We call it now
the “ staff of life.’ That is its usual and well-fitting title. To be singled out from
all other plants in the world as the very staff of human life were, I say, marvellous
honour for so small and insignificant a plant. But more than that; in giving its
life as the staff of ours it,becomes itself a partaker of a nobler nature. In eating
it we incorporate its nature with ours, so that it becomes part of our very selves—
bone of our bones and fiesh of our filesh—and in a very real sense it comes in this
way to participate with usin the enjoyment of human life. Whata striking illus-
tration we have here, then, of some of our Saviour’s words! Jesus said, ‘‘ He that
loveth his life shall lose it, and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it
unto life eternal; and the life-history of the corn emphasizes this truth in a way
so remarkable that no one can help being impressed by it. But we have not
exhausted this lesson even yet, nor have we reached a thousandth part of the honour
God has designed to bestow upon the self-abasing little plant; for when the Lord
Jesus Himself came down from heaven to give His life for the world, and one day
stood and looked around Him for a figure by which He might signify something of
His own Person and office, He could find nothing better to His purpose than the
little corn-plant in its so-called degraded form and russet-dress. ‘I am the Bread
of Life,” He said, “I am the living Bread which came down from heaven.” We
can well appreciate the aptness of that simile. The plant that had laid aside its
lily-dress, and put off all its glory—clothivg itself in russet-brown, and stooping
very low, that it might give its life for the many—and, moreover, that could even
then only become life-giving bread by being first bruised and crushed and broken—
I say we can well perceive how fitting a type in all these particulars it was of Him
‘‘who made Himself of no reputation,” &c. ‘ Wherefore God also hath highly
exalted Him,” &. (John Crojts, M.A.) The Bread of Life:—1. Every living
thing is a feeding thing. That it feeds is the test and signal that it lives. 2. More-
over, every living thing, whatever it may be, whether lowest in the scale of existence,
or highest, must have food appropriate to itself, or it cannot live. Thereis a pathetic
story which comes to us from the earlier explorations of the vast island of Australia.
In the central deserts of that island there grows a strange plant called the nardoo,
bearing leaves like clover. The Englishmen Burk and Wells, who were making
these explorations, in the failure of other food, followed the example of the natives,
and began to eat the leaves and roots of this plant named nardoo. It seemed to
satisfy them ; it seemed to fill them with a pleasant sense of comfort and repletion,
But they grew weaker every day, and more emaciated ; they were not hungry, for
the plant seemed to satisfy the calling of hunger. But all the effects of an unfilled
hunger began to appear in them; their flesh wasted from their bones, their strength
leaked till they scarcely had the energy of an infant; they could not crawl on in
their journey more than a mile or two a day. At last one of them perished of star-
vation; the other was rescued in the last extremity of it. On analysis, it was
discovered that the bread made of this plant lacked an element essential to the
sustenance of a Kuropean. And so, even though they seemed fed, the explorers
wasted away, and one of them died, because they were feeding on a sustenance in-
appropriate. 3. Now all this is true of man’s higher and moral nature. The
mistake men are constantly making is, that they seek to feed their higher nature
upon wrong food, which may satisfy for the time, but in the long run cannot keep
back the pangs of a noble spiritual hunger. 4. This is what Christ came into the
world to be to men—the appropriate, satisfying, sustaining, upbuilding food for their
highest nature. (1) Christ, the Bread of Life, feeds and fills the human hunger for
Divine sympathy. (2) Divine forgiveness, (3) Divine helping. Lessons: 1. Do
not refuse the Bread of Life because there are some things in Him you cannot
understand, any more than you refuse the bread upon your tables, though there are
mysteries in it that no science can explain. 2. See the adaptation to our needs of
the great truth of our Lord’s Divine-human nature, He could not be the Bread of


ee


CHAP. VI.] ST. JOHN. 547
a ee re
Life to us did He not possess such a nature. 3, Learn the essential meaning of
religion. The essential meaning of my physical life is, that I come into contact
with food. The essential meaning of my religious life is, that I as really and as
utterly come into the Food of my spiritual nature—Christ. (W. Hoyt, D.D.)


Ver. 36. Ye also have seen Me and believe not.—The reason of faith:—1. The
grand distinction of Christianity is that it makes its appeal to faith, and upon that
rests the promise of salvation, 2. But this is the scandal of men. If we hold any
truth by reason, perception, or on evidence what need of holding by faith ?
And if we hold it without such evidence what is belief, but a surrender of our
proper intelligence? 3. It is proposed to show how it is that we, as intelligent
beings, are called to believe, and how, as sinners, we can in the nature of things,
be saved only as we believe. This text sets us at the point when seeing and
believing are brought together as not united ; in ver. 40 they are united. 4. It stands
on the face of the language—(1) That faith is not sight but something so different
that we may see and not believe; (2) That sight does not include faith or supersede
the necessity of it, for after sight faith is expected; (3) That sight is supposed to
furnish a ground for faith, and involving guilt when faith is not exercised. Let us
look at three kinds of faith. I. Take the case of stent. It has been a great
question how it is we perceive objects. Berkeley denied that we saw them at all.
The persons who saw Christ had only certain pictures cast in the back of the eye
which were mere subjective impressions. How then do we bridge the gulf between
sensations and their objects; how it is that having a true picture in the back of the
eye we make it a tree. Some deny the possibility of any solution; but the best
solutions conceive the soul to take these forms as more than objects perceived, that
we complete sensation or issue it in perception by assigning reality to the distant
object. What is this but the exercise of a sense faith. We thus see by faith, II.
Take that raITH wHIcH, after perception is completed, assIGNsS TRUTH TO THE THINGS
SEEN, and takes them to be historic verities. Thus after Christ had been seen in
the facts of His life, it became a question what to make of those facts—whether
there could have been conspiracy or self-imposition in the miracles. The mere
seeing of a wonder never concludes the mind of the spectator. How many testify
to having seen the most fantastic wonders, and yet they very commonly conclude
by saying they know not what to make of them, doubting whether sleight of hand,
ventriloquism, &c., may not account for them. The evidence to one who saw Christ
was as perfect as it could be; but all that can be said 1s that a given impression
has been made, and that impression is practically nought till an act of intellectual
assent is added. Then the impression becomes to the mind a real and historical
fact, a sentence of credit passed. III. We come now to Curistman raitH. This
begins just where the last-named faith ends. That decided the greatest fact of
history, viz., that Christ actually was. But what is now wanted and justified and
even required by the facts of His life is a faith that goes beyond the mere evidence
of proportional verities, viz., the faith of a transaction; and Christian faith is the
act of trust by which one being, a sinner, commits herself to another Being, a
Saviour. In this faith—1. Everything is presupposed that makes the act intelligent
and rational. That Christ was what He declared Himself to be and can do what
He offered to do, and that we can commit ourselves to Him. 2. The matters
included in this act are the surrender of our mere self care, the ceasing to live from
our own point of separated will, a complete admission of the mind of Christ, a con-
senting to live as infolded in His spirit. 3. Great results will follow. (1) The
believer will be as one possessed by Christ, created’ anew in Christ Jesus. (2) New
evidence will be created. As in trying a physician new evidence is obtained from
the successful management of the disease, so the soul that trusts itself to Christ
knows Him with a new kind of knowledge; has the witness in himself. Lessons,
1. The mistake is here corrected that the gospel is a theorem to be thought out and
not a new premiss of fact communicated by God to be received of men in all the
threefold gradations of faith. 2. We discover that the requirement of faith, as a
condition of salvation, is not arbitrary but essential for deliverancefrom sin. What
we want is God, to be united to Him and thus to be quickened, raised, made
partakers of the Divine Nature. 3. We perceive that mere impressions can never
amount to faith, inasmuch as it is the commitment of our being to the Being of
Christ our Saviour. 4. It is plain that what is wanted in the Christian world is
more faith. We dabble too much in reason. We shall never recover the true
apostolic energy without it. (H. Bushnell, D.D.‘ Christ the true bread must be


¥ we i a i Md ,
fi + we ae


548 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. ‘[cHAP. VR


—


both seen and appropriated :—Christians grow weak because they let their meat
and drink stand by them. It is not the flesh in the pot, but the flesh in the stomach,
that gives nourishment. It is not the drink in the vessel, but the drink taken
down, that revives. Stir up spiritual hunger, and that will make you feed heartily
on Christ. Eat and drink Christ by meditation, eat and drink Him by application.
Let vour faith draw in Christ in every ordinance. Keep your spiritual meals as
constantly as you do your other meals. Your eating will help you to a stomach.
Satisfaction and hunger are mutual helps one to another. Eating and drinking
other meat takes away the appetite, but it increaseth the spiritual appetite. Fixed
times of spiritual feeding every day are marvellous profitable. When you have
prayed, call your heart to account what it hath taken in of Christ. When you have
been reading, ask it what nourishment it hath received from the word. When the
Lord’s Supper is over, inquire what refreshment is received. Put yourselves forward
to frequent, constant, actual feeding. It is a pity such precious meat and drink
should stand in corners when the soul hath so much need of it. (Ralph Robinson.)
Christian faith :—If a man comes to a banker with a letter of credit from some
other banker, that letter may be read and seen to bea real letter. The signature
also may be approved, and the credit of the drawing party honoured by the other, as "
being wholly reliable. So far what is done is merely opinionative or notional, and

there is no transactional faith. And yet there is a good preparation for this ; just

that is done which makes it intelligent. When the receiving party, therefore,

accepts the letter, and entrust himself actually to the drawing party in so much

money, there is the real act of faith, an act which answers to the operative, or
transactional faith of the disciple. Another and perhaps better illustration may be

taken from the patient or sick person as related to his physician. He sends for a
physician, just because he has been led to have a certain favourable opinion of his
faithfulness and capacity. But the suffering him to feel his pulse, investigate his
symptoms, and tell the diagnosis of his disease, imports nothing. It is only the
committing of his being and life to this other being, consenting to receive and take

his medicines, that imports a real faith, the faith of a transaction. In the same

manner Christian faith is the faith of a transaction. It is not the committing of

one’s thought, in assent to any proposition, but the trusting of one’s being to a

being, there to be rested, kept, guided, moulded, governed, and possessed for ever.

(H. Bushnell, D.D.)


Ver. 37. All that the Father hath given Me shall come unto Me, and him that
cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast out.—The certainty and freeness of Divine
grace :—I. GRACE TRIUMPHANT IN SPECIALITY. 1. Christ leads us up to the original
position of all things. All men are naturally from the beginning in the hand of the
Father as Creator, Governor, and Source and Fountain of election. 2. He proceeds
to inform us of a great transaction. That His Father put His people into the hands
of His Son as the Mediator. Here was the Father’s condescension in giving, and
the Son’s compassion in receiving. 3. He assures us that this transaction in eternity
involves a certain change in time. The only token of election is the definite
open choosing of Christ. 4. He hints at a power possessed by Him to constrain
wanderers to return, Not that any force is used, but by His messengers, Word,
and Spirit, He sweetly and graciously compels men to come in accordance with
the laws of the human mind, and without impairing human freedom. Weare made
willing in the day of Christ’s power. 5. He declares that there is no exception to
this rule of grace. Not some but all, individually and collectively. II. Grace
TRIUMPHANT IN ITS LIBERALITY.* 1. The liberality of its character: “him that
cometh,” the rich, poor, great, obscure, moral, debauched. 2, The liberality of the
coming: no adjective or adverb to qualify. Not coming to the sacraments or
worship, but to Christ. Some come at once; some are months in coming; some
come running; some creeping ; some carried ; some with long prayers; some with
only two words; some fearfully; some hopefully, but none are cast out. 3, The
liberality of the time. It doesn’t say when. He may be seventy or only seven; at
any season; on anyday. 4, The liberality of the duration. “Never cast thee
out,” neither at first nor to the last. 5. Something of the liberality is seen in the
certainty, “in no wise.” It is not a hope as to whether Christ will accept you,
You cannot perish if you go. 6. There is great liberality if you will notice the
personality. In the first clause, where everything is special, Jesus used the large
word ‘ all” ; In the second, which is general, He uses the little word ‘‘ him.” Why?
Because sinners want something that will suit their case. This means me. (C. A,


CHAP, Vi.J | ; ST. JOHN. 549
- a
Spurgeon.) An account of the persons that come to Christ :—1, What is meant by
coming to Christ? (1) An outward coming in application of the means. When
we come to His ordinances we come to Him. (2) Closing with Christ, embracing
Him, believing on Him, and submitting to Him. Coming not with the feet but with
the heart. 2. What is meant by the Father giving men to Christ ? (1) In God’s
eternal purpose and counsel. (2) In the drawing of our hearts to Him when
God by His Spirit persuades us to close with Christ. This giving is mutual : Christ
is given to us and we to Him, so there isa marriage-knot drawn and contracted
between us, I. Att THAT THE FarHrR HATH GIVEN Mz sHALL come To Mz, 1.
This is an expression of some latitude and universality—< all” (Eph. i. 4,55 2
Pet. iii, 9). From which we learn how to make our calling and election sure,
viz., by closing with the conditions of the gospel. We may know whether we are
given to Christ by coming to Him. 2. This is an expression of restriction. None
come to Christ but such as are given to Him (John vi. 44; 2 Cor. iii. 5; Phil. ii.
13), The reasons why none come to Christ but those whom God gives to Him are
—(1) Because all others are ignorant of Him, and without the knowledge of Christ
there is no coming to Him (Matt. xvi. 16,17). (2) There isa perverseness in their
wills and affections, so that though many know Him, they hang off from Him
(John iii. 19), so there must also be a drawing of their hearts which is the work of
God alone. 3. From the word ‘‘ come” we learn that men by nature are distant
from Christ. 4. From the word “ given” we see that all men are in the hands of
God, for none can give what they have not got. II. Curist’s ENTERTAINMENT OF
THOSE WHO comE To Him. 1, His reception. (1) He will take them into friendship
with Himself (Matt. xi. 28; Isa. lv. 7; Ezek. xxxiii. 11). (2) None excepted (Rev.
xxii. 17). There is nothing to exclude (Isa. i. 18; 1 Tim. i. 15). (3) What an
encouragement to all men to close with Christ. (a) The nature of our sins cannot
exclude us, since Paul, Manasseh, Mary Magdalene, &., found mercy (Psa. xxv.
11). The ground of God’s pardon is not our sin, but His grace (Isa. xliv. 3, 24, 25).
(b) Nor the number of our sins (Hos. xiv. 4; Jer. iii. 1), (c) Nor any supposed
imperfection in our humiliation. We are humbled sufficiently if we come. (4)
Consider the great advantage of coming. (a) Pardon and the life of justification
(Isa. lv. 7; Mic. vii. 19). (b) Power over sin and the life of sanctification. (c) Com-
fort and peace of conscience. (5) To enlarge, we may come not only in conversion,
but after it, for assurance, greater measures of grace, and progress. Let us then
come boldly (Heb. iv. 16). 2. His custody and preservation, ‘I will keep him in.”
(T. Horton, D.D.) The Father’s gift the sinner’s privilege :—I, THE EXPRESSION.
‘¢ All that the Father,” &c. 1. Number. Who can measure the amplitude of ‘‘all’’?
2. Definiteness. Not one more or less. 3. Relation. The Father sends His Son
to men and men to His Son. The conditions of this relation are the Incarnation
and Atonement on the part of Christ ; coming or believing on the part of men. * 4.
Donation. This was mediatorial. 5. Value. What must be the worth of that
which the Father could give and Christ accept? II. Toe promisn. ~ * Shall come
unto Me.”? 1. The certainty. ‘‘He shall see of the travail of His soul.” 2. The
act. (1) Externally, they shall be brought in the providence of God under the
means of grace. (2) Spiritually. If you have come to Christ you have entered into
the meaning of four words—conviction of sin, the suitableness of Christ, ven-
turing on Christ, continual coming to Christ. III. Tur mncouracement. ‘‘I
will in no wise cast out.” 1. Personality. ‘‘Him.” Sin is personal, so must
salvation be. 2. Extent. Christianity is the only universal religion; it can take
root everywhere because it makes its offer to everybody. 3. The removal of doubts.
(1) On the part of sinners. (a) When they have been called late in life; but
remember the dying thief. (b) Sin suggests doubts, It is not what you have been,
but what you are willing to be. (c) Unworthiness and infirmity create doubts. (d)
Doubts arise from ignorance, All these are removed by the invitation. (2) On the
part of saints. (a) Many feel a sense of inward corruption. (b) Others are
conscious of stupidity and perverseness. (c) Lowness of attainment suggests
doubts; and (d) Remaining guilt and imperfection. But what are these in the light
of the promise, ‘‘ Him that,” &c.? (Dr. Andrews.) Encouragement to seckers
from the purposes and promises of God :—I. Gon’s Gracious puRPOsE. 1. God the
Father is the prime Mover in the scheme of redemption. Beware of regarding
the Father as an enemy and the Son as a friend. The Father’s love is perpetually
magnified in Scripture. 2. The Father hath given His Son a multitude which no
mancannumber, 3. This ift was a very burdensome one to the Son. Aransom must
be paid and satisfaction given. 4. The acceptance of the gift was most willing, for


—~.


550 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omap. vt.


a


the Son gave Himself to receive it (Eph. v. 25). II. Tue aRvTicLE oF THE COVENANT
which secures the actual union of His people to the Redeemer. “Shall come unto
Me.” 1. What is meant by coming to Christ? (1) Seeking, implying a sense of
need, danger, misery, condemnation, ruin. (2) Finding, including an enlightened
understanding, and the revelation of the Saviour as suited to the sinner’s necessities.
(3) Appropriation. 2. Theinstrument of calling sinners is the Word, the Law with
its warnings and threatenings, the gospel with its invitations and promises. 3. The
effectual agent is the Spirit. We preach like Ezekiel to dry bones until the heavenly
breath breathes upon them. III. Tux promise. “Him that cometh,” &e. The
preacher’s commission is as unlimited as this promise. ‘‘Go ye into all the world,”
&c. 1. Our encouragement to go forth under this commission is drawn from our
knowledge of God’s purpose. This assures us that our labour shall not be in vain.
2. No degree or kind of guilt will be a bar to the sinner’s reception if he will but
come. 3. Surely then the expostulation is timely, ‘‘ Why will ye die?” (1) Why
go on in ways you know to be ruinous? (2) Why keep away from Jesus when
you are sure of a weleome? 4. Whose fault will it be if you perish? Yours, not
God’s. (W. Hancock, M.A.) Comers welcomed :—I. GRoUNDS ON WHICH THEY
FEAR REJECTION. 1. Supposed omission from the number of the given, in which
case they deem it hopeless to come. 2. Greatness of guilt—they are too bad to be
received. 3. Absence of merit—they are not good enough to beaccepted. 4. Late-
ness of repenting—they are too old to be welcomed. 5. Defects in believing—their
faith is too feeble or not of the right sort. II. Reasons wHY THEY ARE SURE OF A
wELcomE. Christ will not cast them out. 1. Fortheirsakes. He knows—(1) The
value of the soul, (2) The greatness of the peril. (3) The blessedness of salvation.
2. For His Father’s sake. ‘To do so would be to place dishonour upon Him whose
will He had been sent to perform. 3. For His own sake. Since every sinner saved
is—(1) An increase to His glory. (2) A triumph of His grace. (3) A trophy of
His power. (4) A subject added to His empire. 4. For the world’s sake. How
could the gospel prevail if it got noised abroad that one was rejected. Lessons—
1. Despair for none. 2. Hope forall. (2. Whitelaw, D.D.) High doctrine and
broad doctrine :—Consider—I. Tum Eterna purposr. 1. If all that the Father
giveth to Christ shall come to Him, then some shall come, and why should
you not be among them? One says, ‘‘Suppose I am not one of the elect”;
but suppose you are—or, better still, leave off supposing altogether and go
to Christ and see. 2. Those who come to Christ come because of the Father
and the Son. They come to Christ not because of any good in them, but because
of the Father’s gift. There never was a soul who wanted to come but Jesus
wanted him to come a hundred times as much. 3. They are all saved because
they come to Christ, and not otherwise. There is no way of salvation for peculiar
people. The King’s highway is forall. 4. If I come to Christ, it is most clear
that the Father gave me to Christ. II. Tur rnvernastine cosren. 1. “ Him that
cometh,” &ec., is one of the most generous of gospel texts. Generous—(1)
As to the character to whom the promise is made. ‘ Him,” the atrocious
sinner, the backslider, you. (2) The text gives no limit to the coming, save
that they must come to Christ. Some come running, some limping, &c. (3)
There is no limit as to time. Young and old. 2. The blessed certainty of salvation
Sir c I will not, not,” or ‘‘ never, never cast out.’? 3. The personality of the text
—‘* Him,” that is, thee. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Coming to Christ :—Every stage
of the Redeemer’s life confirmed the delighiful fact, that ‘God sent not His Son
into the world to condemn the world,” &c. I. Tue oBsEcT oF APPROACH. Prophets
spake of Him, that around Him should throng the sons and daughters of woe. Jacob
said, when dying, ‘Unto Him shall the gathering together of the people be.
Isaiah said, ‘‘ Unto Him shall men come”; and He Himself said, “All that the
Father hath given Me,” &c. ‘And I, if I be lifted up, will'draw all men unto Me.”
He possesses qualifications to relieve our wants, in opposition to all assumed
characters. 1. He is infinitely wise. 2. He is of illimitablejpower. 3. He is of
boundless compassion: and by possession of these, He is dblé to save to the utter-
most all that come unto God by Him. II. Tue purrosks :FoR WHICH WE ARE TO
come, 1, For instruction. We are ignorant of ourselves—of God—of Christ—of
the way of salvation. He is the light of the world—the great prophet. “All thy
children shall be taught of the Lord,” &c. 2. For pardon. Weare guilty, and need
pardon. ‘Him hath God exalted with His right hand,” &. ‘In whom we have
redemption through His blood—the forgiveness of sins,” &c. Whosoever believeth
in Him shall receive remission of sins, 3. For strength. We have duties to per-


CHAP. VI.) ST. JOHN. 551


form, difficulties to encounter, trials to endure. Without Him we can do nothing:
but He has said, ‘* My grace is sufficient for thee,” and always remember as a check
to indolence and supineness, that though without Him we can do nothing, ‘‘ we can
do all things through Christ, which strengtheneth us.” 4. For peace. He is the
Prince of Peace. ‘*My peace I leave with you,” &c.; and we, as ministers of
Christ, preach peace through the blood of His cross. 5. For eternal life. ‘I give
unto My sheep eternal life.” He is the record, ‘‘God hath given unto us eternal life,
and this life is in His Son.’? III. How we are to coms. A bodily act is not
intended; many do this, and not come at all. Jesus said, when they thronged
around Him, ‘ Ye will not come unto Me that ye might have life”; but a spiritual
act is meant; and does it not remind us that we are naturally at a distance, not
locally, but spiritually ; and hence arises the necessity of the agency of the Holy
Spirit—* No man can come unto Me,” &e. 1. We come by prayer: ‘‘ Hence,”
says Paul, ‘‘let us come boldly to the throne of grace.” 2, By faith. ‘ Without
faith it is impossible to please God,” &c. (1) It regards His Divinity. (2) His
humanity. (3) That He is the appointed medium of approach—“ I am the way,
the truth, and the life.”’ 8. With humility on account of our sin. 4. Contrition.
Not sorrow merely for its consequences, but from a view of its nature, and the
Being against whom it is committed. ‘That godly sorrow which worketh repent-
ance to salvation,” &c. IV. Tae cERTAINTY oF AccePTaNcE. ‘I will in no wise
cast out.” 1. From the promises and invitations of Scripture. ‘And the Spirit
and the Bride say, Come.” ‘Ho, every one that thirsteth.” ‘Come unto Me, all
ye that labour.” ‘‘ Wherefore, He also is able to save to the uttermost.” “As I
live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure.” ‘ Not willing that any should perish,”
&c. 2. From the examples of the Scripture. There stands a Manasseh, a
Magdalen, St. Luke, a Thief on the Cross, and a Saul of Tarsus. Go to heaven,
and ask if Jesus was willing to receive them? The question shall give a fresh
impulse to the song, while they swell the strains, and cry, ‘‘ He loved me, and gave
Himself for me.” Goto the regions of darkness, and ask of them, Is one there that
applied to Him? and, while anguish swells their bosoms, they will answer, No; we
despised and rejected Him, and would not have Him to reign over us. Go to the
north, east, west, and south, and ask believers whether Jesus did not receive them
graciously. They will all give their testimony—While a great way off, He ran and
met me, and fell upon my neck and kissed me. Conclusion: address to those
already come—those coming—and those at a distance. (The Pulpit.) Coming
to Christ :—I have read of an artist who wanted to paint a picture of the prodigal
son. He searched through the mad-houses, and the poor-houses, and the prisons,
to find a man wretched enough to represent the prodigal, but he could not find one.
One day he was walking down the streets and met a man whom He thought would
do. He tald the poor beggar he would pay him well if he came to his room and sat
for his portrait. The man agreed, and the day was appointed for him to come.
The day came, and a man put in his appearance at the artist’s room. ‘ You made
an appointment with me,” he said, when he was shown into the studio. The artist
looked at him, and said, “I never saw you before.” ‘‘ Yes,” he said, “I agreed to
meet you to-day at ten o’clock.” ‘You must be mistaken, it must have been some
other artist; I was to see a beggar here at this hour.” ‘“ Well,” said the man, ‘I
am he.” “You?” ‘Yes.”~‘ Why, what have you been doing?” ‘ Well, I
thought I would dress myself up a bit before I got painted.” ‘ Then,” said the
artist, ‘*I do not want you; I wanted you as you were; now you are no use to me,”
That is the way Christ wants every poor sinner, just as he is. (D. L. Moody.)
Coming to Christ :—‘‘ My next step,” said an anxious inquirer, ‘is to get deeper
conviction.” ‘* No,” said a Christian friend, ‘‘ your next step is to go to Christ just
as you are. He does not say, come to conviction, come to a deeper sense of sin,
which you have been labouring to get, but ‘Come unto Me.’” “Ah,” she
exclaimed, “I seeitnow. Oh, howself-righteous I have been, really refusing Christ,
while all the time I thought I was preparing to come to Him.” “ Will you go
to Jesus now?” Humbly, yet decisively, she responded, “ Yes, I will.”” And the
Lord in the richness of His grace and mercy enabled her to do so. (Clerical
Library.) Christ the Saviour of all who come to Him:—I. Our Dury To CHRIST.
To come to Him. 1. How. (1) By repentance (Matt. xi. 28; Mark i. 15). (2) By
faith. (a) Assenting to Him (Heb. xi. 6) that He is an only (Acts iv. 12) and all-
sufficient Saviour (Heb. vii. 12). (b) Receiving Him (John i. 12) for our Priest, to
atone (Heb. ix. 12) and to make intercession (Heb. vii. 25; 1 John ii. 1); for our
Prophet (Deut. xviii. 15 ; Acts ili. 22), to make known God’s will and to enable us


552 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omar ve


a
to know it (John xvi. 13); for our King (Isa. ix. 6; John xviii. 36; Matt. xxviii.
18), to subdue our enemies (Heb. ii. 14), to rule over us (Psa. cx. 1-3), 2. What
for. (1) Pardon (Acts v. 31). (2) Acceptance (Rom. v. 1). | (3) Purity (Titus ii.
14; Acts iii. 26). (4) Eternal life (John v. 40; Matt. xi. 28). IL. Curist’s
pRoMIsE, that if we come to Him He will in no wise cast us out. 1. What are we
to understand by this? That He will receive us (Titus ii. 14) are The number
of His people (1 Peter ii. 9); (2) His love and favour (John xiii. 1); (3) His care
and protection (John xvii. 12); (4) An interest in his death and passion; (5) A
participation of His grace and spirit (John xvi. 7); (6) His intercession (John xvii.
y); (7) His presence and glory (John xvii. 24), 2. Howdoes this appear. (1) We
have His promise. (2) This was the end of His coming (John iii. 16; vi. 39, 40).
III. Mortvrs to come To Carist. 1. Are we in debt? He will be our Surety (Heb.
vii. 22). 2. Are we in prison? He will be our Redeemer. 3. Are we sick? He
will be our Physician (Matt. ix. 12). 4. Are we arraigned? He will be our
Advocate, (1 John ii, 1). 5. Are we condemned? He will be our Saviour (Rom.
viii. 34). 6. Are we estranged from God? He will be our Mediator (1 Tim. ii. 5).
7. Are we in misery? He will be our Comforter (Psa, xciv. 19), 8. Are we weary?
He will give us rest (Matt, xi. 28). Wherefore come to Him, (1) Presently. (2)
Cheerfully. (3) Sincerely. (4) Resolutely. (Bp. Beveridge.) The all-important
advent:—I. Tue xventT. There are various advents. 1. The incarnation. 2.
Through the Spirit. 3. At the judgment. 4. That of our text—a man’s coming to
Christ. This is dependent on the first, is made effectual through the second, and
secures that the third shall be blessed and glorious. II. Tur consequence. Those
who come will not be cast out. 1. Because it is not in Christ’s nature todoso. 2.
Because He has shed His blood for this very purpose. 3. Because He has said it,
which is enough. IJ. Tue manner. 1, Direct—not through any mediator. 2.
As you are. 38. As you can. 4. Now. (J. Vaughan, M.A.) Coming unto
Jesus :—Take every other verse out of the Scriptures, and leave but this, and you
have a foundation on which a world of souls may build their hopes and never be
put to shame. Hear it, impenitent sinners, alarmed souls, desponding believers,
rejoicing saints. I, THE PERSON POINTED our. What is meant by coming to Him.
1. Negatively. (1) Not to the Scriptures, they only testify of Him (chap. v. 39, 40).
(2) Not the Church, that is only a means, not the fountain of grace, (3) Not prayer,
that is a well of salvation but not salvation. (4) Vers. 5, 22-24, show how possible
it is to come, and yet not to come to Christ Himself. 2. Positively. Christ
addresses the spiritual part of man’s nature, and the invitation implies—(1) A for-
saking of sin. Tocome to is to come from (2 Cor. vi. 14-18). (2) A renouncing of
self. (3) Faith which worketh by love (vers. 35, 68, 69). IL. THs assuRANCE GIVEN
CONCERNING THE Person INDICATED. 1. The assurance itself, (1) It is unrestricted.
(2) Personal. (8) Based upon the good “ will” of Christ. (4) Emphatic, ‘‘ in no
wise.” 2. The grounds of the assurance. (1) The purposes of the Father. (2)
The death of Christ. (3) The resurrection of Christ. (4) The work of the Spirit.
(5) All God’s attributes make it sure. Conclusion: 1. What say you to this? 2.
Transpose the text, ‘‘Him that cometh not to Me I will cast out.” (S. Miller.)
The gospel welcome :—I. THE sTaTES OF MIND WITH WHICH WE SHOULD comm. The
previous part of the text need prove no stumbling-block. Allit affirms is that those
whom the lather gives do come to Christ. Put the two together and they affirm
the absolute freeness of the Divine grace, and exhibit that grace as acting in con-
currence with our voluntary powers. Salvation is neither arbitrary, mechanical,
norcompulsory. We must come—l. With childlike and dependent trust. (1) The
primary element of all true faith, which is the movement of mind and heart towards
God, is simple reliance on the gospel testimony that Christ is all-sufficient for the
purposes of salyation. (2) The great strength and stay of this faith is that it
enables the soul to rely exclusively upon a personal Redeemer, (3) This absolute
casting of ourselves on Christ is not offered as a permission, but as a positive
command, 2. With chastened humility and godly sorrow, repentance and faith
stand together in the gospel commission, aud are always united in the experience
of the faithful. ‘Going and weeping.” The prodigal. 3. In the spirit of total
self-renunciation. Leave self, righteousness, sin, &c., and come to Mz. IL. Tur
ENCOURAGEMENT AND CONFIDENCE we have in coming to Christ. 1. ‘* Him that
cometh” or is coming, in the very act of coming now. It is a con-
stantly repeated act; alike necessary in regeneration and_ sanctification.
This includes all of whatsoever country, church, condition, rank. (1) Hear it
ye young. There is a sense in which your coming to Christ may be too late, but


a


nap. vi] ST. JOHN. 558
ae


there is none in which it can be too early. (2) Ye middle aged whom harassing


cares disquiet. He will allow for everything but a refusal to come. (3) Ye aged.
Perhaps the harvest is passed and ye are not saved. 2. “In no wise.” (1) But
I have stayed away too long. (2) I am a backslider. No matter. 3. Has Jesus
ever cast any one out? No. (1) All the glorious perfections of His nature bend
Him to welcome you. (2) The mighty price paid for your redemption. (3) The
purpose and promises of God. Conclusion: Not to come is to be rejected ; not to
be saved is to be lost; there is no middle state. (D. Moore, M.A.) Invitations of
the gospel—the sinner’s warrant :—In the courts of law if a man be called as a
witness, no sooner is his name mentioned, though he may be at the end of the
court, than he begins to force his way up to the witness-box. Nobody says, “* Why
is this man pushing here ?” or, if they should say, ‘‘ Who are you?” it would be a
sufficient answer to say, ‘‘ My name was called.” « But you are not rich, you have
no gold ring upon your finger!” ‘No, but that is not my right of way, but I was
called.” ‘Sir, you are not a man of repute, or rank, or character!” ‘It matters
not, I was called. Make way.” So make way, ye doubts and fears, make way, ye
devils of the infernal lake, Christ calls the sinner. Sinner, come, for though thou
hast nought to recommend thee, yet it is written, ‘‘ Him that cometh unto Me I will
in no wise cast out.” (C. H. Spurgeon.) The essential in religion :—I. WHat
TRUE RELIGION 1s. 1. Negatively. (1) It cannot consist in any feeling of moral
fitness. What need of coming to Christ if our own nature is morally sufficient ?
(2) Nor in the observance of external ritual. The source of the corruptions of
Christianity is the tendency to put form for faith. (3) Nor in simple orthodoxy.
2. Positively. A living relation with a living Christ, II. Tue METHOD of GAINING
TRUE RELIGION. 1, Not thronging about Christ. 2. But coming to Christ by faith.
III. THE PROOF OF THE POSSESSION OF TRUE RELIGION. 1. Not in an old experience
preserved in the memory. 2. Nor in a present release from the fear of death. 3.
Nor in the fervent glow of feeling (these may accompany it), but in the present
proneness of the soul on these words of Christ. Conclusion: Why will you not
come to Christ? 1. Is it because you are afraid of ridicule and what others may
say? ‘* Whosoever shall be ashamed of Me and of My words, of him shall the Son
of man be ashamed.” 2. Is it because of the inconsistencies of Christians ?
**Every man shall give account of himself to God.” 3. Is it because you are not
willing to give up all to Christ? ‘‘ What shall it profit a man,” &. 4. Is it
because you are thinking you will do as well as you can, and that God ought to be
satisfied with that? ‘ Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all.” 5. Is it because you are postponing the matter without
any definite reason? ‘‘ Boast not thyself of to-morrow,” &. 6. Is it because you
fear you will not be accepted? ‘ Him that cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast
out.” (W. Hoyt.) Scripture difficulties :—To thread a needle in the dark is a
thing which no one can do. The difficulty and impossibility, however, does not lie
in the thing itself, but in the circumstances under which it is attempted, Only let
there be light, and the thing is not only possible, but perfectly easy. This will serve
to illustrate our inability to reconcile, understand, and explain certain mysteries in
Divine things ; for instance, to reconcile God’s fixed decrees and infallible foreknow-
ledge with man’s free will and responsibility. Our Lord plainly declares, that ‘‘no
man can come to Him except the Father draw him”; but, at the same time, He
gives the widest and most unlimited invitation—“ Come unto Me, all ye that labour
and are heavy laden, and I will give yourest.” ‘* Whosoever will, let him take of the
water of life freely.” And He charges it as entirely their own fault, if any refuse to
come, and so perish: ‘‘ Ye are not willing to come to Me, that ye might have life.”
(W. Hancock.) I was cruising one day in the western Highlands. It had been a
splendid day, and the glorious scenery had made our journey like an excursion to
Fairy Land; but it came to an end, for darkness and night asserted their, primeval
sovereignty. Right ahead wasa vast headland of theisle of Arran. Howitfrowned
against the evening sky! The mighty rock seemed to overhang the sea. Just at
its base was a little bay, and into this we steamed, and there we lay at anchorage
all night, safe from every wind that might happen to be seeking out its prey. In
that calm loch we seemed to lie in the mountain’s lap while its broad shoulders
screened us from the wind. Now, the first part of my text, ‘All that the Father
giveth Me shall come to Me,” rises like a huge headland high into the heavens.
Who shall scale its height? Upon some it seems to frown darkly. But here at the
bottom lies the placid, glassy lake of infinite love and mercy: ‘“‘ Him that cometh to
Me I will in no wise cast out.’’ Steam into it, and be safe under the shadow of the


554 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. _[cmar. vi


great rock. You will be the better for the mountain-truth as your barque snugly
reposes within the glittering waters at its foot ; while you may thank God that the
text is not all mountain to repel you, you will be grateful that there is enough of it
to secure you. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Character not needed for salvation :—In the
mission at George Yard, Whitechapel, a converted street-singer, who had experienced
much difficulty in getting work for want of a “character,” but who afterwards
became a licensed hawker and distributed tracts as he walked along, said: ‘ Bless
God, I have found out that Jesus will take a man without a character.” (J. F. B.
Tinling, B.A.) The essence of the gospel :—Pluck a green leaf from a bough and
look at it. That leaf, science tells us, is the typicaltree. The tree is built upon
the pattern of that leaf. The tree is only the leaf expanded, and with its various
parts altered to suit new requirements ; but the idea manifest in the leaf is the idea
according to which the tree is made and shaped. For instance, science tells us that
the seed—the starting-point of life to the tree—is only a leaf rolled tight and
changed in tissue and in contents, and so fitted forits special uses. The tree-trunk
is only the leaf-stem made to take columnar form, and greatly lengthened and
strengthened and enlarged. All the mingling mass of branch and bough and twig,
lifting their manifold tracery against the sky, is but the reproduction and increas-
ing of the delicate tangle of veins striking through the green substance of the leaf.
In short, the tree is only the leaf cut in larger pattern. Everything in the huge
tree is adjusted to the method of the little leaf. In the leaf you have the tree in
germ and type. So it is, it has seemed to me, with this short text I have read to
you, ‘“ Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.’’ It is the typical gospel.
In this text we have the whole great gospel in germ and type. The entire system
of the revelation of salvation is shaped after the pattern of this text. (W. Hoyt.)
The accessibleness of Christ :—Have you never read the story of the good ship that
had been a long time at sea, and the captain had lost his reckoning; he drifted up
the mouth of the great river Amazon, and, after he had been sailing for a long time
up the river without knowing that he was in a river at all, they ran short of water.
When another vessel was seen, they signalled her, and when they got near enough
for speaking they cried, ‘‘ Water! We are dying for water!” ‘They were greatly
surprised when the answer came back, ‘‘ Dipitup! Dipitup! You are in a river.
It is allaround you.” They had nothing to do but to fling the bucket overboard,
and have as much water as ever they liked. And here are poor souls crying out,
“Lord, what must I do to be saved?” when the great work is done, and all that
remains to them is to receive the free gift of eternal life. Whatmust youdo? You
have done enough for one life-time, for you have undone yourself by your doing.
That is not the question. It is, ‘‘ Lord, what hast thou done?”’ And the answer
is, ‘It is finished. I have done itall. Onlycome andtrust Me.” Sinner, you are
in a river of grace and mercy. Over with the bucket, man, and drink to the full.
(C. H. Spurgeon. ) Human perversity :—If acompassionate prince wrote over his
palace gate—‘‘Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out,” would poor
beggars reading it need to have these words explained before they could understand
them? And if the good man kept his word, and received all who asked his help,
would his porch be ever empty night or day? Yet has Jesus, the Prince of Life,
emblazoned these words in large, shining letters above His gates of grace, and
ever kept His promise to help all the destitute and miserable who come to Him,
and thousands of sinners are found to this hour who will not understand them,
and millions of sinners who care nothing about them. (H. G. Guiness.)
Abundant mercy :—You say, ‘‘ Do not get the invitation too large, for there is nothing
more awkward than to have more guests than accommodation.” Iknowit. The
Seamen’s Friend Society are inviting all the sailors. The Tract Society is inviting
all the destitute. The Sabbath schools are inviting all thechildren. The American
and Foreign Christian Union is inviting all the Roman Catholics. The Missionary
Society is inviting allthe heathen. The printing-presses of Bible Societies are going
night and day, doing nothing but printing invitations to this great gospel banquet.
And are you not afraid that there will be more guests than accommodation? No!
All who have been invited will not half fill up the table of God’s supply. There are
chairs for more, There arecupsformore, God could with one feather of His wing
cover up all those who have come ; and when He spreads out both wings, they cover
all the earth and all the heavens, (T. De Witt Talmage, D.D.) None cast out by
Christ :—In some of the hotels on the road to the lead and gold mines of California
there is constantly to be found in the register the names of persons with “ D.B o
opposite to them. This means “dead broke,” and it is the custom never to. refuse


omar. vi.] ST. JOHN. 555


a meal to these poor fellows who have risked and jlost their all in these precarious
ventures. (H. O. Mackey.) Whosoever comes is saved :—A messenger came to a
Sunday-school superintendent and said: ‘‘ Hasten as quick as you can, there is a
boy in a garret that wants to see you: he is dying.” The Sunday-school superin-
tendent hastened to the place, and in the garret, in the straw, lay a boy who had
been crushed by a cart. He was dying; and as the superintendent entered, the boy
said: ‘‘Oh! Iam so glad you have come. Didn’tI hear you say the other Sunday
that ‘ whomsoever comes to God he would be saved?’” ‘ Yes,” replied the super-
intendent, ‘‘I said about that.’’ ‘‘ Well,’ said the boy, ‘‘ then Iam saved. I have
been a bad boy, but I have been thinking of that, and I have been saying that over
to myself, and Iam saved.” After he had seen his superintendent, his strength
seemed to fail, and in afew moments he expired, and the last words on his lips were:
«‘ Whomsoever cometh to God, He will in no wise be cast out.” He did not get the
words exactly right, but he got the spirit. Mercy for all :—Men are going to
ruin; but not like the boat that was seen shooting the rapid, and had reached
a point above the cataract where no power could stem the raging current. To
the horror of those who watched it shooting on to destruction, a man was seen
on board, and asleep. The spectators ran along the banks. They cried; they
shouted; and the sleeper awoke at length to take in all his danger at one
fearful glance. To spring to his feet, to throw himself on the bench, to seize
the oars, to strain every nerve in superhuman efforts to turn the boat’s head
to the shore, was the work of an instant. But in vain. Away went the bark to
its doom, like an arrow from the bow. It hangs a moment on the edge of the
gulf; and then, is gone for ever. Suppose a man to be as near hell!—if I could
awaken him, I would. The dying thief was saved in the act of going over into
perdition. Christ caught and saved him there. And He who is mighty to save,
saving at the uttermost can save, though all our life were wasted to its last breath,
if that last breath is spent in gasping out St. Peter’s cry, ‘‘ Save, Lord, or I perish!”
(T. Guthrie,D.D.) A Saviour for the lost :—“T am lost,” said Mr. Whitefield’s brother
to the Countess of Huntingdon. ‘‘Iam delighted to hear it,” said the Countess.
“Oh,” cried he, ‘‘ what a dreadful thing to say!” ‘‘ Nay,” said she, “ * for the Son
of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost’; therefore I know He is
come to save you.” O sinner, it would be unreasonable to despair. The more
broken thou art, the more ruined thou art, the more vile thou art in thine own
esteem, so much the more room is there for the display of infinite mercy and power.
The gospel for dying hours :—You may know the name of Mr. Durham, the author
of a famous book on Solomon’s Song, one of the most earnest of Scotland’s ancient
preachers. Some days before he died he seemed to be in some perplexity about his
future well-being, and said to his friend Mr. Carstairs, ‘‘ Dear brother, for all that I
have written or preached, there is but one Scripture which I can now remember or
dare grip unto now that I am hastening to the grave. It is this—‘ Whosoever
cometh unto Me, I will in no wise cast out.’ Pray tell me if I dare lay the weight of
my salvation upon it.” Mr. Carstairs justly replied, ‘‘Brother, you may depend
upon it, though you had a thousand salvations at hazard.” You see it was a plain,
sinner’s text that He rested on. Just as Dr. Guthrie wanted them to sing a bairn’s
hymn, so do dying saints need the plain elementary doctrines of the gospel to rest
upon, (C. H. Spnrgeon.) Jesus a great Saviour :—Remember He never did cast
any one out. Never yet! Neverone! I have declared this everywhere, andI have
said, “ If Jesus Christ casts any one of you out when you come to Him, pray let
me know; for I do not want to go up and down the country telling lies.” Again I
give the challenge. If my Lord does cast out one poor soul that comes to Him, let
me know it, andI willgiveup preaching. I should not have the face to come forward
and preach Christ after that; for He Himself has said it, ‘* Him that cometh to Me
I will in no wise cast out’; and He would be a false Christ if He acted contrary to
His word. He cannot cast youout; whyshould He? ‘Oh, but then I am so bad.”
So much the less likely is He to refuse you, for there is the more room for His grace.
(Zbid.) Christ never fails:—When a man brings out a patent medicine, he
publishes verifications of the efficacy of his physic, He getsa number of cases, and
he advertises them. I suppose they are genuine. I should not like to be hanged
if they were not. I suppose, therefore, they are all accurate and authentic. But
there is one thing which you never knew a medicine advertiser do: he never
advertises the failures of the medicine. The number of persons that have been
induced to buy the remedy, and have derived no good from it: if these were all
advertised, it might occupy more room in the newspaper than those who write of a


556 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. VI.


cure. My Lord Jesus Christ is a Physician who never had a failure yet—never once.
Never did asoul wash in Christ’s blood without being made whiter than snow. Never
did a man, besotted with the worst of vice, trust in Jesus without receiving power to
conquer his evil habits. Not even in the lowest pit of hell is there one that dares to
say, ‘I trusted Christ, and I am lost. I sought His face with all my heart, and He
cast me away.” ‘There is not a man living that could say that, unless he dared to
lie; for not one has with heart and soul sought the Saviour, and trusted in Him, and
then had a negative from Him. He must save youif you trust Him. As surely as
He lives He must save you, for He has put it, ‘‘ Him that cometh to Me I will in no
wise cast out.” I will repeat it, “Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast
out.”? You have never come if He has not received you; for He must save those who
trust in Him. (Ibid.) The forgiving mercy of God:—It is reported of Julius
Cesar, that he never entertained hatred against any so deeply but he was willing to
lay down the same upon the tender of submission. As when C. Memnius put in for
the consulship, he befriended him before others of the competition, notwithstand-
ing that Memnius had made bitter invectives against him. Thus the great God of
Heaven, to whom all the Cesars and kings of the earth are tributaries and homagers,
doth never hate so irreconcilably but that true humiliation will work a reconciliation
—let but the sinner appear before Him in a submissive posture, and His anger wiil
be soon appeased. (J. Spencer.) How to come to Christ :—At a gathering in the
West End of London the Rev. Cesar Malan found himself seated by a young lady.
In the course of conversation he asked her if she were a Christian. She turned
upon him, and somewhat sharply replied, ‘‘ That’s a subject I don’t care to have dis-
cussed here this evening.”’ ‘‘ Well,’ answered Mr. Malan, with inimitable sweetness
of manner, “I will not persist in speaking of it, but I shall pray that you may give
your heart to Christ, and become a useful worker for Him.” A fortnight afterwards
they met again, and this time the young lady approached the minister with marked
courtesy, and said, ‘‘ The question you asked me the other evening has abided with
me ever since, and caused me very great trouble. I have been trying in vain in all
directions to find the Saviour, and I come now to ask you to help me to find Him.
Iam sorry for the way in which I previously spoke to you, and now come for help.”
Mr. Malan answered her, ‘‘ Come to Him just as you are.” ‘‘ But will He receiva
me just as Tam, and now?” ‘Oh, yes,” said Mr. Malan, ‘‘ gladly will He do so.”
They then knelt together and prayed, and she soon experienced the holy joy of a
full forgiveness through the blood of Christ. The young lady’s name was Charlotte
Elliot, and to her the whole Church is indebted for the pathetic hymn com-
mencing, ‘Just as I am, without one plea. (Ira D. Sankey.) None cast
out:—I went the other day to St. Cross Hospital near Winchester. There they
give away a piece of bread to everybody who knocks at the door. I knocked as
bold as brass. Why should I not? Idid not humble myself particularly and make
anything special of it. It was for all, and I came and received as one of the people
who were willing to knock. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The comfort of the gospel in a
dying hour :—When the great Bishop Butler was lying on his death-bed, he was
observed to be unusually pensive and dejected, and on being asked the cause, he
replied, “Though I have endeavoured to avoid sin and please God to the
utmost of my power, yet from the consciousness of perpetual infirmities,
I am still afraid to die.” A friend who stood by read him this text. “Ah,”
said the dying man, I have read that a thousand times, but I never felt its
full force till this moment, and now I die happy. (Dean Stanley.)


Vers, 38-40. For came down from heaven, not to do Mine own will, but the will
of Him that sent Me.—The love of the F'ather:—The amazing love of the Father
appears—I, In His spaRInG THIS GUILTY WoRLD, though He spared not the angels
that sinned. His mercy is seen in man’s long day of grace, and in thy day of
grace, sinner. Accept it ere the dawn of the day of judgment. II. In cHoostna
AND DRAWING GUILTY MEN TO BE SAVED. To give men liberty to be saved is love
indeed ; to provide a ransom is love higher still; but its loftiest height is seen in
the drawing operations of Father, Son, and Spirit. But for this men would not
come at all. III. In His arvina Curist TO BE THE WAY OF SALVATION (chap. iii. 16;
Rom. viii. 32). Had He shot down a beam of heavenly light, or caused us to hear
a heavenly note, this would have left us inexcusable; but He gave the best of His
treasures. He resolved that all salvation should be fovnd in the Son, and avoided
leaving any details tous. IV. In His REvEanINe HimseLF ro us THROUGH CHRIST
(chap. xiv. 9, 10), Not through an interpreter, but through One who shared Hig


i i


A


CHAP. vI.] ST. JOHN. 557


nature and was the perfect embodiment of His will. V. In appornTING THE
ETERNAL REWARD FOR REDEEMED SINNERS THROUGH CunisT (ver. 39,40). (A.A. Bonar.)
The purpose of Christ’s coming :—I. CHRIST CAME DOWN FROM HEAVEN. 1. How
does it appear that He was originally in heaven ? (vers. 33, 51, 62). (1) He had a
real existence before He was born (chap. i. 15; viii. 58). (2) He was before the
world (Heb. i. 8); for He made the world (Heb. i. 2, 8, 10; Col. i. 14-16; John i.
1, 2). (8) The existence He had before was purely Divine (Phil. ii. 6-7; Acts xx,
28). (4) The Divine nature was communicated to Him from the Father (chap. v.
26, vii. 29, xvi. 15; Heb. i. 3). (5) Hence He is said to be in heaven by reason of
His Divine essence, which He always had from and with the Father (chap. vi. 62).
2. What are we to understand by His coming down from heaven? His assuming
our human nature, and in it conversing upon earta (chap. i. 14; 1 Tim. iii. 16).
II. As Christ came from heaven, so HE came NoT To DO His owN Witt, BuT His
THAT SENT Him. 1. Christ’s will as He is God is no way different from the Father’s.
2. As man His will was distinct from the Father’s, but still subordinate to it (Luke
xxii. 42); and therefore though He had a will of His own as man, yet He came not
to fulfil that. 3. But our Saviour speaks not here of Himself, either as God or
man, but as God-man, Mediator, one sent from the Father to do His will. From
hence it follows—1. That God’s will only is the fountain of man’s happiness and
salvation. For—(1) God made man upright and happy (Eccles. vii. 29). (2) Man
made himself sinful and miserable (Hos. xiii. 9). (3) But he cannot make himself
happy again (Jer. x. 23). (4) And as man cannot, so none but God can. None
else could find out a way, and none else effect it when found. (5) God hath no
other motive but His own will and pleasure to save man (Eph. i. 5). (a) Man him-
self could be no motive (Deut. vii. 7, 8). (b) Neither could the hope of glory be so,
God receiving nothing thereby (Job xxii. 2,3; Psa. xvi. 2). 2. That Christ came
to accomplish the will of God. (1) By acquainting us with what is necessary to be
known or done in order to be saved (chap. xiv. 2). (2) By giving us, in His own
person, a perfect example (1 Pet. ii. 21; Matt. xi. 30). (3) By enabling us sincerely
to perform whatsoever is enjoined us (chap. xv. 5; Philip. iv. 13). (4) By dying for
us (Matt. xx. 28; 1 Tim. ii. 16). (5) By continuing to intercede for us (Heb. vii.
25; Johni.1, 2). III. Uses. 1. Give God the glory of your salvation. 2. Bless
Him for all the means of it. (1) For sending His Son to die for us. (2) For
sending His Spirit to live within us. (3) For vouchsafing to us the means of grace.
3. Trust Him only for the accomplishment of your salvation. (1) By the pardon of
your sins. (2) The strengthening of your graces (Phil. ii. 13). (3) Power to
persevere (Matt. x. 22). 4. Hence learn also of your Saviour—(1) To submit your
wills to God’s (1 Sam. iii. 18). (2) To do the will of Him who sent you hither.
And it is His will—(1) That you repent (Acts xvii. 30). (2) That you turn from
your sins (Ezek. xviii. 30, xxxiii.11). (3) That you love the Lord with all your
hearts (Matt. xxii. 37). (4) That you earnestly endeavour to work out your salva-
tion (Phil. ii. 12). (Bp. Beveridge.) Perfect obedience:—In a daring inroad
beyond the Tigris, Abu Taher advanced to the gates of the capital with no more than
five hundred horse. By the special order of Moctador the bridges had been broken
down, and the person or head of the rebel was expected every hour by the Com-
mander of the Faithful. His lieutenant, from a motive of fear or pity, apprised
Abu Taher of hig danger, and recommended a speedy escape. ‘‘ Your master,”
said the intrepid Carmathian to the messenger, ‘‘is at the head of thirty thousand
soldiers; three such men as these are wanting in his host.” At the same instant,
turning to three of his companions, he commanded the first to plunge a dagger into
his own breast, the second to leap into the Tigris, and the third to cast himself
headlong down a precipice. They obeyed without a murmur, “ Relate what you
have seen,” continued the Imam. ‘Before the evening your general shall be
chained among my dogs.” Before evening the camp was surprised and the menace
executed. (Gtbbon.) To do the will of God is the true end of life :—The end of
life is not to do good, although many of us think so. It is not to win souls, although
I once thought so. The end of life is to do the will of God whatever it may be.
(Professor Drummond.) This is the Father’s will... that of all which He
hath given Me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.
The Father’s will:—I, Tue Divine sIDE OF THE WORK OF SALVATION. 1. How
sovereign its character. The Father’s will is independent, omnipotent, unchange-
able, perfect, full of love. 2. The obedient servant of that will (ver. 38), Cliist
came not to do His own will, His own private purposes, but ‘ the commandment of
the Father” (Psa. xl.). To this end He took on Him the form of a servant (Isa.


a
558 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHae. VI.
hE OT SNS GS GAA
slii.), (1) This was needful as an example for us; (2) and that we may know that
Christ is no amateur Saviour. He has come willingly enough, but the reason was
the Father’s will. So that when Christ forgives or receives it is the Father’s will.
3. God’s will was that His Son should have disciples, a flock, members, a bride,
brethren. 4. These persons Jesus undertook to keep, and to raise them up at the
last day. II. Tue HUMAN SIDE OF THE WORK OF sALvATION (ver. 40). 1. This is
still based on the Divine will. 2. The same obedient servant is engaged init. 3.
The terms are “ seeing and believing on the Son.”” We cannot see Christ with our
natural organs, but we can read and bear about Him. The eyes of our understand-
ing discern Him; the sense of faith recognizes Him, 4. These terms are open to
all. ‘* Every one,” the man of great or of little faith, rich or poor, &c. None are
excluded but those who exclude themselves. 5. Those who believe in Jesus are in
a present state of safety. They have everlasting life. Conclusion: 1. Never fear
that there is anything in the secret purposes of God which can contradict His open
promises. Never dream if you are a believer that any dark decree can shut you out
from the benefits of grace. 2. Fear not that your believing will end in failure,
(C. H. Spurgeon.) Doing God’s will in our daily work (text, and Mark vi. 3) :—
Scripture speaks of Christ as the Servant of the Lord. But not till most of His
brief history had passed did He begin to preach the gospel. For thirty years He
was engaged in the everyday duties of life. JI. OUR DAILY WoRK MAY BE TRUE
SERVICE FoR Gop. Housework, the innumerable details of a mother’s lot, manual
labour, a sufferer’s duties, commercial life, brain-toil—for these we may be as truly
sent of God as an apostle or a prophet. 1. God’s providential appointment shows
where He wants our work. That we have our particular gifts, that our training fits
us for a special post, that circumstances uncontrolled by us have brought us to a
certain position, that our position involves definite duties—what are these but God
pointing to what He requires us todo. 2. It were unlikely that most of our life
should be necessarily spent on what has no vital bearing on eternity. No small
feature of the blessedness of heaven is that there they serve Him. Consecration to
Christ involves that He be glorified by our entire being. He claims us wholly. It
is said that there is a point in the upper air where the discordant sounds of earth
blend in harmony, the noise of the streets cannot be distinguished from the
murmur of the sea, nor the shout of the battle from the chime of bells, nor the
mirthful song from the sufferer’s moan—there they are one; so the varied parts of
our life may blend in a harmonious voice of praise ceaselessly rising to our exalted
Lord, as by Himself the will of God was done as truly at the carpenter’s bench ag
in the most solemn agony of the garden and the cross. Il. Some or THE prREG-
TIONS IN WHICH THIS DIVINE SERVICE MAYBE RENDERED. 1. Our daily toil tends to the
well-being of others. The domestic servant contributes to the comfort of the
home, the mechanic serves many a real human need, the teacher by voice or pen
spreads knowledge, the physician and the nurse heal the body, the artist trains
some of the higher faculties of the mind, the merchant produces or makes earth’s
productions available ; there is no right calling which does not in some way benefit
mankind. 2. And daily toil presents the best opportunity for manifesting the
religion of Christ. 3. Daily toil is one of the great schools for training spiritual
life, III. Tum possrBiniry OF THIS SERVICE SHOWS THE SACREDNESS OF OUR WORK-DAY
Lire. 1. That all work may be Divine may well reconcile us to tasks that seem
lowly. 2. This suggests a searching test of our belonging to Christ. For what is
it to be Christ’s, but to share His life. If we are only Christians on Sundays we
are not Christ’s. 3. This shows God’s way to larger service presently. Was it not
because He did the will of Him that sent Him in that humble village home, that
He learnt to say in trial more awful than man can know, ‘ Father, not as I will
but as Thou wilt”? (C. New.) Lhe believer's safety :—I. Curtsr winu conn
NONE THAT ARE GIVEN To HIM. 1. How doth God give us to Christ? (1) By making
us sensible of our sin and misery (Jer. viii. 6; John xvi. 7, 8). (2) By making us
humble (Isa. lxiv. 6; Matt. v. 3, xi, 28). (8) By inclining us to piety by His
preventing grace (James iv. 6). (4) By convincing us that Christ was sent to be
our Saviour. 2. How shall those not be lost? They shall have—(1) Their sins
pardoned (1 John ii. 1-2). (2) Their hearts renewed (Ezek. xxxvi. 25; Tit. iii, 5).
(3) God reconciled (Rom. v. 10; 2 Cor, v.18). (4) Their graces confirmed (Luke
xxii. 32). (5) And so their souls eternally saved. (6) This Christ is able (Heb. vii.
25) and willing (Luke xiii. 34) to do. II. Curist’s carr over His PEOPLE REACHES
TO THE DAY OF THEIR RESURRECTION. 1. God’s justice will raise the wicked—(1) To
judge (Hccl. xii, 14; 2 Cor. v.10). (2) To condemn. (3) To punish (Matt. xxv.


> *


CHAP. vI.] ST. JOHN. 559


46). 2. Christ will raise the saints to bless them—(1) With freedom from all evil
ees xxi. 4). (2) With the confluence of all good (1 Cor. ii. 9). III. Uszs. 1.

arefully attend those means which God gives to bring your souls to Christ. 2.
Commit your souls only to Christ’s care (1 Pet. iv. 19). 3. Live as becomes
Christians. (Bp. Beveridge.) Christ our keeper :—The next thing we learn here
is that all these persons Jesus Christ undertook to keep. He should “lose nothing.”
This is a very remarkable expression. The Lord Jesus Christ, therefore, has taken
all those who were given of the Father to Him into His custody. He is the surety ;
He is responsible for them, and He keeps them. (C.H. Spurgeon.) The last day.
I. Each MAN HAS HIS LAST DAY. To each a sun rises of which he never sees the
setting, or a sun sets of which he never sees the rising. II. Faminius HAVE THEIR
Last pay. Households part never to meet again. Ancient lines dating back beyond
the Conquest, at last come to an end. The ancestral mansion is vacant, the title is
extinct, the estates revert to the state. In almost every community ‘‘ there is one
alone, he hath neither child nor brother,’ and his last day will be the last day of
his name and race. III. SraTEs ALSO HAVE THEIR LAST DAY. Where are the
thrones of Carthage and Tyre, of Assyria and Egypt, of Macedon and Rome? One
sun arose on them still breathing, the next found them only matters of history. In
the interval they had passed from something to nothing. And other states occupied
their places; not a few of whom, in their turn, have expired and been laid away in
the cemeteries of history. IV. THe worLp WILL HAVE ITS LasT Day. We have
the best authority for saying that the time will come when the human race will
disappear in a body from the earth, and the planet itself and all things therein be
burned up. Exactly when this greatest of last days will come we are not informed.
The month, the year, the century, the millennium even, in which it will occur, is
not foretold. So little hint is given of its exact locality in history, that its actual
advent will take the world by surprise. Up rolls the last sun from the east as
brightly and steadily as usual. Men get them to their business, their pleasures,
without a thought of change. (E. F. Burr.) The resurrection of believers :—
When a farmer holds in his hand the first ripe sheaf of corn he has in possession an
unassailable proof that he will have a harvest. More decisive and satisfactory
evidence to that effect could not be desired by any reasonable man. Long before
this time the precious seed had been cast into the dark bosom of the earth, when no
tokens were visible that nature possessed any power of life. But in due season the
sun began to warm the sleeping world, the gentle rain from heaven fell upon the
place beneath, and the winds of the south whispered of a coming revival. Soon
there was first the blade, then the ear, and after that the full corn in the ear, soon
the first ripe sheaf telling of a harvest at hand. Christ is the first-fruits of them
that slept, the infallible proof that we shall have a resurrection from the gloomy
winter of death. (Archibald Craig.) The resurrection of believers a certainty :—
Trees, in the winter time, appear to the view of all men as if they were withered and
quite dead, yet when the springtime comes, they become alive again, and, as before,
do bring forth their buds, blossoms, leaves, and fruit, The reascn is because the
body, grain, and arms of the tree are all joined and fastened to the root where the
sap lies all the winter time, and from thence, by reason of so near conjunction, it is
derived in the springtime to all parts of the tree. Even so the bodies of men have
their winter also, and that is in death, in which time they are turned into dust, and
so remain for a time. Yet in the springtime, that is, in the last day, at the
resurrection of all flesh, by means of the mystical union with Christ, His Divine
and quickening virtue shall stream from thence to all the bodies of His members,
and cause them to live again, and that to life eternal. (Strode.)


Vers. 41-51. The Jews then murmured at Him because He said, I am the bread
which came down from heaven.—Weighty truths :—I. Tuat CHRIST’s LOWLY CON-
DITION IS A STUMBLING-BLOCK TO THE NATURAL MAN. 1. Had He come as a conqueror
with royal favours for His followers they would have received Him willingly ; but
their pride refused to believe that the lowly prophet was from God. 2. There is
nothing surprising in this. It is human nature showing itself in its true colours
(1 Cor. i. 23). Thousands reject the gospel because of its humbling doctrines.
Christ’s teaching and example they admire, but His blood they cannot away with.
TI. Man’s NATURAL INABILITY TO REPENT AND BELIEVE, until the Father draws him.
We are spiritually dead and without the power to give ourselves life. The will of
man is the part of him that is in fault. It would not be true to say that a man has
u wish to come, but no power; it is that a man has no power because he has no


»
.


560 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. VI.

nae ETEE TEESE RETESET
desire, III. THe SALVATION OF A BELIEVER IS A PRESENT THING. It is not said
that he shall have life at the judgment day, but that he has it now. (Bishop Ryle.)
Four enigmas solved :—I. The enigma of Cunist’s HEAVENLY ORIGIN (vers. 41-43).
1. The mystery propounded. The difficulty was not that the Messiah’s origin
should be mysterious. The popular opinion, based on Dan. vii. 13, was that when
Christ came no one should know whence He was (vii. 27). But the Jews supposed
that they knew exactly whence Jesus was, and that He should have come down from
heaven seemed absurd. 2. The mystery resolved. What to the learned Scripturists
of His day was a puzzle He left a puzzle. To have refuted their objections by a
declaration of what took place at Bethlehem would only have increased their
incredulity. The true method of faith is not to believe that Christ is Divine because
the Incarnation story is authentic: but that Christ having been powerfully declared
to be the Son of God with power by His resurrection (Rom. i. 4), the account given
of His conception must be correct. II. The enigma of MAN’s RESPONSIBILITY (vers.
43-45). 1. The difficulty set forth. Christ blamed His hearers for their unbelief
(ver. 36), and yet affirmed (ver. 44). This is what the intellect of centuries has
wrestled with. 2. The difficuliy set aside. (1) Not by denying the fact of man’s
responsibility (chap. v. 40, vi. 36). This the Scripture often declares (Rom. i. 18,
vi. 23; Eph. v. 6; 1 Pet. iii. 12) and conscience confirms. (2) Not by explaining
away the alleged necessity of Divine grace (vers. 37, 44, 45). But—(3) By showing
that the Father’s drawing interferes not with human freedom. In naming it a
“ drawing” and a “ teaching” Christ makes it a moral suasion. III. Enigma of
SAVING FAITH (vers. 46, 47). 1. The perplexity stated. Ifno one could come to Him
without first hearing and learning of the Father, then no one could come (Exod.
xxxiii. 20; 1 Tim. vi. 16). This, though not expressed, was clearly the hearer’s
thoughts. 2. The perplexity recognized. He admitted that no one had ever seen
the Father. 38. The perplexity removed. He, the Son, had seen the Father (vers.
19; i. 18; xvi. 28). Hence to hear and learn of the Father was to hear and learn of
Him whom He had sent. To learn of the Father one must be a disciple of Christ.
IV. The enigma of ETERNAL Lire (vers. 47-51). 1. The riddle proposed. The
manna had only supported physical life for a few years, and those who had partaken
of it were dead. The Jews were at a loss to know how Christ could do more for
them than Moses. 2. The riddle read. (1) The bread of life was a living, spiritual
Person (ver. 48). (2) It was in itself living and life-giving. (3) When eaten by
the soul it communicates to the soul the life itself contained. (4) The soul thus
vivified could not die. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) Reason and faith:—There is
nothing so truly reasonable as to exclude reason from the province of faith; and
nothing so truly irrational as to lose sight of reason in things which are not neces-
sarily of faith. The two excesses are equally dangerous—to shut out reason, or te
make it all in all. Faith tells us what the senses cannot tell ; but it never contra-
dicts them ; it is above, and not against them. (Pascal.) Murmuring a great
sin :—Consider that murmuring is a mercy-embittering sin, a mercy-souring sin
As the sweetest things put into a sour vessel sours them, or put into a bitter vessel
embitters them, so murmuring puts gall and wormwood into every cup of mercy that
God gives into our hands. The murmurer writes “ Marah, ” that is, bitterness
upon all his mercies, and he reads and tastes bitterness in them all. As “to the
hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet,” so to the murmuring soul every sweet
thing is bitter. (7. Brook.) Murmuring a hydra-headed sin:—As the River
Nile bringeth forth many crocodiles, and the scorpion many serpents, at one
birth, so murmuring is a sin that breeds and brings forth many sins at once. Itis
like the monster hydra—cut off one head and many will rise up in its room. It is
the mother of harlots, the mother of all abominations, a sin that breeds many
other sins, viz., disobedience, contempt, ingratitude, impatience, distrust, rebellion
cursing, carnality; yea, it charges God with folly, vea, with blasphemy. The
language of a murmuring soul is this, ‘Surely God might have done this sooner
and that wiser, and the other thing better.” (T. Brooks.) No man can come
unto Me, except the Father which hath sent Me draw him.—Coming to Christ :—
I, THE RELIGIOUS ACTION OF WHICH CHRIST sPEAKS. Coming to Him—a frequent
Scriptural phrase expressive of the first step in religion. 1. Its nature. An act
of the soul. There was no impediment to a literal approach. He was always
accessible. Coming is used for faith in Christ as prophet, priest, and king aoa
living on His fulness for all spiritual purposes. 2. Its importance. (1) Implied in
the invitation of Scripture, ‘Come unto Me.” (2) In the promises (ver 37). (8)
In the directions, ‘‘ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.” (4) In the decisions, core


CHAP. VI.] ST. JOHN. 561


ye believe not ye shall die.” II. Tum rnaBinity oF MAN TO PERFORM IT OF HIMSELF.
Whence does this arise? I. Not from any Divine decree, for it would be neither
just nor reasonable to command men to believe and to decree that they should not.
But—2. From the depravity of the heart. 3. And in some cases carnal policy
operates to fetter the.mind to its moral powers. Success in life is the one thing
needful. 4. From religious mistakes. Some imagine that they have come in
sacramental actions, or by the repetition of certain words, or by good works. III.
Tue DIvINE AGENCY BY WHICH IT Is AccoMPLISHED. 1. The Father. He draws by
moral and persuasive means. He draws man as guilty that He may be pardoned ;
as ignorant, that he may be instructed, &c. 2. The process is generally conviction
of sin, desire for salvation, direction to the cross, discovery of a Saviour, trust,
safety, rest. IV. THE DELIVERANCE PROMISED. 1. The solemn event which the
language implies. We must die. 2. The resurrection promised. The event is
general, but the benefit is particular. 3. The agency by which it is effected. “I,”
which shows the dignity and power of Christ. 4. The period of its performance—
‘“‘the last day.”? The day for which all others were made, and to which they are
introductory. Conclusion: 1. In coming to Christ nothing can prevent your salva-
tion (chap. x. 27-29). 2. In turning from Him nothing can save you from
perdition. (J. E. Good.) The Christian now drawn to Christ, and hereafter to be
raised by Him:—I. Our comina to Curist. 1. This is not to be understood
corporeally. It was not so taken by Himself. ‘ Ye will not come,” and yet many
literally come from captiousness, curiosity, for loaves and fishes, and under tem-
porary emotion, and after awhile “‘ went back.” 2. But the expression is taken from
the body, and there is hardly a part of it that has not been used to hold forth the
operations of faith. Sometimes the reference is—(1) To the eye; then believing is
seeing Christ. (2) To the ear; then believing is hearing Him. (3) To the taste;
then believing is eating His flesh and drinking His blood. (4) To the head; then
believing is knowing Him. (5) To the feet; then believing is coming to Him. 3.
This coming to Christ implies—(1) Absence. Else why come? (2) Accessibleness.
How can we come unless we can approach Him? ‘Lo, I am with you alway.”
(3) Application. We come to Him—(a) As the way that we may walk with Him ;
(b) As to a refuge that we may enter Him; (c) As toa fountain that we may be
cleansed ; (d) As a foundation on which we may build; (e) As toa physician for
cure; (f) As our prophet, priest, and king, to be taught, saved, and ruled over by
Him. 4, Faith is trust, confidence. II. Man’s rnanrnrry witout Divine AGENCY.
1. This is a very unwelcome doctrine, even to those who admit human depravity ;
but it is wrapped up in that depravity. 2. This is a Scriptural doctrine—‘ In our
flesh dwelleth no good thing.” 38. This is a doctrine based upon the nature of
things. As we cannot perform natural actions without the concurrence of nature,
how can we perform spiritual actions without the concurrence of the Spirit? 4.
This is a doctrine of importance. (1) It serves to show those who are the subjects
of this work what is their duty to bless and praise God for His sovereign grace.
(2) It serves to show sinners their duty to pray to Him who wills all men to be
saved. III, Tae INFLUENCE BY WHICH THE SOUL 1S BROUGHT To THE Saviour. In
a general way the Father draws thus. 1. There is a confliction of sin. 2, This
produces distress and fear. 3. Hence renunciation and despair. 4. Yet along with
this is hope. 5. Concurrently new desires after Jesus. 6. Reception of Jesus as a
Saviour, and reliance on His salvation. IV. Tum FINAL BLESSEDNESS RESULTING
From THIS. 1. The speciality of this reference. He will raise all, but the privilege
is limited to some. 2. The memory of this blessedness. It is the completion of
the blessedness of a persevering Christian life. Without the body the Christian
man would be incomplete. Man will be raised infinitely improved. 3. The
Author of it. Christ is not only the model of this resurrection, but its accom-
plisher. 4. Iis certainty. If it were not so, He would have told them. ‘“‘ Because
I live ye shall live also.” (W. Jay.) Human inability :—I. Man’s INABILITY.
Wherein does this consist? 1. Not in any physical defect. If in coming to Christ
moving the body should be any assistance, or includes the utterance of a prayer,
mancancome. 2. Nor in any mental lack. Man can believe in the Bible and in
Christ as in anything else. But—3. In his nature, whichis so debased by the Fall
that it is impossible for him to come without the assistance of the Holy Spirit. To
enter into the subject of this inability note—(1) Itliesin the obstinacy of the human
will, which is set on mischief and disinclined to that which is good. (2) The
understanding is darkened so that it cannot perceive the things of God until opened
by the Holy Spirit. (3) The affections are depraved and must be renewed. We


; ie <

662 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. VI.
ee ee eee
love that we ought to hate, and hate that we ought to love. (4) Conscience has
been impaired by the Fall, and must be repaired. 4. So that while largely this is a
question of the will, it is not exclusively so, for sometimes even in the regenerate
there is will without power, much more in those who are dead in trespasses and
sins. 5. Were it otherwise, how are we to account for the uniform testimony of the
Scriptures that our salvation is wholly due to God? 6. This doctrine is condemned
for its hurtful tendency. But what doctrine is there that will not hurt a man if he
chooses to make hurt of it? So with this otherwise it only hurts Satan’s kingdom.
7. You are not warranted in saying, ‘‘If I cannot save myself and cannot come to
Christ, I must sit still and do nothing.” There are many things you cando. (1)
To be found continually in the house of God is in your power. (2) To study tke
Word:of God. (3) To renounce outward sin. (4) To make your life honest, sobe:,
righteous. 8. But your want of power is no excuse, seeing you have no desire to
come, and are living in wilful rebellion. Suppose a liar has been a liar so long
that he says he has no power to speak the truth, is that an excuse? If
a drunkard has become so foully a drunkard that he cannot pass a public-
house, do you therefore excuse him? No; because his inability to reform lies
in his nature, which he has no desire to conquer. Il. THe FaTHer’s DRAW-
incs. 1. God draws men by the preaching of the gospel, but not by this
alone, for the men of Capernaum had the gospel in its fulness, and attested
by miracles. There is such a thing as being drawn by a minister without being
drawn by God. 2. Clearly it isa Divine drawing, a sending out of the Third
Person in the Holy Trinity. 3. In this there is no compulsion. Christ saves no
one against his will. 4. How then does the Holy Spirit draw him? By making
him willing. He goes to the secret fountain of the heart and he knows how, by
some mysterious operation, to turn the will in an opposite direction. But he is
saved with full consent, for he is made willing in the day of God’s power. ‘* Draw
me and I will run after Thee.” 5. How this is done is a mystery, but the apparent
way is: (1) He finds a man with a good opinion of himself—an effectual barrier to
coming to Christ—and lays bare the man’s heart, full of sin, so that he stands
aghast. (2) The man saysI will try and reform—another barrier—but the Holy
Spirit shows him he cannot do this. (3) The heart sinks, and the man is ready to
despair—then the Spirit shows him the Cross and enables him to believe. III.
AppiicaTion: 1. One says, ‘‘If all this be true, what is to become of my religion ?
I must give it up and begin again.” That will be better than building on the sand
of your ability, and as soon as you say, ‘‘I cannot come to Christ; Lord draw me,”
grace is begun in your heart, and God will not leave you till the work is finished.
2. Careless sinner, thy salvation hangs in God’s hand, and He is the God thou art
grieving every day. Does not this make them tremble. If so the Spirit has begun
to draw. 3. Some of you are conscious that you are coming to Christ. Itis the
Father’s doing—‘‘ With lovingkindness haveI drawn thee.” 4. Rejoice in this love
those of you who have come. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Things to be remembered :—I.
We must never suppose that the doctrine of this verse TAKES AWAY MAN’S RESPONSI-
BiLiTy to God for his soul. On the contrary, the Bible always distinctly declares
that if any man is lost, it is his own fault (Mark viii. 36). If we cannot reconcile
God’s sovereignty and man’s responsibility now, we need not doubt that it will be
all plain at the last day. II. Nor does Christ’s teaching here Limrr THE OFFERS OF
SALVATION TO SINNERS. On thecontrary, we must hold firmly that pardon and peace
are to be offered freely through Christ to all without exception. We never know
who they are that God will draw, and have nothing to do with it. Our duty is to
invite all, and leave it to God to choose the vessels of mercy. III. We must not
SUppOse THAT WE, OR ANYBODY ELSE, ARE DRAWN, UNLESS WE COME TO CHRIST BY FAITH,
This is the grand mark and evidence of any one being the subject of the Father’s
drawing work. If ‘‘drawn” he comes to Christ, believes, and lives. Where there
is no faith and love, there may be talk, self-conceit, and high profession. But there
is no “ drawing ” of the Father. IV. We must always remember rHat Gop ORDINARILY
WORKS BY MEANS, and specially by such means as He Himself has appointed. No
doubt He acts as a sovereign. But we must carefully maintain the great princ’ple
that God ordinarily draws through the instrumentality of His Word. The man
that neglects the public preaching and private reading of God’s Word, has no right
to expect that God will draw him. The thing is possible, but highly improbable.
V. WE MUST NEVER ALLOW OURSELVES OR OTHERS TO WASTE TIME in TRYING TO FIND
out, as a first question, WHETHER WE ARE DRAWN oF Gop the Father, elect, chosen,
and‘the like. The first and main question is, whether we have come to Christ by


~— emey


OMAP. VI.) ST. JOHN. 563


faith. If we have, let us take comfort and be thankful. (Bp. Ryle.) The drawing


of the Father :—Man is like a waggon sunk in the mire under a heavy load, and
Divine love is the strong team which draws it up and draws it forward. (R. Besser,
D.D.) Just as the magnet does not attract everything, but only iron, so there
must be in man a disposedness of heart, before God’s drawing can take hold of him.
{Theophylact.) A man cannot come to Christ unassisted by the Holy Spirit :—I
have seen a captive eagle, caged far from its distant home, as he sat mournful-like
on his perch, turn his eye sometimes heavenwards; there he would sit in silence,
like one wrapt in thought, gazing through the bars of his cage up into the blue sky;
and after a while, as if noble but sleeping instincts had suddenly awoke, he would
start and spread out his broad sails, and leap upward, revealing an iron chain that,
usually covered by his plumage, drew him back again to his place. But though
tuis bird of heaven knew the way to soar aloft, and sometimes, under the influence
of old instincts, decayed, but not altogether dead, felt the thirst of freedom, freedom
was not for him, till a power greater than his own proclaimed liberty to the captive,
and shattered the shackles that bound him to his perch. Nor is there freedom for
us till the Holy Spirit sets us free, and by the lightning force of truth, breaks the
chains that bind us tosin. (Dr. Guthrie.) Why men cannot come to Christ :—You
see a mother with her babe in her arm. You puta knife into her hand and tell her
to stab that babe to the heart. She replies, very truthfully, “I cannot.” Now, so
far as her bodily power is concerned she can if she pleases, there is the knife, and
there is the child. But she is quite correct when she says she cannot do it. Her
nature as a mother forbids her doing that from which her soul revolts. It is even
so with a sinner. Coming to Christ is so obnoxious to human nature that, although
so far as physical and mental forces are concerned men could come if they would,
it is strictly correct to say that they cannot and will not unless the Father who hath
sent Christ doth draw them, (C. H. Spurgeon.) And they shall be all taught of
God.—The teachings of God opened :—I. WHAT IS IMPORTED BY OUR BEING TAUGHT OF
Gop. 1, Negatively. The text is not to be understood (1) of any extraordinary,
-visional appearances, or miraculous and immediate voice of God (Numb, xii. 8;
Heb. i. 1, 2), (2) nor as opposite to or exclusive of the teachings of men. Saul
was taught of God (Gal. i. 12). Yet the ministry of Ananias was honoured (Acts ix.
4,17). 2. Positively: the teachings of God (2 Cor. iv. 6: John xiv. 26) are—(1)
The sanctifying impressions of the Holy Spirit by virtue of which the soul receives
marvellous light and insight into spiritual things, and this not only at conversion
but continuously (1 John ii. 27; John vii. 17; Jer. xxxi. 33). Sanctification gives
the soul experience of the truths of Scripture. (2) The gracious assistances of
the Spirit as our need requires (Matt. x. 19; John xiv. 26). II. Waar rTHosz
SPECIAL TRUTHS ARE WHICH BELIEVERS LEARN. 1. That there is abundantly more
evil in their natures than they ever discerned before (John xvi. 8-9). There is
threefold knowledge of sin. (1) Traditional in the rude multitude; (2) discursive
in the more rational; (3) intuitive in the divinely enlightened, 2. The wrath and
misery which hang over the world in consequence of sin. Scripture threatenings
were before slighted (Isa. xxviii. 15; Psa. 1. 21); now they see that the wages of
sin is death (Rom. vi.). 3. That deliverance from sin is the greatest business man
has to do in this world (Acts xvi. 30). 4. That though it be obligatory to strive
after salvation, yet one’s own strength is insufficient to attainit. 5. That though
the case be sad itis not remediless. There is a door of hope and way of escape.
6. That there is a fulness of saving power in Christ whereby any soul that duly
receives Him may be delivered from all its guilt and misery (Heb. vii. 25 ; Col. 1.
19; Matt. xxviii. 18). 7. That we can never reap any benefit from the blood of
Christ without union with Christ (1 John v. 12; Eph. iv. 16). 8. That whatever
is necessary in order to this union is to be obtained in the way of prayer (Ezek.
xxxvi. 37). 9. To abandon their former ways and companions (Isa. lv. 7; 2 Cor.
v.17; Psa. cxix. 115), and tosee the beauty and excellency of the ways and people of
God (Psa. xvi. 3; Zech. viii. 23). 10, That whatever difficulties there maybe in
religior. they must not be discouraged or return to sin (Luke ix. 62; 1 Cor. ix. 24).
III. WHat ARE THE PROPERTIES oF Divine TEACHING. God teaches—1. Powerfully
(2 Cor. x. 4; 1 Thess, i.4, 5; 1 Cor. xiv. 25). 2. Sweetly (Song of Solomoni. 3; v. 16).
3. Clearly (2 Cor. iii. 16 ; Luke xxiv. 45). 4. Infallibly (John xiv. 13). 5. Abidingly
Psa. cxix. 98; Jer. xxxi. 33). 6. Savingly (2 Tim. iii. 15; John xyii. 3). 7.

enetratively (Matt. xi. 25; Isa. xxxii. 4). 8. Transformingly (2 Cor. iii. 18; Rom.
vi. 17). IV. WHT INFLUENCE DIVINE TEACHINGS HAVE UPON SOULS IN BRINGING THEM TO
Curist. 1. They have an influence upon the means (2 Oor. iii. 6; 1 Cor. iii.'7).


564 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. formar. v1.
ache RM CN dR EDI Ne
2. Upon the mind to remove what hindered it from Christ. 3. They powerfully
allure the sinner to Christ (Hos. ii. 14). V. Wuy Is IT IMPOSSIBLE FOR ANY MAN TO ~
COME TO CHRIST WITHOUT THE FaTHER’s TEACHINGS. Because—1. Of the power of sin
(1) Sin is co-natural with the soul (Psa. li. 4; Isa. xviii. 8). (2) The power of sin
hath been strengthened by long continued custom which gives it the force of a
second nature (Jer. xv. 23). (3) Sin is the delight of the sinner (Prov. x. 23). 2.
Of the indisposition of man (1 Cor. ii. 14). Before he can come to Christ—(1) His
blind understanding must be enlightened, which is the work of God (2 Cor. iv. 6;
Rev. iii. 17; Eph. v. 8). (2) His hard heart must be broken and melted (Acts v.
31; Ezek. xxxvi. 26). (3) His stiff and obstinate will must be conquered (Phil.
ii.13). 3. Of the nature of faith, everything in which is supernatural. (1) The
habit (Eph. ii. 8). (2) The light (Heb. xi. 1, 27). (3) The adventures (Rom. iv.
18).. (4) The self-denial (Matt. v. 29). (5) The victories (Heb. xi. 33-34; Acts
xv. 9; 1 John v. 4). (John Flavel.) The Christian taught of God:—I. TuE
RECIPIENTS OF THE TEACHING. The people of God; all of them, from the least to
the greatest; and that not only instrumentally but directly. Il. Irs supsxcts.
Spiritual things generally, called—1. ‘ Things of God,” pertaining to Him and our
relationship to Him. His nature and ours; His moral character and ours; His
sovereignty and our dependence and duty; His salvation and our need of it. 2.
“Things of Christ,” relating to His person, offices and work. 3. ‘‘ Things of the
Spirit,” our need of Him; the reality of His influence; His indwelling. III. Its
NecEssiry. 1. They must be taught. Why so? (1) Because an all-wise God
has ordained it. (2) Because our ignorance and spiritual darkness require it. (3)
Because this knowledge is the germ of everything of a saving and holy character
in a sinner’s heart. 2. None but God can effectually teach them. (1) He does
not supersede the teaching of His servants, but energizes it. (2) When the ordinary
means fail He does His own teaching. IV. Irs means. 1. His written Word. (1)
To this all others are subsidiary, and are only helpful so far as they are related to
it. Preaching; creeds. (2) This excludes tradition, modern, so called, inspira-
tion. (3) But the written Word is not sufficient without the aid of the Holy Spirit
to act upon the heart and to apply its truths. 2. His providence. The man of
commerce forgets, e.g., that ‘‘ they that will be rich fall into a temptation and a
snare,” and the God of providence by a calamity brings it to hismind. 3. The
Christian’s inward experience. This harmonizes wonderfully with Scripture, throw-
ing light upon it, and confirming it. V. Irs mrrzcr. God teaches that He may—
1. Save. 2. Comfort. 38. Sanctify. 4. Make useful. 5. Make meet for heaven.
(C. Bradley, M.A.) Divine light necessary to our salvation :—The gospel is a
picture of God’s free grace to sinners. Were we in aroom hung with the finest
paintings, and adorned with the most exquisite statues, we could not see one of
them if all light were excluded. Now the blessed Spirit’s illumination is the same
to the mind that outward light is to the bodily eyes. A compass is of no use to the
mariner unless he have light to see it by. (Zoplady.) Conviction by the Holy
Spirit necessary to conversion :—Take the cold iron, and attempt to weld it, if you
can, into a certain shape. How fruitless the effort! Lay it on the anvil, seize the
blacksmith’s hammer with all your might, let blow after blow fall wpon it, and you
will have done nothing; but put it in the fire, let it be softened and made malleable
then lay it on the anvil, and each stroke shall have a mighty effect, so that you may
fashion it into any form you may desire; so take your heart, not cold as it is, not
stony as itis by nature, but put it into the furnace; there let it be molten, and
after that it can be turned like wax to the seal, and fashioned into the image of
Jesus Christ. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Divine teaching necessary :—No human teacher
can do it. Conscience cannot do it. Law in none of its forms, human or Divine
can doit. Nay, the gospel itself cannot doit. Although the Word of God is the
sword of the Spirit, yet, unless the Spirit of God draws forth that sword, it lies
powerless in its sheath, Only when the Spirit of God wields it, is it quick and
powerful, and sharper than a two-edged sword, piercing to the dividing asunder of
_ the souland spirit, a discerner of the thoughts and purposes of the heart. There-
fore, as the work of convincing the world of sin is one which nothing less than the
Spirit of God can effect—and which yet must be effected thoroughly, if sin is to be
driven out from the world—our Saviour was mercifully pleased to send the Com-
forter to produce this conviction in mankind. (drchdeacon Hare.) Taught of
God :—I. THE PERSONS TO WHOM THE PROMISE 1s MADE. 1. They must be living
ones or they cannot be taught anything. They become so by being quickened
together with Christ (Eph. ii. 5), 2. They are described in Isa. liy. 12, 3. All


i


CHAP, VI.] ‘ ST. JOHN. 565


that the Father hath given Christ (vers. 37, 39). Given (1) in the covenant of grace
to preserve and to teach ; (2) in effectual calling (chap. xvii. 6). 4, In short, they
are those who are loved by the Father, redeemed by the Son and quickened by the
Spirit. II. Waar sHatu roy Be TavcHt? 1. To know themselves (1) as sinful
(Luke xv. 18; Rom. vii. 18). (2) Their own helplessness (Isa. xxxvill. 14; Matt.
xiv. 30; John xv. 5). (3) Their own ignorance (Psa. xxv. 5; Job. xxxvi. 22). 2.
To know Christ as their way of life and salvation. (1) The suitableness of His
righteousness (Isa. xlv. 24). (2) The completeness of His atonement (Heb. i. 26).
(3) The riches and efficacy of His grace (John i, 16; Titus ii. 12). (4) In short
to embrace Him as their wisdom, &c. (1 Cor. i. 36), and their Saviour from the
charge, punishment, guilt, love, and dominion of sin. 3. To use the means of
grace—(1) Prayer; (2) Reading and hearing God’s Word. (38) The Lord’s
Supper. (S. Barnard.) The character of faith :—The text shows us—I. Wuat
FAITH Is. Coming to Christ. II. THe neasonaBLENess or Farru. It is not the off-
spring of a diseased imagination, but the result of Divine teaching. Ill. Tux
IMPORTANCE OF Curist. All God’s teaching is designed to make us feel our need
of Christ. (Preacher’s Analyst.)


Vers. 47-58. He that believeth on Me hath everlasting life.—Everlasting
life:—I. Tux Buxssine, ‘ everlasting life.” Everlasting life was never proposed
in the schools of philosophy to the faith of man, or urged as a principle
or motive to holiness. Those who taught were not sure of it themselves. What
does it mean? We may take three views of it. 1. It is opposed to eternal
death. Eternal death does not mean annihilation or destruction of being, but of
well-being, of happiness and of hope. So eternal life is not mere existence, but
complete well-being. 2. It is distinguished from natural life: is a state of freedom
from all possible evil, and the possession of all possible good. 3. Its complete
spirituality. The people of God are now quickened and made alive. They have
spiritual appetites, senses, powers, passions. They can perform spiritual exercises.
But it doth not yet appear what we shall be. II. THs owNER OF THIS BLESSING.
“He that believeth on Me.” 1. The object of this faith—the Lord Jesus. How
surprised would you be did Paul, or Peter, or James express themselves in this
way! But they well knew that salvation was not in them. Thus they preached
not themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord. 2. Its nature, Belief is the giving
assent to a declaration as true. But credence in itself is much like knowledge.
We may know a thing, and not possess it, or pursue it. Faith always operates to-
wards Christ as its object in a way of trust and dependence, and in a way of appli-
cation too. III. Tur sEason oF PossEssion—now. Not he shall have, but he “hath.”
The believer has everlasting life—1. As his aim. The mariner has the port in his
eye from the day he sails till he enters the desired haven. So is it with the Chris-
tian. 2. In promise. ‘‘In my Father’s house,” &.; “ When He who is our life,”
&e, 3. In trust. And whois the trustee? The Lord Jesus, our Forerunner. He
is gone to take possession. 4. In participation. ‘If any man have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of His.” But Christians have this Spirit, and by this
Spirit is the Christian sealed to the day of redemption. 5. When are Christians
peculiarly indulged with these anticipations ? (1) When they are alone. ‘‘ When
I remember Thee on my bed, and meditate on Thee in the night watches.” (2)
In the sanctuary services. “A day in Thy courts is better than a thousand.”
(3) In trouble. God acts upon the principle of the truest friendship, He is most
near in the time of trouble. (4) In death. IV. Tum GRounD OF THEIR CONFIDENCE.
The fulness of their assurance: “ Verily, verily, I say unto you,” &c. Here it is
truth itself that speaks; and yet Christ employs a double asseveration, so that we
may learn—1l. The duty of belief, ‘O fools, and slow of heart to believe.” 2.
The importance of our having the full assurance of understanding, and the full
assurance of faith, to establish our hearts with grace. (W. Jay.) Believing must
be on Christ only :—As the eye seeks for no other light than that of the sun, and
joins no candles with it to dishonour the sufficiency of its beams, so no created
thing must be joined with Christ as an object of faith. Who would join the weak-
ness of a bulrush with the strength of a rock for his protection ! Who would fetch
water from a muddy pond to make a pure fountain in his garden more pleasant !
Address yourselves only to Him to find a medicine for your miseries and comfort in

our troubles, (S. Charnock.) Certain salvation by believing :—One walking
with me observed, with some emphasis, ‘I do not believe as you do. I am an
Agnostic.” ‘ Oh,” I said to him. ‘Yes. That is a Greek word, is it not? The


566 THE*BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. VE
Me ee eee
Latin word, I think, is ignoramus.” He didnot like it at all. Yet I only translated
his language from Greek to Latin. These are queer waters to get into, when all
your philosophy brings you is the confession that you know nothing, and the
stolidity which enables you to glory in your ignorance. As for those of us who
rest in Jesus, we know and have believed something; for we have been taught
eternal verities by Him who cannot lie, Our Master was not wont to say, “It may
be,” or “It may not be”; but He had an authoritative style, and testified, ‘* Verily,
verily, I say unto you.” Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one jot or
tittle of what He hath taught us shall cease to be the creed of our souls. We feel
safe in this assurance; but should we quit it, we should expect soon to find our-
selves in troubled waters. (C.H. Spurgeon.) Faith in Christ must be personal :—
In Gideon’s camp every soldier had his own pitcher; among Solomon’s men of
valour every man wore his own sword ; the five wise virgins had every one oil in
her own lamp. Whosoever will go to God must have a faith of his own; it must
be “ Thy faith hath saved thee.” (J. Spencer.) Faith, though weak, saves the
soul :—Faith is the eye by which we look to Jesus. A dim-sighted eye is still an
eye; a weeping eye is still an eye. Faith is the hand with which we lay hold of
Jesus. A trembling hand is stilla hand, And he isa believer, whose heart within
him trembles when he touches the hem of the Saviour’s garment that he may be
healed. Faith is the tongue by which we taste how good the Lord is. A feverish
tongue. And even then we may believe, when we are without the smallest portion
of comfort; for our faith is founded, not upon feelings, but upon the promises of
God. Faith is the foot by which we goto Jesus. A lame foot is stilla foot. He
who comes slowly, nevertheless comes. (H. Wiiller.) Everlasting life:—I. In
Curist’s purcHASE. II. In Gop’s promisE. III. IN THE FIRST FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT.
Conclusions: 1. The exclusiveness of the gospel. Without faith in Christ there
is no salvation for any sinner. 2. The charity of the gospel. With faith there is
salvation for all. (W. H. Van Doren, D.D.) I am that Bread of Life.—The
Bread of Life:—I. Tue starF oF tirE. 1. Christ is the life. 2. Where Christ is
unknown there can be no life. (1) Heathenism is death. (2) Unbelief. (3)
Formalism. 3. This life is worth everything and is to be obtained for nothing. 4.
This life supports, not by talking about it, believing in statements concerning it,
but by having and enjoying it. II. The staff of life is usep onLY By FaITH, Faith—
1. Receives. 2. Handles. 3, Tastes. 4. Digests. 5. Enjoys. 6. Grows thereby.
III. ParticiPaTIoN IN IT IS THE PRIVILEGE OF THE Lorp’s FAminy. It is household
bread.. 1. The ungodly are self-excluded. 2. The qualification is the robe of
righteousness, worn only by the Lord’s children. 3. The children participate
through—(1) The Word; (2) the sacrament. (J. Irons.) The bread of life :—
J. A REPRESENTATION OF oUR Saviour. 1. Life is more valuable than all beside.
2. The Scripture represents religion as life. 3. How many people look like life
having the form of godliness without the power. 4. The relation of Christ to this
life. Bread which—(1) nourishes; (2) is corn bruised: so Christ was bruised for
our iniquities ; (3) must be eaten, or is nothing to us: so Christ is nothing till
applied. II. TH MEANS OF DERIVING THIS BENEFIT: coming to Christ and believing
on Him, This reminds us—l, That Christ is accessible, 2. That faith is not mere
sentiment, but a principle of life. 3. Faith is notan isolated but a continuous act.
III. TE warriness His roLLOWERS SHALL ENJOY. 1. They shall never thirst for the
world. Worldly men desire nothing else. 2. They shall not hunger or thirst in
vain. The new creature has wants and appetites, but ample provision is made for
their complete satisfaction. 3, They will not hunger or thirst always. “I shall
be satisfied,” &c. Application: The subject is a standard by which we may
estimate—l. Christ. 2. Our faith. 3. The Christian. (Preacher's Analyst.)
Christ the bread of life :—The analogy between Christ and corporal meat stands
in these three particulars: 1. Sustentation. Corporal meat is for the preservation
of the natural life. The natural life is maintained by meat, through the con-
currence of God’s blessing. It is pabulum vite. Hence bread, under which all
other provision is comprehended, is called the staff of life (Isa. iii. 1). Keep the
strongest man from meat but a few days, and the life will extinguish and go out
(1 Sam. xxx, 12). Jesus Christ is the maintainer and preserver of the spiritual life.
As He give it at first, so He upholds it. It is by continual influences from Him
that the life is kept from expiring. If He withdraw His influx never go little, the
soul is at the giving up of the ghost, even half-dead. 2. Vegetation. Corporal
meat is good for growth. It is by meat that the body is brought from infancy to
childhood, from childhood to youth, from youth to a perfect man, Jesus Christ ig


ee


our. vI.] ST. JOHN. 567


He that earries on a Christian from infancy to perfection. All the soul’s growth
and increase is from Christ. So the apostle, ‘‘ From Him the whole body having
nourishment ministered,” &c. (Col. ii. 19). The branches live and increase by
virtue of the sap which is derived from the root. Christians grow by virtue
of the sap which is to them derived from Jesus Christ. Every part grows by
Christ. 3. Reparation. Meat is a repairer of nature’s decays. When by some
violent sickness the spirits are consumed, the body wasted, the strength lost, meat,
fitly and seasonably taken, helps, through the Divine blessing, to recall all again:
‘his spirit came to him again ” (1 Sam. xxx. 12). Jesus Christ is the repairer of
the soul’s decays. Sometimes a believer, through the neglect of his duty, through
surfeiting upon sin, brings spiritual languishings upon himself; his strength is
decayed, his vigour is abated, his pulse beats very weakly, he can scarcely creep in
the ways of God. In such a case Jesus Christ recovers him, repairs his breaches,
and renews his strength, as in former times, The Psalmist speaks of this: ‘‘ He
restoreth my soul: He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for His name’s
sake” (Psa. xxiii. 3), The saints have every day experience of this restoring virtue
of Christ. (Ralph Robinson.) Christ alone is the bread of life:—Some have tried
to stay their hunger by the narcotics of scepticism, and others have endeavoured
to get eat through the drugs of fatalism. Many stave off hunger by indifference,
like the bears in winter, who are not hungry, because they are asleep. But depend
upon it the only way to meet hunger is to get bread, and the only way to meet your
soul’s want is to get Christ, in whom there is enough and to spare, but nowhere
else, (C. H. Spurgeon.) Your fathers did eat manna.—The bread of life and
manna :—The Palestine Exploration Society, when they came to Tel Hum (Caper-
naum), found what they believed to be the synagogue in which Jesus delivered His
discourse. In turning over the stones, it was with peculiarly sacred feelings that
they found a large block with a pot of manna engraved on its face. Hvery
synagogue had its symbol—one a lamb, another a candlestick, and this, the pot of
manna. We can see Jesus in His synagogue pointing with His finger to this
device over the main entrance, and saying, ‘‘ Our fathers did eat manna,” &c.
(W. Bazendale.) If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever.—Christ the
chosen food of earnest Christians :—When alone with Christ, it was heaven below ;
and in the prayer-meetings, when God’s people were warm at heart, how you
delighted to unite with them! The preaching was marrow and fatness to you.
You did not mind walking a long way on a wet night to hear about your Lord and
Master then. It may be there was no cushion to the seat, or you had to stand in
the aisle. You did not mind that. You are getting wonderfully dainty now; you
cannot hear the poor preacher whose voice was once like music to you. You
cannot enjoy the things of God as once you did, Whose fault is that? The
kitchen is the same, and the food the same: the appetite has gone, I fear. How
ravenous I was after God’s Word! how I would wake early in the morning to read
those books that are full of the deep things of God! I wanted none of your
nonsensical novels, nor your weekly tales, for which some of you pine, like children
for sugarsticks, Then one fed on manna that came from heaven, on Christ Him-
self. Those were good times in which everything was delightful. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
The food of the soul :—Few passages have been so wrested as this. Men have turned
meatinto poison. I. WHAT THESE VERSES DO NOT MEAN. 1. Literal eating and drinking,
or partaking of the Lord’s Supper. We may eat that, and yet not partake of Him.
For—(1) A literal eating and drinking would have been revolting to the Jews and
contradictory to their law. (2) To take this literal view would be to interpose a
bodily act between the soul and salvation, for which there is no precedent in
Scripture. (8) It would involve most blasphemous and profane consequences. It
would shut out from heaven the penitent thief, and admit to heaven thousands of
godless communicants. 2. This view arises from man’s morbid habit of paltry
and carnal sense on Scriptural expressions. Men dislike that which makes the state of
the heart the principal thing, II, Waar THEY.po mxay. 1. “ Flesh and blood ” means
Christ’s sacrifice. 2. “‘ Eating and drinking” means reception of Christ’s sacrifice.
III, Tue PRACTICAL LESSONS THEY suGGEST. 1. That faith in Christ’s atonement is
necessary to salvation. 2. That faith in the atonement unites us to the Saviour
and entitles us to the highest privileges. 3. That faith In the atonement is—(1) A
personal act; (2)adaily act; (3) a conscious act. (Bp. Ryle.) The food of the
soul:—I. In Christ alone can we have any CERTAIN RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE. il
Soul hungers for the knowledge which pertains to its nature and its relation to ita
Creator and destiny. 2. Christ is the Truth, and satisfies this hunger. II. Christ


ey ny Ba by


568 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. v1.


i ood of the soul, because He alone saTISFIES OUR MoRAL NATURES. 1, There
is rou in which every man hungers after righteousness. We seck to relieve our
troubled consciences—(1) By extenuating our faults; (2) by forgetting them ; (3)
by seeking pardon through priests. 2. But there is no satisfaction but in Christ.
He sustains—(1) By justifying grace; (2) by positive holiness. III. Christ is the
bread of life in that from Him we have the HOPE OF THE LIFE EVERLASTING. 1. No
human speculation regarding the future, however pleasing, can kindle real hope.
2. Christ hath brought life and immortality to light, and is “in us the hope of
glory.” (J. M. Ludlow, D.D.) The food that Jesus gave to His own:—1. To
finish His work was bread to Himself; His work finished is bread to His people.
2. His words were startling but necessary. The rock must be laid down although
superficial disciples may stumble, for it is the foundation of the true disciples’ faith
and hope. 3. The Lord’s Supper is not the subject here. Both sacraments are
omitted in John, but he records the fundamental doctrines on which they rest. In
the conversation with Nicodemus we have the ground of the one; here the ground
of the other. Wanting Christ’s sacrifice for sin the Supper would have contained
nothing for us, and wanting faith in Christ crucified, we can get nothing from the
sacrament. 4, Hunger centres naturally in human souls, and men have attempted
to satisfy it—(1) With the good things of this life; (2) with the inanities of self-
righteousness. In the text Christ shows the satisfaction of this hunger. We
have—I. On THE PART oF CuRist—1. His incarnation: the Son as Man. Not man,
a man, a son of man. Neither a son of man nor a Son of God could be our
Saviour. The one is near, but has no power; the other has power, but is. not near.
The Incarnation combines nearness with power to save. 2. His sacrifice. The
Incarnation could not save us. Without shedding of blood is no remission. Christ:
converged all the testimonies from Abel’s sacrifice to His last passover on Himself,
the Lamb of God. II. On THE part or Curistians. They believe and live.
Although it is a spiritual and not a material food, it is a real supply of a real
hunger. The soul’s hunger for righteousness and peace and God is a greater thing
than bodily hunger, and must have a corresponding supply. This is found by the
believer. Christ’s incarnation brings God near to Him, and His sacrifice brings
peace and righteousness. The believer thus has the life of God in Christ. This
life is—1. Present. 2. Everlasting. (W. Arnot, D.D.) The vital relation to
Christ :—I. Hi PRESSES THE GREAT DUTY OF CLOSING witH Him wHicH Hr Hap
ALREADY SET BEFORE THEM. 1. This He did by representing to them the danger to
which they would expose themselves if they declined (ver. 53). 2. By directly
announcing the blessings which are to be obtained by obedience (vers. 54, 55). To
partake of Christ by faith secures—(1) ‘‘ Eternal life”; (2) the resurrection of the
last day. II. He srarrs AND ILLUSTRATES THE RELATION IN WHICH, WHEN THEY
cLos— with Him sy FAITH, HE STANDS TO BELIEVING MEN. 1. It is a mutual
indwelling of believers in Christ and of Christ in them (ver. 56). . 2. It is a relation
of the same kind as subsists between Christ and the Father (ver. 57). 3. Itisa
relation, the certain effects of which is life for evermore (ver. 58). (J. A. Beith,
D.D.) Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man.—Lating Christ’s flesh :—
I, THE MEANING OF THE TEXT. 1. The Romanist holds that it refers to a participa-
tion of Christ’s body in the sacrament. But it cannot mean that; for—(1) The
Lord’s Supper had not been instituted, and as Christ refers to a present duty and
privilege, He could not refer to something that did not then exist. (2) Judas
partook of the Lord’s Supper; had he eternal life? (3) The dying thief did not
partake of the Lord’s Supper, but he had eternal life. 2. The true meaning.
Christ had said many things about bread, about Himself as the true bread, and
about their eating Him as this bread; and in ver. 51 He declares that this bread
and His flesh are one and the same thing. Let us, then, try to understand—
(1) What »read means. In ver. 35 belief, not literal participation, is the process
by, which we become partakers of everlasting life. But belief presupposes the
existence of something to be believed. Then what is there in Christ that I am to
believe? Why, that He is the bread of life. It follows that by “bread ” we are
to understand truth, and by eating reception of that truth. The bread of life, then,
is the doctrine of life—the revelation made by Him who “hath abolished death,”
&c. This is confirmed by the fact—(a) That the Old Testament speaks of doctrine
as meat and drink: ‘“ Wisdom hath killed her beast, . . . and she crieth, Come
and eat of my bread, and drink of the wine,” &c.; and nothing was more common
among the Jews than the representation of doctrine under this form. How natural,
then, that the greatest Jewish teachers should have used this familiar figure to


}
$
:
:


et
eT


“ona. vt.] ST. JOHN. 569


signify ‘‘ I am the doctrine of life.” () In ver. 63 Christ fully meets the difficulty ;
and that He was correctly understood is seen by ver. 68. Note, then—(a) That if
bread means doctrine, then flesh means doctrine; (b) that I am not confounding
Christ’s doctrines with Himself, but expounding them. It is one of the great
doctrines of this book, and let those who deny Christ’s Divinity look to it, that He
is evermore the subject of His own discourse. You might as well take the light out
of the sun, and call it the sun still, as take Christ out of His teaching and call it
His teaching still. Christ and His doctrine are the same: ‘I am the truth.” (2)
What eating and drinking mean. (a) A sense of need—appetite. (b) Activity
towards some appropriate object for the supply of that need. (c) Enjoyment in the
use of the object. (d) Resultant strength. This is eating and drinking literally.
Spiritually, meat and drink are before us in the form of doctrine. (i.) There is
hungering and thirsting after it. (ii.) There is action toward Christ to get that
need supplied: what He commands we obey; what He promises we expect; what
He offers we accept. (iii.) Then there is delight in Christ. (iv.) Finally, spiritual
strength : temptation is resisted, trial endured, work done for God and man; and
the evidence of a man’s living on Christ is hig living for Christ. II. Let me
ENFORCE THE SENTIMENT OF THE TEXT. 1. There is a lesson of obligation. You
have heard of Christ, His incarnation, death, resurrection, &c. What has come out of
the hearing ? Hunger and thirst ? You feel uneasy often, and fear. I want that
uneasiness and fear to develop into a sense of spiritual need. Let this stimulate
action towards Christ; then joy in Christ; then doing what Christ enjoins and
avoiding what Christ forbids. 2. A lesson of privilege. (1) The believer dwells in
Christ ; hence his safety. (2) Christ dwells in him; hence his honour. (3) Hence
the believer’s satisfaction “shall never hunger or thirst.” (4) To crown it all,
“‘ eternal life.’’ Life is the fullest capacity for enjoyment; then what must eternal
life be? (W. Brock, D.D.) Truly eating the flesh of Jesus :—I, WHAT IS MEANT BY
EATING THE FLESH AND DRINKING THE BLOOD oF Curist? 1. What is necessary to it?
(1) We must believe in the reality of Christ; not that He was a myth, but that He
was very God incarnate, who lived, died, and rose again, and is now in His proper
personality, sitting at the right hand of God, frorn whence He will come to be our
Judge. (2) We must believe in the death of Christ, “ blood,” not as an example,
but as the expiation of sin, a propitiation through faith in His blood. 2. What is
this act? (1) Appropriation. A man not only believes that bread is proper food,
he takes it. So we cannot feed on Christ until we make Him our own, and for our
individual selves: for we cannot eat for anybody else. (2) Receiving into oneself.
Bread is taken not to be laid aside or exhibited. Every one must do this from the
empress to the pauper: so the poorest and the richest must receive Christ by faith.
(3) Assimilation. Faith is to the soul what the gastric juices are to the body ; and
so Christ by faith is taken up into the understanding and heart, and becomes part
of the renewed man. He becomes our life. 3. Remarks to set this forth in a clearer
manner. (1) Christ is as needful to the soul as bread is to the body. (2) Meat and


drink do really satisfy. The supply of Christ is as real as the need of Him. (3)


A hungry man is not appeased by talking about feeding, but by eating. So Christ
beckons you to a banquet not to look on, but to feast. (4) In healthy eating there
isarelish, (5) Eating times as to the body come several times a day, so take care
that you partake of Christ often. Do not live on old experiences. (6) It is well to
have set times for eating. People are not likely to flourish who have no regular
meals. So there should be appointed times for communion with Christ. (7) The
flesh and blood of Christ are foods suitable for all conditions, for babes in Christ as
well as old men, for sick Christians and healthy, II. WHat ARE THE VIRTUES OF
THIS EATING AND DRINKING? 1. Life is essential (ver. 53). If you have no life in
you you have nothing that is good. The sinner is dead, and there is no life to be
«« developed” and “ educated” in him. Any good that may come to him must be
by impartation, and it can never come to him but by eating the flesh, &e. Convic-
tions of sin are of no use, nor ordinances, nor profession, nor morality. This is vital
(ver. 54) for soul and body. 2. Substantial. ‘Meat indeed,” &c. The Jewish
feasting was a mere shadow: 80 is pleasure, &c, 3. It produces union (ver. 56).
(1) To live in Christ is the peace of justification. (2) For Christ tolivein us is the
peace of sanctification. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Themeat and drink of the new nature :—
I. Waar Curist must BE To us. Our meat and drink, our everything. 1. The
doctrine of God incarnate must be the food of oursoul. 2. We must feed on
Christ’s sufferings. 3. This meat is not intended to be looked at, but to feed upon
by the heart’s belief. 4. By this means the believer realizes union with Christ, IL.


7.


570 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. | [cHaP. VE.
Riri een aN. Si PUREE ee.
WHAT I8 BOUND UP IN THIS EATING AND DRINKING? 1. He who has not so eaten
and drank has no spiritual life at all. 2. All who have received Jesus in this
manner have eternal life. 8. They have efficient nourishment and satisfaction. 4.
Christ dwells in them and is their strength. 5. They livein Christ and are secure.
III. WHAT REFLECTIONS ARISE OUT OF THIS TRUTH? If I have a life that feeds on
Christ! 1. What a wonderful life it must be! 2. How strong it must be! 3. How
immortal it must be !—4. How itmust develop! 5. What company he that is fed
must keep. (bid.) Meat and drink indeed:—I. How can tHE Lorp Jesus
civE us His FLESH To EAT? 1. In all Christ said He realized that the body is not
the man. He was always seeking to win the soul’s faith which would be the man’s
life. We have bodies; we are souls, 2. Since we are spirits there is fitting food
for us, and Christ warns us off from fleshly ideas by saying, “It is the Spirit that
quickeneth.”’ Christ is the soul’s food in His humanity, character, example, sacri-
fice, spiritual communions. 3. Nothing else can satisfy like this. Every receptive
faculty of our soul can live on that incarnate life and renew strength. ‘‘I live, yet
not I, but Christ livethin me.’’ 4. Christ is the food of the soul in that He pro-
vides and adapts God for man. (1) “In” God “ we live, and move, and have our
being.” (2) But man has failed to live inGod. ‘God is not in all his thoughts.”
Our souls have lost their home food, preferring to it ‘‘ the husks which the swine do
eat.” (3) But God graciously offers Himself to us in Christ Jesus. II. How can
WE BE SAID TO EAT THE FLESH OF THE Lorp JEesus. We are obliged to speak of
spiritual powers in language only worthy to represent the bodily powers. 1. There
is a soul eye which receives the impression of the beauties of the Divine handi-
work. The physical eye sees all things alike. 2. The soul ear can catch Divine
harmonies to which the physical ear is deaf. 3. The hand of thesoul gives all the
meaning to what is done by the physical hand. 4. Christ only extended this when
He represented the soul as having a mouth and a faculty of digestion. Hating and
drinking is a going out of ourselves to lay hold of something outside ourselves that
it may become part of ourselves. Men do not live on themselves. Only God
being an all-sufficient Spirit can do that. The relation of the soul to outside food
we call eating and drinking, believing, thinking, loving, communing. ‘Man does
not live by bread alone.” We eat the flesh of Jesus—l. By the appropriations of
faith. Whatever we believe we take into ourselves, 2. By the cherishing of
thoughts ; by meditations on the perfections of Christ. 3. By the communings of
love. We know how two lovely souls in close fellowship nourish in one another all
that is lovely, pure, and good. Conclusion: 1. What a dignity our Lord has put
on the most ordinary acts of life. 2. Lest we should lose this sacredness out of our
common eating and drinking, Christ has set apart one eating time peculiar to Him-
self. (R. Tuck, B.A.) Meat and drink indeed :—I. WHat I8 HERE UNDERSTOOD
BY FLESH AND BLOOD? 1. Not as the Capernaites did, in a carnal sense, but in a
spiritual. 2. As symbolizing the effects of His body broken and His blood shed, or
the merits of His death and passion, as (1) The pardon of sin by His merit (Matt.
xxvi, 28). (2) The purification of our hearts by His Spirit. 3. The glorification of
our souls in His presence (chap. xvii. 24). II. IN wHar sENSE ARE THEY SAID TO
BE MEAT AND DRINK? 1. Is the body preserved in health by meat and drink? 2.
Made strong? 3. Kept in life? 4. Refreshed? So is the soul by the merits of
Christ. Ill. How is it called meat rinpEED, and drink inpEED? 1. Negatively. Not
as if Christ’s body was really meat for the body, nor as if His body and blood were
substantially turned into real meat and drink, nor as if He referred to any corporeal
eating of Himself in the sacraments, as the Papists hold, basing transubstantiation
on this text ; not considering (1) That He speaks not of a sacramental, but of a
spiritual eating, as appears (a) in that the sacrament was not ordained (chap. vi.4;
vii. 2). (bd) In that he that eateth not of this bread shall die (ver. 53), whereas
svery one that eateth it shall live (vers. 51, 54, 56), (2) Suppose the Sacrament
referred to it,it would not import any transubstantiation of the bread and wine intothe
body and blood of Christ, but rather the tramsubstantiation of the body and blood of
Christ into bread and wine. 2. Positively; because it really, and not only in show

does that for the soul which food does for the body (see chap. xv. 1). Nay,in some
sense, Christ is more really our meat than bread can be. (1) He nourishes our
souls, this only our bodies. (2) He so nourishes us that we shall be for ever satis-
fied (ver. 35), this not. (3) Bodily food so preserves our lives that sometimes it
destroys them; but never so Christ. (4) Food preserves but our natural, Christ
nourishes us to an eternal life (vers. 51, 58). Uszs. 1. (ver. 27). 2. Do not only
labour for it, but feed upon it—(1) Believingly (ver. 35). 2. Thankfully. (Bp.


OD th nye es


CHAP. VI.] ST. JOHN. 571


Beveridge.) Meatand drink indeed :—I. Tue RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN THE FLESH AND
BLOOD OF CHRIST AND MEAT AND DRINK. 1. Both are necessary, the one for the soul, the
other for the body. 2. Both are sweet and desirable to the hungry and thirsty. 3. Both
have to undergo an alteration before they actually nourish. Corn has to be ground,
and Christ had to suffer. 4. Both have a natural union with us. 5. Both mustbe
frequently partaken of. II. Tur TranscENDENT EXCELLENCY OF CHRIST’S FLESH AND
BLoop. 1. They were assumed into the nearest union with the second Person in
the Holy Trinity. 2. They were offered up to God as the great sacrifice for our sins
and purchase of our peace (Col. i. 20; Eph. v. 2). 3. They are the great medium
of conveyance of all blessings and mercies to believers (Col. i. 14-19). Uszs. 1.
Of information. (1) See here the love of the Saviour. (2) Learn hence a ground
of content in the lowest condition. (3) Learn the necessity of faith. What is a
feast to him who cannot taste it? (4) Howexcellent are gospel ordinances which
set Christ forth. 2. Of exhortation. (1) Come with hungry appetites. (2) Feed
heartily on Christ. (J. Flavel.) The food that gives life:—I. THE Foon.
Familiarity with these words and mental indolence have dulled our sense of their
strangeness. However unintelligible to their hearers, they must have been felt as
putting forth strange claims. On any other lips they would have been felt to have
been absurd and blasphemous. Upon Christ’s lips they are that or something very
wonderful. He presents the food of the soul in two forms. 1. He proposes Him-
self. ‘He that eateth Me.” (1) Here you come across the great characteristic of
Christianity, that it is all in the personal Christ. The great note is, ‘‘I bear witness
of Myself.” (2) He sets Himself forth here as the sutticient nourishment for my
whole nature. (a) Do I want truth of any kind except mere physical or mathe-
matical truth? I get it here, social, ethical, spiritual, religious. He is Wisdom:
Heis Truth. (b) Does my heart want nourishing with the selected elixir of love?
His love is the only food for the hungry heart which does not bring bitterness or
turn to ashes. (c) Does my will want for its strength some law known to be good
and deeply loved. Imust go to the Master, and in His loving personality find the
authority which sways, and by swaying emancipates the human will. (3) He proposes
Himself as the food for the whole world. If He is enough for me He is enough for all,
and comes in living contact with all the generations right on to the end of time.
2. He offers His flesh and blood; His earthly life and violent death. It is not
enough to speak in general terms of the personal Christ as being the food of the
spirit. We must feed upon the dying Christ, and lay hold of His sacrifice, and
realize that His shed blood transfused in mystical fashion into the veins of our
spirits is there the throbbing source of life which circulates through the whole of
the inmost being. II. Tue act or caine THIS Foop. The metaphysical language
is familiar in many applications, We speak of tasting sorrow, eating bitter bread,
feeding on love. 1. This participation is effected by faith. (1) ‘‘He that cometh
... believeth.” By the simple act of trust in Him. You may be beside Him for
thousand years, and if there is no faith there is nounion. You may be separated
from Him, as we are, in time by nineteen centuries; in condition, by the difference
between mortality and glory; in distance, by all the measureless space between
the footstool and the throne; and if there go from your heart an electric wire,
howsoever slender and fragile, you are knit to Him and derive into your heart the
fulness of His cleansing power. (2) This trust is the activity of the whole nature,
for faith has in it intellect, affection, and will. 2. The original expression is
employed to describe the act of eating by ruminating animals; a leisurely and
pleasurable partaking; an act slow and meditative and repeated, which dwells
upon Him. The reason why so many Christians are such poor weaklings is
because they do not thus feed on Christ. The cheap tripper cannot take in the
beauty of the landscape. You cannot know any man in a hurried interview, so in
these hurrying days how few of us ruminate about Christ. 3, Our Lord here uses
a grammatical form which indicates the continual persistance of this meditative
faith. Yesterday’s portion will not stay to-day’s hunger. II. Tue consEQquent
tire. 1. Separate from Christ we are dead. We may live the life of animals, an
intellectual life, a life of desires and hopes and fears, a moral life; but the true
life of man is not in these. It is only that which comes by union with and deriva-
tion from God. 2. Bread nourishes life, this bread communicates life. The
indwelling Christ is the source of lifeto me. 3. This spiritual life in the present
has, as its necessary consequence, a future completion. If Christ isin my heart
the life He brings can never stop its regenerative and transforming activities until
it has influenced the whole of my nature to the very circumference (ver. 54).


572 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cuaP. VR


To


(A. Maclaren, D.D.) We must feed upon Christ :—Why should we be hungering
and thirsting, when Christ has given us His flesh to be meat indeed, and His
blood to be drink indeed? Why should we be hanging down our heads like bul-
rushes to-day, when the Lord loves us, and would have His joy to te in us, that
our joy may be full? Why are we so dispirited by our infirmities, when we know
that Jehovah is our strength and our song, He also has become our salvation ?
I tell you, brethren, we do not possess our possessions. We are like an Israelite
who should say, ‘‘ Yes, those terraces of land are mine. Those vineyards and
olives and figs and pomegranates are mine. Those fields of wheat and barley are
mine; yet I am starving.” Why do you not drink the blood of the grapes? He
answers, “I can scarcely tell you why, but so it is—I walk through the vineyards, ‘
and I admire the clusters, but I never taste them. I gather the harvest, and I }
thrash it on the barn-floor; but I never grind it into corn, nor comfort my heart

with a morsel of bread.” Surely this is wretched work! Is it not folly carried to

an extreme? I trust the children of God will not copy this madness. Let our

prayer be that we may use and enjoy to the utmost all that the Lord has given us

in His grace. (C.H. Spurgeon.) ‘No life” without feeding upon Christ :—You

know the modern theory that there are germs alike in all men which only need
developing. This is a philosophical notion, but it is not God’s way of putting it.

He says, “ No life in you.” No, not an‘atom of true life. The sinner is dead, and

in him is no life whatever. If ever there is to be any good thing come into him

it will have to come into him; it must be an importation, and it can never come

into him except in connection with his eating the flesh and drinking the blood of

Christ. (Ibid.) The blood of Christ our only hope:—It is recorded of Samuel

Pearce, a useful and much blessed minister at Birmingham, that, at the time of his
conversion, having read Doddridge’s ‘‘ Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul,”

he took up the idea suggested in that book, and resolved formally to dedicate him-

self to the Lord. Hedrewup a covenant accordingly, and to make it more solemn

and binding he signed it with blood drawn from his own body. But afterwards,

failing in his vows, he was plunged into great distress. Driven therefore into a

more complete examination of his motives, he was led to see that he had been

relying too much on his own strength; and, carrying the blood-signed covenant to

thé top of his father’s house, he tore it into pieces and scattered it to the winds,

and resolved henceforth to depend upon the peace-making and peace-keeping blood

of Christ. Christ the true food and drink of believers:—In respect of that typical

meat which the Jews had lately spoken of (ver. 31), ‘‘ Our fathers did eat manna

in the desert,” &c., our Saviour tells them that is but typical bread, but His flesh

is bread indeed; it is the real substance, of which that was but a mere type and
shadow. Thus for explication. The observation is this. 1. That the Lord Jesus

Christ is,really and truly the food and meat of believers. Flesh is here put for the

whole person of Christ. Jesus Christ, as He is held out in the Scriptures, is the

true, real, and very meat of believing Christians; Christ, as He is propounded in

the gospel, dead, broken, crucified. Christ, in all His perfection, completeness

fulness, is meat indeed to a true believer. It is the very scope of this sermon,

from ver. 27 to 59, in which this truth is inculcated over and over again, and all
objections answered which the carnal reason and unbelief of man’s heart can make

against it, All other food, in respect of this, is but ‘ cibi tantummodo umbra et

vana imago,” as Cameron saith. As natural life, in respect of the spiritual, is but

a shadow of life; so the meat that is appointed for the natural life, if compared

with the meat of the spiritual life, is but a very image of meat. Christ’s flesh is

real meat. 2. The blood of Jesus Christ is drink indeed. Blood is here put for the

whole person, as flesh was. And it is rather His blood is drink than that He is

drink; because the great efficacy of all Christ did lies principally in His blood

(Heb. ix, 22). And in the same respects as His flesh is said to be meat indeed

His blood is said to be drink indeed, And those three things which concur to the

act of eating His flesh concur also to this act of drinking His blood, the mystical

union, saving faith, the ordinances. (Ralph Robinson.) How Christ is to be fed

upon :—1. In the ordinances. These are the conduits. Jesus Christ hath instituted

and appointed His ordinances to be the means of carrying His nourishing virtue to

the soul, The ordinances are the dishes of gold upon which this heavenly meat is
brought, Prayer, reading, preaching, meditation, holy conference, the sacrament; in

these Christ presents Himself to the soul. He that forsakes these can expect no feed.

ing from Christ. ‘*In this mountain will the Lord of hosts make a feast of fat things,”

&c. (Isa, xxv.6). The feast is made in the mountain of God’s house, and the ordi-


CHAP. VI.] ST. JOHN. «673


nances are the dishes on which this meat is set and the knives by which it is carved
out tothe soul. 2. Saving lively faith. This is the instrument. What the hand and
mouth and stomach are in the corporal eating that is faith in this spiritual eating.
Faith is the hand that takes this meat, the mouth that eats it, and the stomach
that digests it, Yea, faith is as the veins and arteries that do disperse and carry
this nourishment to every power of the soul. This is abundantly cleared in this
very chapter (ver. 35), ‘‘He that cometh to Me shall never hunger; he that
believeth in Me shall never thirst.” ‘Cometh’ is expounded by “ believeth.”
Eating and drinking are here put for believing. Crede et manducasti. He that
believes eats, and he that eats not it is because he believes not; Hic edere est
credere. (Ibid.) “e must feed upon Christ for ourselves:—Dr. Bonar, in his
‘¢ Memoir of M‘Cheyne,”’ says of him: ‘‘ He seems invariably to have applied for
his personal benefit what he gave out to his people. We have already noticed how
he used to feed on the Word, not in order to prepare himself for the people, but for
personal edification. To doso was a fundamental rule with him; and all pastors
will feel that, if they are to prosper in their own souls, they must so use the
Word—sternly refusing to admit the idea of feeding others until satiated them-
selves. And for similar ends it is needful that we let the truth we hear preached
sink down into our own souls. We, as well as our people, must drink in the falling
showers. Mr. M‘Cheyne did so. It is common to find him speaking thus:
‘July 31, Sabbath afternoon—on Judas betraying Christ; much more tenderness
than ever I felt before. Oh, that I might abide in the bosom of Him who washed
Judas’ feet, and dipped His hand in the same dish with him, and warned him, and
grieved over him—that I might catch the infection of His love, of His tenderness,
so wonderful, so unfathomable!’” (Sword and Trowel.)


Ver. 59. These things said He in the synagogues.—I. The occasion of this won-
derful revelation to the Church. The desire of the Jews to have the miracle of the
manna repeated. Those of larger views may have had the supply of an army in
thought. II. The pesren was to quench for ever any such ambition. If you desire
a warridr leader I am not of that kind. III. The supstance showed that man’s
true peace lay not in things of sense. Christ’s errand was to bestow spiritual
blessings on all mankind. To this end He must die as a vicarious sacrifice. To
participate in the blessings of this sacrifice there must be faith. The discourse is
a complete resumé of the gospel plan of salvation. (W. H. Van Doren, D.D.)
Capernaum was a busy bright little town; a station on the great road; a garrison
for Roman troops; a port for collecting dues by land and lake; a place of tanners,
dyers, soap-boilers ; a market for oilmen, shepherds, cheesemongers, fruit grocers ;
a halting ground for the buyers and sellers of every kind, the corn-chandlers, the
fishermen, the woolstaplers, the vinters, and the gardeners. Being the first town
on the Lake of Tiberias as you ride in from Damascus, as Arona is the first town
on Lago Maggiore as you come from Turin, it was the port at which any one
coming that way would embark for cities lying south and east on the shore.
Standing on a hill of limestone, rough and rich with the flow of the basaltic rocks
from higher volcanic hills ; having the rich plain and cool lake of Gennesareth at
its feet, with the palm, the orange, and the pomegranate blooming everywhere
about, Capernaum became, like Como or Palanza nearer home, a retreat for the
rich as well as a field of labour for the poor. Most of the Jewish inhabitants, net-
makers, fishermen, farmers, were believers in a physical Messiah ; followers of
Herod, of Judas, of Simon, of John ; Jews of an earnest and yet of a most worldly
type. The strangers who dwelt among those.Jews, like every one trained in the
Hellenic schools, were liberal and tolerant in affairs of faith. Had not the Roman
governor built a synagogue for the Jews at his own expense? ‘‘ Capernaum, pro-
perly spelt Caphar na Hum, was one of the towns most favoured by the Lord. It
was the first place to which He came after His baptism by John. There He dwelt
for a little while with His early disciples, Peter and Andrew, James and John.
Here lived the good nobleman whose son He cured. There too He healed the
demoniac in the synagogue, relieved the mother-in-law of Peter, healed the man
sick of the palsy, and restored the withered hand. There He made whole the cen-
turion’s servant, and raised the daughter of Jairus from the dead. From the
blue waters of the lake He obtained the tribute money, and on its slimy shores,
among the brambles and vines, He spoke the parables of the Tares, of the Sower,
of the Treasure, of the Merchant, of the Net. In the White Synagogue, built by
the Roman soldier, He pronounced His discourses on Faith, on Fasting, on


a> >


574 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaP. VI.
WOO ey a SS ee
Humility of Spirit, on Brotherly Love. Near to Capernaum He fed the five
thousand, walked on the sea, and preached His Sermon on the Mount. He loved
the busy, basaltic town, and after His expulsion from Nazareth He made it the
scene of His ministry. In the words of St. Matthew, a native of the place, it
became His own city. Where, then, was this favoured spot? Strange to say, the
great Churches of East and West, while bent on fixing the sites of events in the
sacred story ... kept no clear record of the scene of so many miracles and
sermons as Capernaum.” (Hepworth Dizon.)


Vers. 60-65. Many therefore of His disciples, when they heard this, said, This
is a hard saying; who can hear it?—The defection of the disciples :—I. Occa-
SIONED BY A HARD SAYING (ver. 60). It was unquestionably hard (vers. 51, 53, 57).
1. Difficult to understand even for Christians (John xiv. 17, 26; 1 John ii. 20, 27),
but especially for unbelievers (1 Cor. ii. 14). 2. Difficult to receive, demanding
humility, self-abnegation (Matt. xvi. 24), whole-hearted surrender (Rom. xiii. 14;
Eph. iv, 22; Col. iii. 8), none of which is easy for the unrenewed. 3. Difficult to
practice. II. ARRESTED BY A HIGH sayiNG (ver. 62). 1. Retrospective (John iii.
13; vi. 88, 51; vii. 29; viii. 38); referring to His pre-existent condition. 2. Pre-
dictive ; foretelling His ascension. 3. Anticipative; cherishing the hope that His
exaltation would resolve difficulties (Matt. xxviii. 17). Jil. Instrucrep By A DEEP
sayine (ver. 63). 1. The announcement of a truth. Only spirit can impart life.
2. The removal of an error that literal eating was meant. 3. The illustration of
a principle. Wrong understanding a stumbling block; right understanding of the
same words life. IV. WaRNED BY A SHARP SAYING (ver. 64). 1. Discriminating.
Christ, then as now, distinguished between those who believed and those who believed
not. 2. Informing. Christ, then as now, showed that He was perfectly acquainted with
characters, works, and ways (Rev. ii. 2, 9,13, 19; iii.1, 8, 15) of His professed followers.
3. Reproving of their guilt. Christ never regarded unbelief as an accident, mis-
fortune, disease, but always as a sin. 4. Sorrowing (Mark iii. 5; vi. 6). V.
EXPLAINED BY A DARK SAYING (ver. 65). 1. A rebuke to their self-sufficiency.
They deemed themselves competent to pronounce judgment on Christ, to gauge His
utterances, to estimate the value of His teaching, and to determine His position in
God’s kingdom. Christ assures them they could do none of these things without
Divine assistance. 2. A declaration of their irreligion. They were yet in their
unrenewed condition, and therefore incapable of receiving the truth. Learn—1l.
The sin of stumbling at Christ’s words. 2. To wait for further light on religious
difficulties. 3. The danger of literalism. 4. The propriety of self-examination
as to whether one truly believes. 5. The possibility of repeating the sin of Judas.
6. The need of daily prayer for Divine grace. (TI. Whitelaw, D.D.) Hard
sayings :—I. For the seL¥-aicutxEous to feel he deserves eternal punishment. II.
For the Laoprcran increased in goods to feel that he is a beggar. III. For the
WISE AND PRUDENT to believe he is a fool. IV. For the man or PLEASURE to
believe that he is selling his’soul for ashes. V. For THE cARNAL MIND to know
that he must owe his salvation to the blood of a crucified Galilean. (W. H.
Van Doren, D.D.) Doth this offend you ?—A certain test :—I. Or wHaT Is aoop ?
That which the unrenewed hate to do. II. Or wHar is trrRuE? That which the
unrenewed hate to hear. III. Or wHatis HEAVENLY? That which the unrenewed
hate to become. (Ibid.) It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth
nuthing: the words I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life.—Chris-
tianity a vital force :—Christianity is a latent spiritual power, designed and
adapted to translate men from a lower and physical life into a higher and
spiritual life. If this be so—I. Waar is A CHRISTIAN Lire? 1. It is the life of
the human soul, derived not from natural laws, or the incitements of society
nor from any human causes, but distinctively a life derived from God; not an
occasional excitement, but the indwelling of a Divine influence. 2. Under such
influence is developed a personal experience differing from any that could
otherwise be developed, which awakens in us a likeness to Christ’s nature and
habits in—(1) Purity; (2) Love; (3) Activity. II. Somm aoop REASONS WHY ONE
SHOULD ENTER IN THIS LIFE. Most have some conception of a character. With
one it is wealth, with another learning, with others art, eloquence, home life.
But these are not you. There is a living, controlling being behind all achieve-
ments: character is the fashioning of that. I urge you, therefore, to accept the
Christian ideal—the man in Christ Jesus—because—1. The Divine power, as a
living influence on your souls, is the only reconstructive force adequate to your


Y
4


| ad


OnAP. v1} ST. JOHN. 575


needs. Those ideals which men form, exterior to themselves, have no trans-
forming power upon their dispositions. What man needs is a perfect control of
his animal nature, his selfishness, pride, sensuality. 2. This developing power
reveals the only harmonizing elements around which all of a man’s nature can
reorganize itself. Love is the only point of crystallization. (1) Crown pride
and there are many faculties which say, ‘‘I will not bow down to pride.” (2)
Crown vanity, and many parts of the soul will say, “‘I am higher than thou.”
(3) Crown reason, and many feelings will rebel. (4) Crown beauty, and there
is not one faculty that under stress of trial will cry, ‘‘O Beauty, save me!”
(5) Crown conscience, and many faculties indeed will follow; but conscience is
a despot. (6) But crown love, and all will acknowledge his supremacy. 3. It
is only in a character fashioned on the model of Christ that we can find relief
from things seemingly or really antagonistic. (1) Aspiration and content. (2)
Conscience and peace. (3) Hope and fear. 4. The Divine power in the soul
harmonizes man with his fellow-men. 5. This Divine power gives to the whole
economy of life and flow of events a reconciliation which nothing else can.
Christ is not working for results that appear in this life alone, but for those
that shall appear in the life hereafter. You do not care what befalls you, so long
as you have the certainty that the end of it shall be right. This redeems death
from being a catastrophe, and exalts it into a victory. Conclusion: If this view
be correct—1. There is a very great difference between reasoning upon Christianity
and testing Christianity. No man is competent to determine questions in regard
to it until he has put his whole soul into the attitude of Christ. ‘There are
multitudes asking for arguments; Christ says, ‘“‘ The words that I speak unto
you,” &c. 2. Is there not reason to fear that many persons who believe them-
selves to be safe come far short of true Christian life? No man is a Christian,
whatever his morality, &c., until Christ’s Spirit dwells in him. 3. No man can
come into this position by his own power. But open your heart and the Spirit will
come in with His vivific power. (H.W. Beecher.) The influence of the Spirit :—
I. ExpnaIn THE PassaGE. When it is said, “It is the spirit that quickeneth ”’—1.
It is not to be understood of the Holy Spirit exclusively, for the same work is
ascribed to the Father and the Son. 2. The spirit does not quicken universally.
‘‘The wind bloweth where it listeth; ” we read of those who were ‘“‘ full of the Holy
Ghost,” and of others which were “sensual, not having the Spirit.” 3. Yet the
Holy Spirit quickens all who are quickened (Ezek. xxxvii. 7; Rom. viii. 12). 4.
He quickens men in their several stations: ministers to preach with clearness
and fervour; private Christians to hear, receive,and do. 5. Though the Spirit
can do this immediately, yet He generally does it by the use of means, and princi-
pally by the Word. II. Tue supsects or His inruvencz. He quickens—1. Our
attention, as in thecase of Lydia. 2. Our judgment (Isa. iv. 4). He leads us to
distinguish between good and evil, to discern the reality of grace. 3. The will, to
choose, embrace and cleave to that which is good. 4. The conscience, stirring it
up to the faithful and vigorous discharge of duty. 5. The memory, to receive
and retain Divine truths, to recollect God’s dealings with us and our conduct
towards Him. 6. The gifts of ministers and private Christians, that they may
be ready in prayer, preaching, and conference, and also those graces which He
has implanted—fear, love, faith, zeal, &c. 7. The dead bodies of the saints
(Rom. viii. 11). Il. Tue zxps ror waica Hx quicxens. 1. To consideration,
without which we should be utterly thoughtless about our spiritual concerns
(Jer. xxiii. 20). 2. To useful inquiries. 3. To fervent and importunate prayer.
4, To holiness of heart and newness of life. 5. To all acts of evangelical
obedience, IV. Improvement. 1. Learn the proper Deity of the Spirit. He that
doeth the works of Deity must have the perfections of Deity. 2. See why God’s
words and ordinances have no greater efficacy. The most persuasive address is
not sufficient without the influence of the Spirit. 3. Let us earnestly pray for
His quickenings. 4, Let us join in the use of means. 5. Grieve not the Spirit.
(B. Beddome, M.A.) _— The necessity of the Holy Spirit :—However learned, godly,
and eluquent a minister may be, he is nothing without the Holy Spirit. The bell
in the steeple may be well hung, fairly fashioned, and of soundest metal, but it
is dumb until the ringer makes it speak; and in like manner the preacher has
no voice of quickening for the dead in sin, of comfort for living saints until
the Divine Spirit gives him a gracious pull, and bids him speak with power.
Hence the need of prayer from both preacher and hearers. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
The Spirit a Quickener :—I. IN THE PHYSICAL CREATION. He brooded over dark


bh”


576 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. _ [omar. vt.
ABS


chaos and quickened it into life, order, beauty, and fruitfulness. This vitalizing


power has never left His realm. Il. In THE MoRaL wortD. “ The inspiration of
the Almighty giveth understanding.” He implants instincts and affinities that
respond to the touch of God. III. In THE CHOSEN PEOPLE. He inspired poets
to sing, prophets to teach, judges to rule, and warriors to fight. IV. In THE
REVELATION OF SPIRITUAL TRUTH. Hye and ear are inadequate vehicles. 1. He was
the efticient Agent in the Incarnation, and from that hour until now if Christ is
born in a soul, the hope of glory, it is by the same Spirit. 2. Like a dove He
descended on Jesus at His baptism, fitting Him for all His future work. 3. In
bringing Him from the dead (Rom. viii. 11}, and in the impartation of Pentecostal
power the same fact is corroborated. 4. The personal and local Christ departed,
for it was expedient for Him to give way for the Spirit, The dull eyes of the
disciples were opened, and they were transformed into heroes of faith. 5. Your
bodies are temples of the Holy Ghost, therefore your dust will be re-animated by
Deity. Conclusion: The highest need of the Church is the overjoying power of
the Holy Ghost. (J. S. Kennard, D.D.) The Spirit and Life:—1. THe LIFE or
THE SOULIS DERIVED FROM A SPIRITUAL SOURCE. 1. The Scriptures teach that the Holy
Spirit is the Communicator of life—(1) Physical (Gen. i. 2; Psa. xxxiii. 6). (2)
Intellectual (Prov. viii. 12,14; Job. xxxii. 8). (3) Spiritual (Acts ii. 36-38). 2.
The spirit of the new man inspires him to attend to the things that are appropriate
to his life, and so he grows in grace (Rom. viii. 5). 3. A careful consideration of
the ordinances of Christianity, and their underlying truths, are conducive to
spiritual results, (1) Baptism, the symbol of death to sin, separation from the
world, and the commencement of a new life. (2) The Lord’s Supper, the
memorial of the sublimest self-sacrifice.. (3) The Scriptures, which contain
the will of God and eternal life. II. Lirz FRom THE FLESH IS IMPOSSIBLE
(Gal. v. 17). 1. However imperceptible the path of a soul under the
control of the unregenerate senses is a downward one (Rom. viii. 8). 2. The
fleshly spirit divided Jewish society into hypocritical formalists and icy sceptics;
and the same spirit has continued to work in priestly corruptions and theoretical and
practical infidelity within and without the Church. III. Tue Powszr or Carists
WORDS IS SPIRITUAL. 1. They are spiritual in their nature. 2. They are life-giving.
Flesh and Spirit. (1) Flesh here means the outward and sensuous, which appeals
to the eye, ear, &c. There was much of this in the old Jewish faith; but whenever
they rested in it it profited them nothing. (2) Spirit does not mean the Holy Spirit,
but the inward part of religion which the soul understands and livesupon. I. Tur
UNPROFITABLE FLESH. The external observances of religionin themselves. 1. The
‘‘real Presence.” If Christ were really eaten carnally, then He could only profit
carnally like other food. Does grace operate through the stomach? On the
contrary, the real reception consists in belief in the Incarnation, trust in the death,
realization of the spiritual indwelling of Christ. 2. Baptism. The putting away
of the filth of the flesh is nought, the answer of a good conscience towards God is
the vitality of baptism. 38. Apostolical succession. The mere fleshly connection
between bishop and bishop, established by successive laying on of hands, supposing
it could be proved, is valueless: the apostles’ successors are those who preach
apostolic doctrine, display apostolic piety, and do apostolic work. 4. The value
of ornate worship must be determined by what in it is sensuous and what spiritual.
5. The same applies to architecture and symbolism: do they gratify a carnal taste
or minister to spiritual life? 6. Eloquence often excites the same emotions as the
theatre is as sounding brass, and only profits as the vehicle of a truth that moves
the inmost soul. 17. Revivalistic movements frequently engender a mere carnal
enthusiasm, and, unless their excitements stir the spirits of a man towards God and
holiness, they are based upon a lie. 8. Prayer and ordinances of any kind ag
mere matters of form and habit profit nothing. Their power lies wholly in their
spirituality. II. Tae gquickenine Spreir. 1. It is the spiritual nature which
quickens a man. He who has not received this from the Holy Ghost is dead in
trespasses and sins, 2. This quickens all ordinances and makes them vitalizing
means of grace. 38. So with spiritual acts and moral duties. 4. This spiritual
nature has for its Author the Divine Father and is the actual operation of the
Holy Spirit. 5, The mark by which it is discovered is faith. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
Spirit and life:—I. THe worps or CHRIST PERTAIN TO AND REVEAL THE SPIRITUAL
AND ETERNAL. 4, Spirit and life are closely related to each other. The Spirit
originates, the life perpetuates. 2. Words strictly speaking cannot be Spirit; they
represent or manifest ; as Christ said, ‘I am the Door.” The words of man express


ee |


ve a SSP ae


ouaP, vi] ST. JOHN. 577


his thoughts and reveal his inmost being. How easy to detect the style of Johnson,
Macaulay, or Carlyle. The words of Christ reveal His Spirit of wisdom and love.
3. Valuable as are the works of literature, &c., Christ’s words do not pertain to
them. They are of a prior and higher realm. They do not teach science, but they
give light and life to men that he may pursue the most profound investigations.
Hence under the shadow of the Cross alone flourish literary and scientific institu-
tions of the highest character. II, Tae worps or CHRIST ARE ACCOMPANIED BY
AN UNSEEN SPIRITUAL POWER, which is indissolubly joined to them, and thus they
become spirit and life. How the spiritual can be joined to the material we can’t
explain. Where are the cords which bind this earth to yonder sun? What is it
that gives the minute seed the power to develop? Life, But what is life? The
chemist says a grain of wheat is so much carbon, &c. I ask him to make one, and
he takes the various substances in their due proportions, and the result looks like a
grain of wheat. It has the same colour, weight, form. But plant it—it will not
grow. But the grain that God made, though kept in Egypt’s catacombs for three
thousand years, will, because it has life. So with the words of Christ. They are
like other words, but God has joined with them a spirit and life which affect the
heart of man. III. THz POWER OF THIS WORD IS SEEN IN THE MATERIAL UNIVERSE.
1. “By the word of the Lord were the heavens made.” The great worlds are God’s
conceptions materialized that finite minds may catch a glimpse of His almightiness
and wisdom. Think of all this as the product of a word and who can estimate its
power? 2. More than this, ‘He upholdeth all things by the word of His power.”
8. Great as is the creation and preservation of worlds there is something higher in
life. The one is passive the other active. In Christ was life and He breathed into
man a living soul. His Word perpetuates natural life, and how numberless are its
forms and varieties! What endless gradations in the character of that life from
the worm to the man, from life for a moment to life everlasting. IV. The text,
however, refers to SPIRITUAL LIFE AND DECLARES THAT THE WORDS OF Curist
ORIGINATE AND PERPETUATE THAT Lire, 1. Were there no such declaration we
might infer it. Unless needed to awaken man’s sensibilities, why did God stoop to
Mount Sinai and Christ to the manger and the cross? 2. Everywhere religion is
spoken of as life. Ezekiel’s mystic river and valley of dry bones. 3. The words
of great men have frequently given to nations increasing influences: Homer,
Aristotle, &c., for Greece; Bacon, Shakespeare, &c., for England. But if God
speaks, how powerful must His words effect the hearts and lives of men! Even
fancied Divine words, as of the oracle to Alexander or of the imaginings of Joan
of Are inspired almost irresistible power. 4. During His earthly abode, Jesus
showed how truly His words were spirit and life. He healed the sick and raised
the dead with a word. And how simple were His words, apparently without any
effort. How quietly he calmed the winds and multiplied the bread. And His words
reached spirit as well as matter. “ Whether is it easier to say thy sins be forgiven
thee,” &c. 5. The same power accompanies His words as spoken by His servants.
They have revolutionized the world. Idolatry disappeared before the Bible. The
Cross was exalted above the eagle. Great reforms have always been preceded and
accompanied by the study of God’s Word. (Bp. M. Simpson.) Christ's great
ideas :—Christ came into the world to introduce three great ideas, into which all
His teachings could be classified. I. The first was simple in form and sublime in
sentiment; He came into the world to teach Taar Gop 18 oUR Faruer, and urged
that idea continually. Over all things was a sustaining power, and this over the
most precious of all truths in regard to the being of God. The only prayer Christ
ever taught began, “Our Father which art m heaven.” II. THe meu oF A
TRUE MAN. No one else ever did that or had ever attempted it—even in outline.
He could tell us what a true man was because He was Himself a True Man.
Highteen centuries have criticised that life only to render it more radiant and
excellent. III. THE PERFECTIBILITY OF SINFUL MAN. No one. had so clearly
shown that man was a sinful being, or been more outspoken in regard to the
awful consequences of wrong doing, and yet He affirms that fallen humanity can be
lifted up and made holy. Sin was an obstacle to eternal life, but Jesus Christ had
pledged Himself to remove it. He promises that if we will come to Him our sins
shall be forgiven; that they shall be flung far from remembrance into the backward
depths of space. His words will live and never change. (H. M. Scudder, D.D.)
The honesty af Jesus :—1. Christ’s teaching was honesty itself compared with that
of the scribes; and now no book has a ring so decidedly clear and genuine as the
New Testament. 2. Yet honesty is not the whole of the significant quality of


ae


578 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. VI.
ch
Christ's life and words. A man may be quite honest but greatly mistaken. It isa
great thing to have a candid mind not obscured by prejudice or broken by passion-
3. But this is not enough. The position of a mirror in the light, and its angle
towards the object to be seen in it is as important as its clearness. We cannot hope
to gain true representations if we persist in holding ourselyes at a wrong personal
angle towards truths. But Jesus always kept Himself in a relation so true to men
that in His thoughts and judgments, all objects are represented in their simple
reality. His words are not only clear and honest, they correspond to the truth of
things. I. Let me prescriBE THIS cHARACTERISTIC. 1. In the conversations of
Jesus. He quietly brushes aside Jewish notions and personal deceptions and
touches with saving power the real lives of the people. They might for years have
concealed their real self, but when Jesus came they became real. It was so with
Nicodemus, the woman of Samaria, the publican, the Pharisee, the disciples. 2. In
the teachings of Jesus. {1) They went to the moral core of their being, and
insisted on their becoming true men at heart. (2) His doctrine of God has the
same practical relation to human life. The doctrine of Jesus means real righteous-
ness, justice, love, in God as in man. He did not come to teach a comprehensive
system of philosophy, a subtle science of nature, or some perfect scheme of
divinity. He represented God on earth, and realized in His life and death the whole
eternal disposition of God towards man. II. Some pertinent APPLICATIONS OF THIS
TruTH. ‘Two facts are forcing themselves on our notice. 1. Ecclesiastical Chris-
tianity and dogmatic Christianity have less influence to-day than ever they had.
2. Never has a real Christianity of real life been more honoured or loved. 3. It
requires therefore no prophet to predict that the church of the future will not be
altogether the church of the past. It will not be a church of vested ecclesiastical
pretension or formal and one sided orthodoxism, but a gospel of the Son of God in
the hearts of men, preached through the conduct of life. 4. If we have any doubt
as to what this real gospel is we may find it in the New Testament, if we read it
with a willing mind; but to practice it means something much harder than coming
to church, singing hymns or discussing doctrines. It is Christ loved, chosen, and
obeyed as Saviour and Lord. (Newman Smyth, D.D.)


Vers. 66-69. From that time many of His disciples went back. Those who are
mentioned in regard to—I. THz cHARACTER THEY ASSUMED. Disciples. This term
was first used to designate the Apostles; then it was applied to or assumed by
many whom our Lord had to distinguish from His ‘disciples indeed.” How
many there are who are Christians only in name! II. Tue course THEY PURSUED.
They went away from Him. 1. They relinquished all attendance on His ministry.
2. Disowned all attachment to His person. 3. Repudiated all sympathy with His
design. 4. Threw off His authority. III. THz reasons WHICH OPERATED LEADING
THE MEN TO Go AsTRAY. Because He insisted—1. That all secular concerns were
subservient to the salvation of the soul, which offended their avarice. 2. That all
things pertaining to salvation belonged to God alone, which wounded their self-
righteousness. 3. That they could not come to God except by Himself, which went
counter to all their theological prepossessions. 4. That unless there was constant
progressive fellowship with Himself experimentally they could not obtain ever-
lasting life IV. THE DANGER THEY INCURRED, Where should they go? To
go away from Christ a footstep was to go to perdition. (W. Brock, D.D.) The
touching appeal. I. Tux ract necorpEeD. 1, The designation given them. Disciples
2. Their number was considerable. 3, The period of their desertion—* From that
time ;” the delivery of the discourse. II, Tux appman mapm was—l. Touching. 2
Seasonable, When others turn their backs it is well to warn those who remain, 3.
Important. Backsliding is a sin of peculiar aggravation. III. Tae answer GIVEN.
1, To whom shall we go? (1) To the scribes and Pharisees ? They are blind
guides. (2) To heathen philosophers? Their foolish hearts are darkened. (3) To
the law? 1t thunders above our guilty heads its anathema, (4) To the world? It
has proved itself deceitful. (5) To the ways of sin? The end of them is death
2. ‘Thou hast the words of Eternal life—we will stay with Thee, the Son of
the living God for—(1) Pardon; (2) purity; (3) wisdom ; (4) strength ; (5) conso-
lation. (Anon.) A home question and a right answer :—I. Tur REASON FOR THE
quEsTIon, It was asked because—1. It was a season of defection. In all churches
and ages there have been times of flocking in and flying out; ebbs and floods; and
it is well at such seasons that decisive questions should be put. 2. It wasa season
of defection among the disciples; not merely camp followers who went after Him


+ ee pty: SORA


a


yon


a


OHAP. VI.) ST. JOHN. 579
eee ES NDE. aden sett 22 Se EE ee See ee ae ne ee a
for the loaves and fishes. And this sets forth the grievous guilt of those who wear
their Prince’s regimentals and then turn aside to false doctrine or sin. 3. It was
a defection on account of doctrine because of the preceding discourse. 4. This
defection was a “ going back.” They did not go off the straight road, they simply
reversed their steps and went back to their old lives. 5. It was open defection.
They once walked with Jesus in the public streets, but now they will have no more
to do with Him. This was at least honest and better than many a modern hypocrite.
Il. Tue Question rrsetF. He might well press it for—l. One of them would
certainly do so. He only chose twelve, yet one was a devil. 2. All of them might
do so, and apart from His grace would. ‘Let him that thinketh he standeth.”
3, If they turned aside it would be specially sad. The chaff had been blown away
and only the wheat was left, and that mixed with a little tares. These were picked
men. How sad when an office bearer falls! 4. Apostasy is very contagious. Like
sheep who, if one goes wrong, the next will follow. 5. He wishes His following to be
perfectly voluntary. None can walk truly with Jesus who walk unwillingly. II.
He ANSWER WHICH QUICK-VOICED PETER Gave. It was threefold. 1. ‘*To whom
shall we go?” The thought was intolerable. Would you like to follow your old
sinful life again? 2. ‘ Thou hast the words of eternal life.” We cannot go away
when we think of eternity. Those who turn back from Christ, what will they do in
eternity ? 3, We believe, and are sure, &c. Doyou believe that? How then can
you go away? (C. H. Spurgeon.) A mournjul defection:—I, WHY DO MEN Go
away? 1. Because they cannot bear Christ’s doctrine. “This is a hard saying.”
There are many points in the gospel offensive to human pride. 2. For the sake of
gain. 3. Because terrified by persecution. Although the fires of Smithfield are
extinguished there is much persecution still. Godless husbands tyrannize over their
wives; employers over their servants ; workmen over each other. 4 Out of sheer
levity. In a list of wrecks you will find some which have gone down through
collisions, or by striking on 4 rock; but sometimes you meet with one ‘ foundered
at sea”; how, no one knows, on a calm day. So there are many who make ship-
wreck of faith in easy circumstances. At the space of a moment they profess
Christianity, and then suddenly, to everybody’s surprise and without troubling
themselves about it, renounce it. 5. Through wicked companions and unequal
marriages. It is hard to keep religion when one pulls one way and one another.
6. For the sake of sensual enjoyments, 7. Through change of circumstances. (1)
Some because they have become poor and cannot look and do as they did. (2) Some
because they have become rich and religion is unfashionable with the set to which
they now belong. 8. Unsound doctrine occasions many to apostatize. 9. Laziness
causes others to turn aside. They do nothing, and as a consequence soon have
nothing to do. II. WHaT BECOMES OF THEM? 1. Some are very unhappy, and
return. 2. Others are hardened in their obduracy and go from bad to worse. III.
WY SHOULD NOT WE GO AS OTHERS HAVE GONE? Only because of the grace of God.
IV. Ir you WoULD BE PRESERVED FROM FALLING you must—1l, Keep humble and
rely on the Holy Spirit of God. 2. Be jealous of your obedience, be circumspect.
3. Watch and pray. 4. Shun profane company. (Ibid.) Apostasy :—I. Our Lorp’s
quzstion was—l, The language of affection. Spoken in view of the loss of friends
and immortal souls He came tosave. 2. An implied warning. The propriety of
such a question now rests on two grounds. (1) The possibility, so far as they know,
that professed disciples are not real disciples. (2) The possibility that if real
disciples they may apostatize. How our Lord’s declaration (ver. 70) must have
constrained each to ask “ Lord is it 1?” 3. Anxious concern in view of abundant
reasons for it. (1) Many disciples had already forsaken Him. (2) They were all
the subjects of much weakness and prejudice. (3) They were to be exposed to
many temptations and dangers. 4, They were ignorant toa great extent of the
nature of Christ’s salvation, and similar reasons exist in the present day for
anxious concern and it may be useful to consider some of the sources of danger.
(1) The deep depravity of the human heart. How easily does this depravity—

a) lead men to deny or disregard the great practical truths of the gospel;
(b) to lose all just impression of the distinction between Christians and the world ;
(c) to disregard the comparative worth of temporal and eternal things; (da) to
become insensible to the danger of small departures from duty; (e) to banish the
thought of eternity; (f) to become more solicitous to preserve appearances before
men than reality before God; (g) to neglect the means of grace. (2) The power of
temptations without us, arising from wealth or poverty, business, society, &e. II.
THE DISCIPLE’s ANSWER, which bespeaks a just sense of his wants as a sinner and of


5 a


580 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHar. vI.
his dependence on Christ as a Saviour, 1. As sinners we need the forgiveness of
God, and can obtain the blessing only through Christ. 2, As sinners we need
sanctification, guidance, support, consolation which no one but Christ can give.
3. We need eternal life :.Christ only has the words of eternal life. (N. W. Taylor,
D.D.) The uses to be made of the falls of Christians :—It behoves us—I. To
THINK WITH GRATITUDE OF THOSE WHO YET STAND. Many went away, but some,
and they of the most value, remained. To despond would—1. Unduly magnify the
importance of the apostles. 2. Give too much pleasure to the enemies of God.
II. To reuL AND ACKNOWLEDGE OUR OWN DANGER. 1. Because others have gone
their own way and there is no likelihood of our following them, that is not to say
that we are not in danger of pursuing a way of our own from Christ. You are in
no danger of drunkenness, are you in danger of pride? 2. This sentiment will
provoke charitable sentiments respecting falls of others. II. To come wiTH aLL
FAITH AND SUPPLICATION TO THE SAVIOUR FOR PROTECTION AND MERCY. Neglect of
this is the fruitful cause of backsliding. (S. Green, D.D.) Going and staying :—
J. THE saDNESS oF aposTasy. 1. Many take up a profession of Christianity who
afterwards go away. (1) The matter of fact. They ran well, and to all appearances.
judged by outward standards, were excellent Christians. (2) To what this is
owing. (a) Largely from the want of the root of grace within; (6) From insufii-
ciently counting the cost. (c) The want of a sensible joy in Christ as soon as was
expected. 2. The sadness of their case. (1) In general itis worse than if they had
never made a profession of Christ (2 Pet. ii. 20,21). (a) As the Holy Spirit is
grieved, and it may be, retired, their recovery is more doubtful. (6b) As they have
put themselves out of the way of the Spirit’s influence it cannot be expected that it
should follow them. (c) As Satan has got faster hold of them. (2) As their case
is now worse than it was at the beginning, so by forsaking Christ they judge them-
selves unworthy of eternal life and out of the way of heaven. In the day of
judgment they will be convicted of base ingratitude, the greatest treachery and
unfaithfulness and of the most unaccountable folly. II. Curist’s TENDER CONCERN
FOR THE SAFETY OF His REAL DiscrPLEs. 1. How this appears. (1) In His inear-
nation and death; (2) In His intercession; (3) In His approachableness. 2,
Whence it proceeds from. (1) Their being ransomed by Him (1 Pet. i. 18); (2)
Their being entrusted to Him by the Father (chap. vi. 38, 39); (3) Their being not
only His servants and friends, but the members of His body; (4) Their being
specially loved by Him ; (5) Their danger through apostasy and their blessedness
through abiding with Him. III. Tue BELimver’s REASON FOR CLEAVING TO CHRIST.
1. They are sensible that they have no one but Christ to whom to go. 2. They
dread the thought of going away, considering its sin, folly, misery and ingratitude.
8. How many soever revolt from Christ, sincere believers will and ought to cleave
to Him still. (1) To repair the dishonour cast upon Him by apostates and to
witness that He never gave any just occasion toleave Him. (2) To show that their
choice of Him is not built on what others say, but upon what they know and ex-
perience of Him. (D. Wilcoz.) Experience and hope conservative of faith :—1,
In the discourse of this chapter we have many “ dark sayings,’ which gave great
offence to many, and were the occasion of the apostasy of some of our Lord’s
disciples, 2. The men who replied to our Lord felt the mysteriousness of Hig
teaching as deeply as others, and at different times confessed as much. But in
spite of all difficulties they did understand that their Master had what no other
teacher had—“ the words of eternal life,” and for that reason they would cling to
Him. So with many of His disciples in the present day. I. Tum mEantne oF
ETERNAL Lire, 1. It has been said that “ Eternal” is expressive of the character
and quality of a thing not of its continuance, and stands for what is divine and
spiritual in present enjoyment, e.g—(1) If any being possessed of animal or
intellectual life were to havo its being perpetuated for ever, though this would be life
everlasting it would not be life eternal. (2) If an angelic or human being possessed
of this divine life were to be annihilated for a period it would still be proper to say
that they had been made partakers of eternal life, 2. This is only half a truth and
needs completing before we can grasp what was in the disciples’ minds. Let all
this be granted, yet the subject of our Saviour’s teaching must have included per-
petuity. He called them to a subjective life now, and declared that that in its ultimate
issues, was to be their everlasting possession. II, Ler us srz HOW THIS MEANING
MAY BE ILLUSTRATED IN THE ANSWER OF THE DiscrpuEs. This answer could not
have embodied all that we know. It was given previously to our Lord’s redemptive
work which throws such light on our Lord’s teaching, and previously to the dispen.


owaP. vI.] ST. JOHN. 581


sation of the Spirit. Moreover, they were slow to learn and misunderstood the mean-
ing of much which our Lord did teach. Nevertheless, they knew something about
eternal life from—1. Our Lord’s teaching. (1) He demanded of them a present
divine life in its origin, continuance, and outward graces. (2) He authenticated
the popular belief in a life after death. 2. Our Lord’s example embodied the first
and was connected by Him with the prospect of'entering upon an endless life which
they were to share. There was no uncertainty about this, and when asked if they
would abandon Him of whom they had learnt it, they felt it to be impossible. III.
To wHom coutD THEY Go? 1. To the Sadducees—the rationalists of the age?
They rejected immortality, and this being gone, what room was there for the
eulture of a divine life, or even of secular virtue, seing that “‘we might eat and
drink for to-morrow we die.”’ 2. To the Pharisees—the ritualists of their day ?
They believed in a future life, but held such views of what constituted the present
religious life of man as to rob it of everything, spiritual and divine. 3. To the
Essenes—the ancient monks and ascetics? These went further than the
Pharisees. They tried to reach the Divine by ceasing to the human, and by
practices which, if universal, would have brought society to an end, showed that
they could not have the words of eternal life. (T. Binney.) A critical hour :—
What the first battle is to an army whose general wishes to test its courage, so was
this trial to the disciples. In this crisis there were two causes of trouble and
temptation for their faith. I. THe rorsaxine or JESUS BY THE MULTITUDE. 1.
The inclination of most men is to yield to the authority of numbers. This is seen
in the camp of the freest philosophy as well as in that of religion. Nothingis more
rare and difficult than adhesion to truth in the face of dominant opinions, as is
shown by the history of great inventors, teachers, martyrs. In the eyes of the multi-
tude truth, like victory, lies on the side of great battalions. 2. All is not absolutely
false in this assumption. ‘True religion should be the lot of all; and the gospel is
universal. Yet it has never made any appeal or sacrifice to popularity and has
triumphed in the teeth of antipathy and resistance. 3. On the other hand, as in
the text, there are defections from it, and these defections severely try those who
abide. II. Tur sTRANGE CHARACTER OF THEIR MasTER’s TEACHING. At present
the subject of the discourse seemed fantastic and impossible. But by and by in the
Cross they understood it, which teaches us that the gospel contains mysterious
points which raise difficulties and objections which are only to be overcome
gradually. Most accept it on a side which responds most to their inmost aspira-
tions, and accept the rest on trust; and, after years of Christian experience, they
come to a comprehension of the harmony of revelation. Suppose, then, one of you
in a situation like the apostles, what must you do? 1. The partisans of absolute
authority say, “‘ Submit yourselves, and the more difficult the submission, the more
valuable the faith.” But itis never safe for a man to go against his conscience,
and it is no honour to God to bring him the heart of aslave and the blind obedience
of afanatic. 2. Reject every doctrine that wounds the conscience or the reason.
This is what these disciples did, and forgot many admirable discourses and works
of mercy. And how many to day yield without a struggle, never trying to get to
the bottom of their doubt, nor asking if there is not a deeper meaning! 3. The
faithful apostles by their example seem to say, ‘‘ Wait.” Why? (1) Because religious
truth must be full of mystery. A Divine revelation which should not surpass our
comprehension would be no revelation. (2) Because the fault may be less in the
doctrine than in our minds. (3) Because an experience a thousand times repeated
proves that that which hurts us is precisely that which ought to heal us. Were
the Pharisees right in being offended at the universality of the gospel? (4) Because
the greater part of the gospel enlightens, consoles and sustains. Will you reject
this for the fraction which you misunderstood? (5) Because experience may, and
will, show you the futility of your objection, “If any man will do,” &e. (E.
Bersier, D.D.) The dividing point :—In the state of Ohio there is a courthouse
that stands in such a way that the raindrops that fall on the norii side go into
Lake Ontario at the Gulf of St. Laurence, while those that fall on the south side go
into the Mississippi and the Gulf of Mexico, Just a little putf of wind determines
the destiny of a rain drop for two thousand miles. And how small apparently the
influence which decides whether the current of our lives shall flow towards Christ
or away from Him. Speculation and faith :—1. The chief cause of declension in
the Church is the pre-occupation of the mind with an imaginary Christ. This
narrative teaches us that a miracle is no match for a pre-determined judgment.
These men belicved on Christ because they saw His miracles, and they framed


~~


582 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. VI.
i, RE ITT Ae athe t Sih ee
in their minds a conception of what that Messiahship should mean; but when they
found that Christ’s conception differed from theirs, in spite of the miracles, they re-
jected Him. They could not vnderstand a Messianic empire over the hearts of men.
2. But they ought to have understood something; that the position of Christ would
invest Him with mystery, and that His teaching would be original, and that His
disciples should have no pre-occupations and be able to distinguish between state-
ment and parable, and that Jesus required childlike honesty and docility in his
hearers. 3. The chief disputants on this occasion were leading Jews striving
to turn the current of popular favour from Jesus. The declaration at which they
affected to stumble was that of ver. 51. ‘*How can this man,” &c. (ver. 52), was
the carnal reasoning of the adversaries. The Master’s reply afforded no help, but
rather otherwise (ver. 53). The disciples were silent, but these strange words
shocked the men who had imagined that fellowship with Jesus would be a stepping-
stone to power (ver. 60). His explanation (denied to incorrigible adversaries) to
them preserved a medium between the indulgence of curiosity and the repression
of an honest desire to learn the truth (vers. 62-65). 4. These “went away”
because no proof could touch them which threatened their anterior conception
of Christ. Not miracle, nor the unique personal influence of Jews. 5. This
picture of the force of a pre-judgment inspired by passion will guide the Christian
student in interpreting modern unbelief. Science is supposed to have no pre-
judgments; but then it affirms that a miracle is inconceivable, and therefore no
testimony can make the record of a miracle credible. What is this but a pre-
judgment! And since Christianity is based upon the resurrection of Christ, then,
according to this, it is logically a fraud. Let us now consider—I. Tue appraL oF
Curist. 1. It should be regarded as an appeal when the Church is surrounded by
an unstable mood of thought concerning Christ. 2. This mood is highly dangerous
and brings death with noiseless footsteps, and its ravages are seen, when, in con-
nection with some sentiment of passion or selfishness, it puts back the faith or
destroys it; and it is answerable for the loss to Christ of thousands of our youth,
and the wide failure of initial steps of Christian profession. 3. It may be traced
in modern secular literature when the writer simply refers to a Christian doctrine
or fact, indicating no bias whatever, so different to those firm strokes which fifty
years ago showed us if the public mind was pervaded by an impression of the
Divine authority of the Scriptures. 4. Not that this necessarily threatens an
unusual reverse to the Christian faith, but everything depends upon the way in
which this unstable mood is dealt with during the next fifty years. 5. The appeal
of Jesus is intended to bring into conspicuous contrast the immovable form of the
Rock of Ages. II. THz ANSWERING CONFESSION OF THE CHURCH. Are we prepared
to drift? or to prosecute a new search? If Christ has failed to give us the words
of eternal life, where shall we go to for them? 1. To some ancient religion ?
Thanks to modern research, the new science of comparative theology is now
accessible to every one. The question is not whether the religious systems of India
or China are not possessed of fine sentiment, but whether they can compete with
Christianity. (1) What are they all but at best obscure impressions of mysteries
which in Christianity are definitely proclaimed! (2) What have they done for the
people! Instead of elevating the general mind, they have narrowed, impoverished
and depraved it. Modern research therefore pronounces that the religion of the
future must be the Christian or none. 2. To modern philosophy? (1) Where is
its moral power to come from ? (2) How is this moral power to be disseminated ?
With all its boasts, it is built upon an hypothesis which, as yet, has constructed no

thing: whereas we have a faith which has been attested by the history of centuries

whose Divinity is verified this day by the only civilization which is living. (E. E.
Jenkins.) Temporary discipleship :—I. Tuar Jesus Curist AND His DOCTRINES ARE
NECESSARILY OFFENSIVE TO UNREGENERATED HUMANITY. But let us inquir

the hard sayings, the unpalatable truths, that offended the crowd. in That Chet
was greater than Moses. This was a mortal offence to the Jews. While Moses was
yet alive the treatment he received was anything but respectful, but after his death
their veneration for the great lawgiver knew no bounds, Again, they spoke of the
manna in the wilderness very highly indeed, but their fathers had a very different
opinion of it. 2. That God is the God of the Gentile as well as the Jew (ver. 37)

Another hard saying—3. That the atonement (the bread from heaven) is the life of
the world. Millions wilfully reject this heavenly food, to pine away and die on the
unwholesome, adulterated fare dearly supplied by pleasure, ambition, and philo-
sophy, falsely so called. Such were the hard sayings that made many of the


———————


fg «ins


omar, vr.} ST. JOHN. 583


disciples turn back and walk no more with Jesus. But what offended the Jews is
no louger offensive to us, Yet many forsake Him in our days. (1) Because they
do not know Him. One may be acquainted with all the facts of His life, from the
manger to the cross, and yet be totally ignorant of the principles that animated
that life. (2) Because they cannot have Christ and their sins at the same time.
The people of Rome demanded of Brutus why he had stabbed Cmsar, by his own
admission ‘the foremost man of all the world’’; and he answered to this effect
‘Not that I loved Cesar less, but that I loved Rome more.” The surgeon of
intemperate habits kills himself by degrees, and knows it; does he hate life? No,
he loves drink more, and is content to fall into a premature grave. Men are loth
to admit this, and many try hard to deceive themselves and others that they are
kept away by doubt, as though intellectual pride was pardonable and praiseworthy.
Samson perished under the ruins of his prison—why? Was it for the want of
evidences? Itrow not. His burning lust for Delilah brought him to that vulgar,
shameful end. Demas turned His back upon the Redeemer, and forsook Paul and
the churches when they greatly needed his sympathy and help. Was it ‘doubts ”
that caused his apostasy? No; he “loved the present world.” “ Your iniquities
have separated between you and God.” II. Jesus CHRIST HAS NO DESIRE TO SEE
PEOPLE FOLLOWING Him AGAINST THEIR INCLINATION. ‘ Will ye also go away?”
The question suggests two things—l. That the gospel is a moral influence, and
not a coercive agency. In making a personal appeal to the undecided, once and
again have I been told, by way of self-justification, that they expect some irresis-
tible power, some messenger from the dead, to compel them to believe the gospel.
Oh, false and foolish expectation! In aspeech of the Earl of Chatham the following
passage occurs, which, with a little modification, will help to illustrate this point :—
George the Third endeavoured to give undue influence to the prerogative of the
Crown; but the great orator strenuously opposed him, and stood up for the consti-
tution, saying, “‘ The poorest man may in his cottage bid defiance to all the forces
of the Crown. It may be frail—its roof may shake, the wind may blow through it,
the storm may enter—but the King of England cannot enter. All his forces dare
not cross the threshold of the ruined tenement.” You are at perfect liberty to stay
with Him or go away with the multitude that do evil—choose ye. 2. That religion
without love is no religion at all. In this commercial age people are apt to intro-
duce a mercenary spirit even into spiritual things, and ask with the apostate Jews,
“ What profit shall we have if we pray to Him?” ~ Many of us, in our visits to
rural districts, where the inhabitants cling tenaciously to primitive customs, have
been made sad and solemn by meeting & funeral procession bearing a dead one to
his burial; and although strangers to u3, no one need tell us who the relatives of
the departed one are—they are easily distinguished from all others both by their
nearness to the coffin and their willingness to endure any inconvenience in order to
follow him they loved to his long, long home. Others may, and will, turn back
half-way, if the distance be far and the weather foul, but such is their grief after
the departed that, however rough the way and stormy the weather, they will walk
to the brink of the grave, and shed the tears of affection on his coffin-lid as they
look down and bid their last farewell. The relatives of the Saviour likewise are
easily recognized by their nearness to Him in thought and duty, and also by their
fidelity to their beloved Redeemer, through honour and dishonour, through evil
report and good report, even unto death, III. Tere ARE A FAITHFUL FEW IN
EVERY AGE AMONGST THE FAITHLESS MANY. “ To whom shall we go?” Go to the
service of mammon with boats and fishing-tackles, and leave others to become
fishers of men. Go to swine-land, the far country of self-indulgence and carnal

leasures, and spend your substance with the prodigal in riotous living. Go to
Vanity Fair and the City of Destruction: follow the crowd! No; we have already
been to all those places, and failed to find a resting-place for a weary, heavy-laden
soul. You had better stay, then. Peter’s reasons for staying were—1. Because no
one else could give such a clear account of the future. ‘Thou hast the words of
eternal life.” 2. Because He was the Divine Redeemer. ‘ And we believe, and are
sure, that Thou art Christ, the son of the living God.” (W. A. Griffiths.)
Departing from Jesus :—In Mammoth Cave the old negro guide told us how people
had been lost there from time to time. When found, they overwhelmed him with
embraces and other demonstrations of gratitude, Some became insane through
fright ; some fled in terror from the guides. Once @ woman was lost for about
twenty-four hours. In that terrible darkness, in the silence in which hearts beat
loud, she had waited in dreadful suspense. Superstitious dread filled her crazed


584 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cuar, ve


—S—_————————————————


heart. At last the guide came, his footfalls echoing like whispers and groans, hia
lantern casting ghostly shadows upon the walls. The poor terrified creature arose,
and fled away into the darkness. The guide pursued—a veritable black devil he
seemed! At last he overtook her—unconscious, prostrate, ashy white. In his
strong arms he raised her from the ground, and carried her out to safety and light
andhome! Howoftenisitso! When the Saviour comes, we flee from Him. =Mis-
conceptions of Him, distortions of Him, shadows of Him in this dark world, fancies of
Him in our sinful hearts, make Him seem other than He is. And we flee from our
Saviour and our Guide—fiee away into the darkness. And yet He came to find us,
to save us, to bear us tothe light. ‘He came to His own, and His own received Him
not.” (R. S. Barrett.) The physiology of backsliding :—Within the body of the
Hermit crab a minute organism may frequently be discovered, resembling, when
magnified, a miniature kidney bean, A bunch of root-like processes hangs from
one side, and the extremities of these are seen to ramify in delicate films through
the living tissues of the crab. This simple organism is known to the naturalist as
Sacculina: and though a full-grown animal, it consists of no more parts than those
just named. Not a trace of structure is to be detected within this rude and all but
inanimate frame; it possesses neither legs, nor eyes, nor mouth, nor throat, nor
stomach, nor any other organs, external or internal. This Sacculina is a ‘typical
parasite. By means of its twining and theftuous roots it imbibes automatically its
nourishment ready-prepared from the body of the crab. It boards, indeed, entirely at
the expense of its host, who supplies it liberally with food and shelter, and everything
else it wants. So far as the result to itself is concerned, this arrangement may
seem at first sight satisfactory enough; but when we inquire into the life history of
this small creature we unearth a career of degeneracy all but unparalleled in nature.
When the young animal first makes its appearance, it bears not the remotest
resemblance to the adult animal. <A different name even is given to it by the biolo-
gist, who knows it at this period as a Nauplius. This minute organism has an oyal
body, supplied with six well-jointed feet, by means of which it paddles briskly
through the water. For a time it leads an active and independent life, industriously
securing its own food and escaping enemies by its own gallantry. But soon a
change takes place. The hereditary taint of parasitism is in its blood, and it pro-
ceeds to adapt itself to the pauper habits of itsrace. The tiny body first doubles in
upon itself, and from the two front limbs elongated filaments protrude. Its four
hind limbs entirely disappear, and twelve short forked swimming organs temporarily
take their place. Thus strangely metamorphosed the Sacculina sets out in search
of a suitable host, and in an evil hour, by that fate which is always ready to accom-
modate the transgressor, is thrown into the company of the Hermit crab. With its
two filamentary processes—which afterwards develop into the root-like organs—it
penetrates the body; the sac-like form is gradually assumed; the whole of the
swimming feet drop off—they will never be needed again—and the animal settles
down for the rest of its life as a parasite, . . . There could be no more impressive
illustration than this of what with entire appropriateness one might call “ the phy-
siology of backsliding.”” We fail to appreciate the meaning of spiritual degeneration
or detect the terrible nature of the consequences only because they evade the eye of
sense, But could we investigate the spirit as a living organism, or study the soul
of the backslider on principles of comparative anatomy, we should have a revelation
of the organic effects of sin, even of the mere sin of carelessness as to growth and
work, which must revolutionize our ideas of practical religion. There is no room
for the doubt even, that what goes on in the body does not with equal certainty take
place in the spirit under the corresponding circumstances or conditions. The
penalty of backsliding is not something unreal and vague, some unknown quantity
which may be measured out to us disproportionately, or which, perchance, since
God is good, we may altogether evade, The consequences are already marked
within the structure of the soul. So to speak, they are physiological. The thing
affected by our indifference or by our indulgence is not the book of final judgment,
but the present fabric of the soul. The punishment of degeneration is simply de-
generation—the loss of functions, the decay of organs, the atrophy of the spiritual
nature. It is well known that the recovery of the backslider is one of the hardest
problems in spiritual work. To reinvigorate an old organ seems more difficult and
hopeless than to develop a new one; and the backslider’s terrible lot is to have to
retrace with enfeebled feet each step of the way along which he strayed; to make
up inch by inch the leeway he has lost, carrying with him a dead weight of
acquired reluctance, and scarce knowing whether to be stimulated or discouraged by


CHAP. v1.) ST. JOHN. 585


the memory of the previous fall. (Prof. Drummond.) The effects of backsliding
on the steadfast :—When, at the close of the First Empire, our soldiers fought
against united Europe, there frequently arose from the midst of the battle a cry
that troubled all hearts. The reason was that a corps of the army, deserting the
flag of Napoleon, had turned to the enemy. It was so at Leipsic: when the Saxons
abandoned the French eagles the blast of ruin passed over the whole army, for
treason was seen everywhere, And we also, in the desperate struggle in which the
Christian army is engaged, we have often seen discouragement agitate the most
steadfast, when in the front ranks of the enemy, to have to encounter those who but
the day before helped our faith and stood close around our flag. Only yesterday
our allies, to-day our implacable enemies, directing their sharp, haughty, and
gontemptuous criticism against a cause whose weak points were well known to
them. The crisis has been a terrible one, and more than one heart has succumbed
under the anzuish. But in this heart-rending apostasy we seem to hear the voice
of our Head say to us, as formerly to His disciples, ‘‘ Will you also go away?” In
reply to this appeal we have acknowledged our Master; shame has laid hold on us
for having a moment submitted to the contagion of example; we have felt that
never should His cause be more dear to us than when it was abandoned by the
multitude; that the number and assent of masses are nothing and ought to be
nothing; and with a more profound faith we have said to the Christ, ‘‘ Lord, to
whom can we go?” (Z. Bersier, D.D.) A backslider’s end :—Albert, Bishop of
Mayence, had a physician attached to his person, who, being a Protestant, did not
enjoy the prelate’s favour. The man, seeing this, and being an avaricious,
ambitious, world-seeker, denied his God, and turned back to Popery, saying to his
associates, ‘ I’ll put Jesus Christ by for a while till I’ve made my fortune, and then
bring Him out again.” This horrible blasphemy met with its just reward ; for
next day the miserable hypocrite was found dead in his bed, his tongue hanging
from his mouth, his face as black as a coal, and his neck twisted half round. I
was myself an ocular witness of this merited chastisement of impiety. (Luther.)
A brave martyr :—Anne Askew, when asked to avoid the flames, answered, ‘‘I came
not here to deny my Lord and Master.” Where backsliding begins :—In the Life
of Philip Henry it is said, ‘‘ He and his wife constantly prayed together, morning
and evening.” He made conscience of closet worship, and abounded in it. It was
the caution and advice which he frequently gave to his children and friends, “Be
gure you look to your secret duty ; keep that up, whatever you do; the soul cannot
prosper in the neglect of it. Apostasy generally begins at the closet door.”
Besides these, he was uniform, steady, and constant in family worship from the
time he was first called to the charge of a family to his dying day. He would say,
“If the worship of God be not in the house, write, ‘ Lord, have mercy upon us,’ on
the door; for there is a plague, a curse in it.’ ” A backslider’s misery :—After
poor Sabat, an Arabian, who had professed faith in Christ by means of the labours
of the Rev. Henry Martyn, had apostatized from Christianity, and written a book in
favour of Mohammedanism, he was met at Malacca by the late Rev. Dr. Milne,
who proposed to him some very pointed questions, in reply to which he said, “I
am unhappy! I have a mountain of burning sand on my head! When I go about
I know not what I am doing.” It is indeed ‘an evil thing and bitter to sin
against the Lord our God.” Reasons for backsliding :—Those who forsake God
to return to the world, do it because they find more gratification in earthly pleasures
than in those arising from communion with God; and because this overpowering
charm, carrying them away, causes them to relinquish their first choice, and
renders them, as Tertullian says, the penitents of the devil. (Blaise Pascal.)


Vers. 67-69. Will ye also go away?... To whom should we go? Thou hast
the words of eternal life.—Human destiny and its attainment through Christ :—1.
Gop HAS SET BEFORE US A DESTINY. ‘Eternal life.” 1. The idea of a future world
in the abstract is probably present to every man. 2. It is impossible for any one
to entertain this idea without being haunted by the tremendous possibilities of
its truth. A man may lose sight of it, or rush to escape it, but let it once have
a lodgment within, and he cannot refuse it acknowledgment. 3. It does not
require any argument to prove a future world—you know that there is one. 4,
It ig equally impressed upon the human consciousness that this future life (1) is
one of conscious immortal existence; (2) has a retributive connection with the
doings of the present life. IJ. Hz nas REVEALED TO US THE METHOD BY WHICH THIS
DESTINY MAY BE ACHIEVED AND REALIZED. 1. The revelation of God’s mercy in the


rr,


586 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. VL,
SS SSS
gospel proceeds on the assumption of this conscious immortal existence, and
has furnished appliances by which the happiest conditions of that existence may
be brought within the reach of all. It is not merely a manual of precept for
this world; it is a treasury of hope and comfort for the world to come. Point-
ing to the Saviour, whose suretyship it announces, and from whose death it
receives its validity and power, it says, ‘“‘ This is the true God and eternal life,

and it proclaims to the troubled spirit that in Christ’s possession are the words
of eternal life. 2. Those words were never spoken in their fulness till Christ came.
There were broken utterances about it, but He brought life and immortality to light.
Ill. He was timrrep AN ExcLustveE Saviour. ‘‘ Neither is there salvation in any
other.” 1. To have allowed a plurality of Saviours would have indicated a falter-
ing confidence or an unsatisfied claim. 2. There needs no other Saviour, so there
is no other. 3. This conviction will force itself on all some day. 4. The experi-
ence of the past proves that none other has the words of eternal life. All ancient
religion and philosophy are empty of information on eternal life. 5. The re-
searches of the present can find no other Saviour. (W. M. Punshon, LL.D.) Two
stages of spiritual life:—(Text in conjunction with Luke v. 8). I. Txe rirst stack
MARKED BY FEAR AT THE REVELATION OF DivinzE GLory. It was not merely the wonder
that produced the cry. This was not the first time that Peter had seen the power
of Christ, and others had seen it who had not been affected. He saw in Christ the
Holy one, and then came a sense of the chasm between Himself and Jesus. 1.
Such a revelation does awaken the feelings of fear and awe. Before Christ came
men had heard of holiness, but its awful presence was never fully felt until He
crossed the path of the world. By Him the ‘‘ thoughts of many hearts were revealed.”
Before the light of His holiness all lying hypocrisies quailed. And for eighteen
centuries the world has been convinced of sin by the presence of the Holy One.
When a man realizes a sense of the presence of this holiness his cry is that of Peter's.
2. Every one must have this feeling before He can cast himself utterly on Christ.
II. THE SECOND STAGE—CONFESSION OF DEVOTION TO CHRIST OUR LIFE. This was a
testing time for the disciples—a time when they were driven to feel that Christ was
their life. Andin Christian experience there are similar periods, and then we feel
that everything but the perfect reception of Him fails to satisfy the heart. Our
spiritual nature craves three things. 1. A knowledge of God the Eternal Truth,
Christ has revealed the Father. . 2. Reconciliation with God the Eternal Righteous-
ness. Christ is life for the conscience. 3.A knowledge of God the Eternal Love.
Christ brought God close to man’s heart. (H. L. Hull, B.A.) Reasons for con-
tinuance with Jesus :—I. No oTHER CHRIST WILL comE. II. No ONE WILL BRING A
BETTER worD. III. THERE REMAINS NO OTHER FAITH. IV. THERE IS NO BRIGHTER
KNOWLEDGE. (W. H. Van Doren, D.D.) If not to Christ then to whom ?—1. “ To
whom shull we go?’’ is his first question when a man awakens to moral conscious-
ness, and feels within him those inarticulate longings which reveal that he is not
what he ought to be. Plato accounted these yearnings the reminiscences of a former
state in which the soul had seen the perfect ideas of things now lost—a near
approach to the Bible doctrine of the Fall. The soul feels that it is not what it
once was, and that it cannot make itself so; but it recognizes its forgotten great-
ness when it sees itagain. It is not to be deceived. It says when one specimen is
offered, ‘‘ This is not what I seek ;”’ but when it finds Christ it identifies its long
lost manhood in Him, 2. Besides these longings there is within us a sense of guilt,
and the spirit groans, ‘‘ Who will help me?” As when the sick cry for a phy-
sician. Man must go somewhere. The Jews were confronted with four rival
systems. Sadduceeism, Pharisaism, Essenism, Christianity, and these virtually
confront the seeker to-day. I. Shall we goto Scrpricism? 1. That seeks to cure
the soul’s malady by denying it. That gives the same satisfaction as persuading a
starving man that there is no reality in his hunger. How much more rational to
accept the bread God has provided. Reject revelation and the same difficulties
emerge in philosophy—so you only get rid of their only possible solution—just as
sick men refused the doctor only throw away the chances of getting well. 2. The
service of infidelity to man is well seen in the French Revolution. II. Shall we go
to Rrroatism ? To improve our spiritual nature by ceremonial means is to begin at
the wrong end, for it is the character of the soul that gives quality to the rite. The
root of the evil is in the soul, which no ceremony can touch. Witness the Pharisees
who would not go into Pilate’s Hall for fear of defilement, and yet could plot for
mutier, Witness the Italian brigand who gives thanks for a successful robbery.
Witness the multitudes of formal worshippers on Sunday who take advantage of


;
‘
.
ry
+
‘

:
>


eee \\ eS


va


CHAP, VI.] ST, JOHN. — 587


_ their neighbours on Monday. Formalism only substitutes hypocrisy for religion.


Ill. Shall we goto Asceticism? 1. It is useless in practice, because the heart can-
not escape from itself, and no walls can exclude temptation. 2. The whole system
is cowardly. 3. It is a negative thing. IV. Shall we go to Jesus? What are His
qualifications? 1, He has the words of eternal life. By words man was lured to
his destruction, and now by words he isto be saved. 2. What are His words. Their
substance is, “ God so loved the world,” &c. Faith in these words gives certainty
where before was doubt, and peace where formerly was despair. 3. See what they
have done in the case of the apostles, heathens, drunkards, sinners of every age
and degree. All that is noble and elevating in our modern civilization have come
from Christ. Conclusion: When our modern prophets ask us to leave Him, we
reply—1. Find us a better answer to the questioning of our spirits than He has
furnished. 2. Show us a better ideal of manhood than He has given. 3. Bring us
brighter light in the life beyond than He has thrown. 4, In a word, give us some-
thing better than Christ. (W. M. Taylor, D.D.) Man’s need of a Saviour :—
1. There is here one great assumption which, being removed, the whole drops to
pieces. It is that man must have some one to go to. He cannot live without a
master, a guide, a comforter. The soul cannot live alone or grope its own way.
St. Peter’s question evidently implies, ‘‘ We cannot leave Thee till we have found
another who shall outbid Thee in Thy offers, and outshine Thee in Thy revelations.”
2. This is what we may call the argument from want. Man wants someone, and
therefore God has someone for him. To whom is the only question, not whether
we shall go. Was Peter right, or was he rash and wrong? (1) There are some
suppositions which would be fatal to this argument. Supposing there be no God, or,
at most, a God unconcerned about His creatures, then to say that man’s spiritual
thirst is any proof that God has provided spiritual water is a fallacy ; it only proves
that to want and to have not is man’s pitiless destiny. Butif there be a God such
a conception is revolting to our best instincts, and dishonouring to God Himself.
Far worthier is that of One touched with a feeling of our infirmities, and if this be
true, then provision is sure. (2) This argument is not weakened by sin’s entrance.
The fact that man was spared after he had sinned, and that he now needs God’s
care and love more than ever, strengthens the argument. What Peter wanted,
and what we want is—I. SomE ONE WHO CAN RAISE US ABOVE CIRCUMSTANCES. How
many of our race suffer from poverty, anxiety, sickness, disappointment, the sense
of inferiority, and the dullness of life’s routine, &c. God designs that such
should have independence, earth’s giving or refusing: and there is only one
person who goes to the root of the trouble, for He can say to us, “I came to
you from heaven, and there we know of no such distinctions; there the only
honour is humility, the only office self-sacrifice, the only distinction, the being
nearest to and likest God. Cultivate these things over which tyranny has no
power, and I will guide you by my counsel and afterward receive you to glory.” II.
Some PERSONAL HELP TO LIFT US ABOVE SIN. Sin is an established fact, explain it,
disguise it, extenuate it how we may. Christ’s mission was to teach us the nature
and guilt of sin. When this is brought home to the soul then indeed it cries, ‘‘ To
whom shallI go? Surely God must have some one forme?” He is in that sin-
less one who came into the world to save sinners. If we accept not Christ the voice
of centuries tells us that there is no other. III. Somz ONE WHO SHALL RAISE US
ABOVE DEATH ITSELF. ‘This we find in Him who confronted death and conquered,
and who is “The resurrection and the life.” Has any one else, not the words,
but even the Lope and promise of eternal life? (Dean Vaughan.) Christ the
only source of religious life :—1. There is a time when our religious thoughts
and feelings undergo a strain. It may be in youth, when the world first
lays hold of us: or in passing into manhood, when the intellect recoils from in-
herited thought; or under some terrible temptation. Then it seems doubtful
whether we shail stay in the old house or “ go away.” 2. When this time comes,
we must have an answer in our hearts why we should stay with Christ, or else we
shall certainly go. 3. The idea of all religion is that of the higher “ eternal’? life
of our text. “ Let us eat and drink,” &c., is common enough in practice, but no
school advocates it. All schools maintain that there is a life of unselfishness which
has as its vital principle the happiness of others. 4. The question, then, is not as
to the need. but the sources of this higher life. The religion of Christ is said to be
no longer effectual. Science, the religion of humanity, art, and culture, make their
claims more or less.to the exclusion of Christ. 5. How, then, ean it be shown
that in Christ alone is the true source of the higher life for man. By—I. Tus


oa Wd Sp lee
588 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [owar, VL.


ee


POWER or Curist’s PERSONALITY. It was not a question of opinion as to whether
the doctrines of Christ could be abandoned, an alternative between those of Christ
and the Pharisees. he issue here, as ever, was a purely personal matter. 1. This
assertion of authoritative personality is characteristic of Christ as a religious
teacher. ‘Iam the Way,” &c. The words would have been profane boasting on
any other lips. But when we see in Him what Peter saw in Him, we at once own
the power and blessing of His words. 2. The consciousness of a Divine character
in Christ is the most powerful root of the Divine life. We are moved by character
as by nothing else. ‘ruth on its intellectual side is hard to find, and may easily
be eluded. It is this which makes the essential weakness of many modern schemes
of religion. They are schemes of intellectualism, and, to the majority, are useless.
They are incapable of being moved by science and art, because the motive power of
life does not work in the main through the intellect or the taste. The higher life
may be helped by them, but they do not give or quicken it. 3. But let the per-
sonal life in us be brought in contact with a higher personal life, and the springs
of our higher life are at once touched. Place a noble human being amongst others,
and how powerfully does his infiuence work! It is intelligible to all minds, and
steals into all hearts. It was such a power as this, in a super-eminent degree, that
Christ was felt to be. Behind all His kindness, there lay a depth of Divine per-
sonality. 4. All this Christ is still, and the higher life is realized by us when our
character is moulded by His, and His mind is formed in us. I, Tue pirect
REVELATION OF THE HIGHER LIFE THROUGH His worps. The idea of Divine per-
sonality carries with it the idea of revelation. If the power behind the world is a
personal power, it cannot but make itself known; and eternal life can only be
known to us through its expressions in such a one as Christ. If we cannot find it
here, we can find it nowhere. All Christ said or did was a revelation of it. Here
is strength to resist evil and to make habitual in us the instincts of a higher life,
and nowhere else. And ff we have failed, our hearts tell us it is because we have
gone back from Christ. (Principal Tulloch.) The difficulties of disbelief:--1. Sup-
pose we give up the Christian faith, what shall we have instead? Wise men are
bound to look at consequences. If you were asked to leave your house, would you
not inquire where you were to go? And are we to concern ourselves more about
shelter for the body than a home for the soul? 2. It is easier to pull down than
to build up, to spuil a picture than to paint one, to tempt a man than to save one,
to ruin life than to train it for heaven. Infidels are doing this easy work, and to
them we must put the practical question, Give up religion, and what then? I. Givz
UP THE IDEA OF GoD, AND WHAT THEN? You would refuse to throw away the poorest
covering till you knew what you were to have in return, Will you, then, reck-
lessly give up the idea of the living, loving, personal God at the bidding of any
man? Remember that you can put away the mystery of God, and you get in
return the greater mystery of godlessness. The wax flower on your table was
made, but the roses in your garden grew by chance, forsooth. II. Givz up tHE
IDEA OF THE FUTURE, AND WHAT THEN? If a man asked you to throw away a
telescope, would you not inquire what you were to have in return? Will you, then,
throw away the faith-glass through which you read the solemn and wondrous
future. Christian revelation tells us that death is abolished, and heaven the goal
of human spirits. Renounce this, and what can the sceptic give? JII., Suur
your Binte, AND WHAT THEN? The Bible says, “The Lord is my Shepherd,” &c.;
the tempter says, “ Be you that shepherd.” It says, ‘‘ Ho, every one that thirsteth,”’
&c. ; he says, ‘‘ You have no thirst that you cannot slake at the muddy pool at
your feet.” It says, “God is a present help in time of trouble”; he says, ** Dry
your tears, and snap your fingers in the face of the universe.” It proclaims the
forgiveness of sins ; he says, ‘‘ You have never sinned.’’ It says, ‘In My Father’s
house are many mansions’’; he says ‘¢ Your mansion is the grave ; get into it, and
rot away.” Conclusion: 1. Keep this question straight before you. 2. Inquire of
the tempter his power to provide an alternative. 3. Be sure that the alternative is
worth having. And you will find—4, That if you leave the Divine life and aspect
of things, there is nothing but outer darkness. (J. Parker, Dep) The disciples’
reasons for cleaving to Jesus :—IJ. Let us glance at THOSE SYSTEMS FOR WHICH WE
ARE TEMPTED TO FORSAKE Curist. 1. Romanism. 2. Spiritualism. 3. Pantheism.
4, Secularism. 5. The world. II. Let us examine Curist’s suPHRIOR CLAIMS ON
OUR AFFECTION AND Fait. 1. He is a Divine Teacher. 2. An all-sufficient
Saviour. 3. An Almighty Protector. 4. A Sovereign Lord. 5. The Rest of the
weary soul. Conclusion: 1. Christ is infinitely worthy of our confidence and love


ae


omar. vi.) ST. JOHN. 589


2. Make yourselves better acquainted with Him, and your faith and love will be
confirmed, (Isaac Jennings.) Personal affiance in Christ the soul’s safeguard
(Sermon to Young Men) :—1. We canscarcely conceive of any one but Peter speak-
ing these words. They would not have been the first answer of the critical Thomas
or the more philosophical John. The truth they contain would at last have aroused
the faith of Thomas,.and have been the resting-place of the love of John. Their
sudden, unqualified utterance could only have broken from the lips of Peter. At
the bare mention of the possibility of departure from Christ, St. Peter’s soul was on
fire, and the utterance of his heart outran the slower processes of the intellect, and
he spoke with the voice of one who had experienced the power of the words of
eternal life. 2. Younvg men are specially tempted to go away. The distinctive
feature of your age is that it abounds in temptations, There is—I. Tue 1empration
TO A LIFE OF IDLE SELF-INDULGENCE. 1. With health strong, spirits high, and
companionship abundant, the pleasure of merely living is so very great as for the
time to seem almost satisfying. The facilities for easy living increases this tempta-


- tion; but to yield to it is to kill the heart of your truest life. Though there may be


nothing positively sinful in the separate acts of such a life, it is as a whole most
sinful. You are guilty of the sin of omission, and rendering yourself unfit for the
work of the future when it comes. For in such a life the seeds of all future evil
are sown—softness, slothfulness, selfishness, &c. 2. This temptation is not to be
overcome by the dull aphorisms of morality, nor by the festering pricks of ambition
—the one all powerless against the other, as dangerous as the evil. What you need
is to know Christ for yourself, so that love for Him becomes a real passion in your
heart. Personal affiance brings you into His presence; and to be in His presence
is to love Him, and love makes all labour easy. There is no limit to the height to
which this may not exalt the most common-place life, II. Ta Temprarion To
IMMORAL PLEASURES. 1. To attempt to restrain young men of strong passions by
stoical philosophy or prudential maxims, is like throwing a little water on a great
fire, which, hissing out its own feebleness, does but quicken the burning. 2. There
is but one sufficient remedy: that which has turned the martyrs’ flames into a
pleasant whistling wind, and subdued the flesh in all the triumph of its strength—
the love of Christ. Bring Christ by the cry of faith into thy life; set thy struggles
against corruption in the light of His cross, and pardon, and purity, and power will
come from the pierced hand, III. Tur TempraTIoN TO SENSUOUS RELIGIOUSNESS.
1. Our worship may easily be smothered by the weight of its external adorning
till it sinks into the death of mere formality, or is sentimentalized into the languid
feebleness of an unmanly emotion. 2. The charm of such a temptation can only
be broken by the knowledge of Christ on the cross dying for our sin, awakening by
His word the sense of guilt, bringing the message of forgiveness, and holding com-
munion with the reconciled spirit. When this mighty revelation comes, the soul
cannot rest in outer things, nor allow the most beautiful symbol to intercept one
ray of His countenance, who is fairer than the children of men. You cannot starve
the busy, intrusive fancy into a heavenly affection. The love of Christ must so
elevate the spirit, that it shall rest in no form, but in every form seek Him
supremely. IV, THe TEMPTATION TO FREE-THINKING, AND THE LOSS OF ALL REALLY
FIXED BELIEF IN CurisTmaniry. 1. Ages have their own temper, and there is much
that is noble in that of our own. It contrasts most favourably with sensual, dull,
and easy-living times. Labour, conflict, victory, are its watch-words. But its
victories breed in it a certain audacity, to which the authority and genius of the
Christian revelation oppose themselves.’ 2. Safety is not to be found in sleepily dis-
regarding what is passing around us, nor in setting ourselves against the temper of
the day, or in inventing a concordat between it and revelation, nor in forbidding
criticism and turning away from discoveries. The rock, whose rugged breast
affronts the torrent, cannot stay, but can only chafe the troubled waters. 3. If
there are hard sayings discovered in the Christian record, and many turn back
because of them, this is but a sifting of the inner willingness of hearts to go away.
What else do the many voices around us proclaim but that, more than ever, we
need a personal knowledge of Christ to keep us safe amidst the strife of tongues?
4. The real talisman against unbelief is not in hard, narrow, exclusive views, but
in personal love to Christ. This love will sweep away a thousand doubts and
speculative difficulties, and supply a whole life of resistance which is quickened
into action by the mere touch of what might harm the spirit. (Bp. S. Wilber-
force.) Whence the words of eternal life:—I. Tun answer oF science. By
education, by learning the laws of nature and training oneself to obey them.


<i


~~


590 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHuae. VL
MT ee eee
Professor Huxley likens life to a game at chess. The board is the world; the
pieces the phenomena of the universe ; the rules its laws. The player on the other
side is hidden. His play is always fair, but he never overlooks a mistake. To
the man who plays well the highest stakes are paid. The one who plays ill is
checkmated without remorse. Education is learning the rules of this game, 1.
This representation ignores the spiritual nature. That there is @ spiritual nature
and spiritual fact is attested by the consciousness and history of our race. 2. The
God of Science is unknowable, without sympathy for the weak and erring, and
compassion for the suffering. If this be all the God there is, how foolish to con-
cern ourselves about the words of eternal life! 3. This theory of the highest living
leaves out of the account the most startling fact of human life—sin. 4. This
answer has been tested. Give us culture, say the scientists, and we will save the
race, and usher in the long-looked-for Golden Age. Ah, yes, culture! that is what
Athens had, and perished. That is what Paris has, and, as Carlyle says, is crazy.
That is what Germany:has, and still is full of the worst ills. That is what England
has, and yet England is neither satisfied nor happy. That is what we have, and
still these spirits of ours crave something higher, stronger, purer, better. That is
what this age of ours has, and withal is blind and weak, and restless as the storm-
tossed sea. Science may educate, but still sin remains, and conscience is not
quieted. II. Perer’s answer. What a mighty contrast between Christ and
science, . 1. Go to Jacob’s well. ‘‘ Whence has thou the living water?” The
scientist would reply, ‘‘ Out of the great well of nature. Study the laws of the
universe.’’ Would the woman’s heart have been touched, and would she have
obeyed? 2. Suppose it had been the scientist who had been dining at Simon’s
table; he would have said, ‘‘ Woman, it is not scientific to weep. Becalm. Life
is a game at chess; you have been checkmated because you didn’t understand the
rules of the game.’? Would she have gone away as she did disburdened and
satisfied? 3. What would the scientist have done at the grave of Lazarus? 4.
Where has science given us a parable of the prodigal son? (S. 4. Ort, D.D.)
Jesus Christ the only source of rest and happiness :— I. In this reply of the apostle’s
is implied 4 CONVICTION OF THE INSUFFIENCY OF ALL HUMAN MEANS FOR THE ATTAINMENT
OF gaLvation. ‘‘ Lord, to whom shall we go?” Shall we apply to the scribes and
Pharisees? Shall we inquire of the ceremonial or moral law? Shall we submit
to the decisions of reason? 1. The scribes and Pharisees, and other doctors of the
law among the Jews, at that period were blind leaders of the blind. Their corrup-
tions had darkened their minds, and thrown a veil over the sacred writings; so that
the plainest prophecies were misunderstood, and the most important doctrines per-
verted by them. 2. The apostles were equally convinced that life and salvation
could not be obtained from an observance of the ceremonial or moral law. (1)
With respect to the former—they knew that the tabernacle service was chiefly
typical, shadowing forth good things to come. (2) With respect to the latter—even
if they could not recollect that they had been guilty of any gross immorality, yet
they knew that they were far from that perfection which the law demands. 3.

They were also persuaded of the entire insufticiency of reason to point out to them
the path of life. Untaught by revelation, what knowledge can we obtain respecting
the salvation of a sinner? II. The text implies that they had a rim BELIEF IN
CHRIST’S PERFECTIONS AND QUALIFICATIONS AS A Saviour. ‘Thou hast the words of
eternal life.” 1. This is the language of faith, and expresses the sentiments and
exercises of every soul that fiees to the Saviour for refuge. 2. In this confession
they acknowledge, also, a belief in His ability to instruct men in the way of life

3. It also implies faith in Him ag the only atoning sacrifice. 4. To be a perfect
Saviour, He must be able, also, to ensure everlasting life to those whose sins He
expiated ; and, therefore, He must be possessed of power to apply His purchased
salvation to the souls of His people. JIT. From such a view of His offices, and a
complete satisfaction in His undertaking and character, arises an unconquerable
desire for the blessings which He has to bestow ; and hence the words of the text
are to be considered as expressing A FIRM RESOLUTION TO ADHERE To Him As THEIR
Saviour anD Lorp. ‘To whom shall we go,” say the disciples, “ but unto Thee.”
1. United to Him they see safety ; separated from Him they behold inevitable death.
2. This holy resolution is formed, not merely from necessity, but from a conviction
of the hononr, delight, and immortal glory which await the followers of the Lamb.

(W. L. Johnson.) Words of eternal life:—I. A SEARCHING QUESTION PUT AT A
cRITICAL TIME. 1. It is a question put at a time when there was a great falling off
from the number of Christ’s followers. Now was the time to show their colours—


ee re


oRAP. vr.] ST, JOHN. 591


now or never. The chaff was driven away. The wheat remained. Times of
apostasy are sifting seasons for God's people, giving a renewed call to every soldier
of the Cross to rally round the deserted banner. The example of others is no safe
guide. Public opinion is often a feeble indicator of duty. There is one example,
and only one, that we are safe to follow—the example of Christ. There is one
standard, and only one, that never varies—the Word of God. Keep the infallible
standard in your eye, and that will help to steady you amid the changes of men
and time, 2. This question was put at a time when there was a fresh demand
made on the faith of Christ’s followers. It is obvious that our Lord’s design was
to lead His followers to a knowledge of the hidden mysteries of His kingdom; to
set before them some of the deeper truths of revelation. Progressiveness marked
all His teaching. Faith has often to surmount barriers which are impassable by
the natural understanding. Duty is ever making fresh demands upon us, and as
we advance we are ever finding out depths that we have not yet sounded, and heights
of holiness we have not yet scaled. There are speculative difficnlties that try our
faith, and perplexing things in God’s word that we cannot explain. Im the face of
such perplexities it will be our wisdom to hold fast what we canaccept. ‘‘ What we
know not now, we shall know hereafter.” 38. This question was put at a time when
higher devotion was required in the life of Christ’s followers. When God reveals
Himself to His people, as He has been doing with increasing clearness at different
stages in the world’s history, it is in order to enable them to be more devoted
witnesses for Him among men. All our knowledge ought to help us to live holier
and nobler lives; otherwise it profits nothing. II. A NoBLER REPLY FOUNDED ON A
WEIGHTY REASON. 1. Christ the highest of all teachers. We have many professing
guides, but they all save One lead astray. Shall we follow our modern Pharisees
and adopt the creed of the formalist? No, that will not satisfy the soul that longs
for life. Shall we follow our modern Sadducees and adopt the creed of the atheist?
No, that will not satisfy the soul that longs for God. Are we perplexed in our
search for truth, and know not whose teaching to trust amid conflicting opinions?
Let us learn to distrust, in matters of eternal moment, all human guides, and look
to that Name beside which there is none other under heaven given among men
whereby we must be saved. Then we shall have a Teacher to instruct us wiser
than man, a Light brighter than the sun to shine on our path. 2. Eternal life the
best of all possessions. Christ has something to bestow which no other claimant
can boast of. He offers an inheritance that will outlast the sun, and live as long as
God Himself. (D. Merson, M.A.) Words of eternal life:—What are any of
these life-giving words? Here are afew. ‘I am the Resurrection and the Life,”
&c. ‘Seek ye Me, and your soul shall live.” ‘‘Whoso eateth My flesh,” &c.
“© God so loved the world,” &c. What “ potential energy ’ slumbers in those won-
derful words! They carry within them to the guilty and the dying a Divine
message fraught with saving and life-giving power. They are simple that a child
may read them, but they hold, as it were in solution, the deepest thoughts of God.
The mere words are often compared to the casket containing the gem. To find the
gem you have to open the casket, Even so, to get at the meaning of Christ’s life-
giving words, you need the spiritual discernment, the key that will unlock the
gospel casket. The application of its contents to the heart will result in life eternal.
Or take another similitude: The words are like the title-deeds of an inheritance.
The possession of the title-deeds settles the ownership of the property. So the
man who appropriates by faith the truths of the gospel makes good his claim to
the inheritance which the gospel proniises. Accept these truths, hold fast the
title-deeds, and the inheritance is yours—not simply will be yours at some future
time, but is yours now. The moment you receive the words of Christ. ycu become
possessor of the life of Christ. And this is what is here called ‘Eternal Life,”
which has been defined to be not simply endless being, but a life of perfect harmony
with its environment, not subject to the changes and imperfections of this finite
world. To be in harmony with Christ, otherwise called reconciliation with God—
this is the aim of man’s being, the noblest heritage of fallen humanity. Christ
makes the offer of it to all His followers. In Him it is to be found, and those who
are in Him have already entered into possession, But, so long as they are in
this’ finite world, they are like the sons of Jacob in their posession of Canaan,
surrounded by foes and exposed to changes, so that the circumstances are not
favourable to undisturbed possession, the external harmony or environment not
being perfect, but the time is coming when the harmony thus incomplete will
be consummated in fairer worlds amid perfect and purer surroundings. (Ibid.)


Soe


592 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cmap. vi.


nn UES URNS NNR


Revealed religion the only source of true happiness :—Taking the gospel just as we
tind it, I shall show that all men’s desires are to be met in it and in nothing else.
If we reject it, whither shall we go for the fruition of our desires ? Take—I. Tur
DESIRE OF CONTINUED ExIsTENcE. That this is deeply seated in the soul is evident
from the horror which annihilation awakens. Where shall we, then, find the
evidence that the desire is to be gratified? 1. The senses only inform us that we
shall die, and no disembodied spirit appears to contradictit. 2. Reason only specu-
lates upon it as a probability, and those philosophers who most cleverly argued it
out disbelieved their own reasonings. 3. But faith looks through the darkness and
Veholds in Christ ‘life and immortality brought to light.” II. Tue prstre oF
action. The gospel, and that only—1. Gives a right direction to the human
faculties. Those faculties have acquired a wrong direction which reason, working
through the highest civilization, could not correct; but just in proportion as the
gospel has prevailed the standard of morality has been elevated. 2. Opens a noble
field for their exercise. When the gospel is not known the social duties are but
little understood or performed ; but Christianity enjoins the doing of good to our
fellow-creatures, not only as beings who are to live here, but forever. 3. Enjoins
employments which are fitted to improve man’s faculties, and thus render him
capable of some vigorous and successful action, III. THe DESIRE OF KNOWLEDGE.
True, man may advance with no other light but the light of nature. But in that
department which respects the character of God and man’s eternal relations
human reason is at best an inadequate instructor. The knowledge derived
from the Bible is—1. Most practical, adapted to influence the affections, and
through them the life. 2. Sublime. Its revelations are stamped with moral
grandeur—God, creation, the soul, redemption, immortality, &c. 3. For ever pro-
gressive. The treasures of the Bible are inexhaustible, and he who walks by it here
will walk in the brighter light of heaven hereafter. IV. THE DESIRE OF THE APPRO-
BATION OF OTHER BEINGS. 1. Wherever the gospel has not existed, malice, hatred,
envy, revenge, &c., have held the soul in dominion in spite of all that reason
could do to redeem it. But the gospel brings into exercise the spirit of forgiveness
and benevolence, and makes man a brother, instead of an enemy, to his fellow-
man. 2. But this desire has respect to the favourable regard of God, and is met—
(1) By the gospel proclamation of forgiveness ; (2) The impartation of a character
which renders man the object of Divine complacency. V. THE DESIRE FOR SOCIETY.
There is an impression abroad that Christianity is unfriendly to social enjoyment.
But monkery is a perversion of Christianity. Christianity is in its very nature
social, for—l, A large part of its duties are social. 2. Its tendency is to refine and
exalt the social affections. 38. It has established a society—the Church. 4, It
meets this desire through every period of existence. Conclusion: 1. Does not this
furnish a conclusive argument for the Divinity of the gospel? 2. How malignant
the spirit of infidelity. (1) Even on the theory that Christianity is false, it can
supply nothing in its place. (2) But on the theory that Christianity is true, it
stands chargeable with opposing man’s best interests in time and eternity. 3. How
blessed the employment of extending the gospel! (W.B. Sprague, D.D.) Christ
the centre of Unity:—An old Greek sage had a theory, and it must be admitted
that there was a great deal of truth in his speculations. He had a notion that the
history of the universe was composed of alternate cycles, covering vast periods of
time—the cycle of love and the cycle of hate. Under the influence of love, when
this cycle was being fulfilled which he supposed all came under, the mighty force
and tendency of each was towards unity. Then came the cycle of hate when the
centrifugal forces produced universal disintegration ; parts flew off from the whole,
from their proper centre, and from their proper relatians to each other; and the
various objects of beauty also began to disappear. This was a curious conception
but was there not a great deal of truth init? May we not say that there are two
laws in the spiritual kingdom of Jesus Christ? First, the love law, having for its
centre God, who pervades the universe and tends to promote harmony and beauty
and every other comeliness. The second, the law of hatred or self-assertion, by
which the individual, breaking away from God, sets himself up as his god; from
which will of necessity result the disintegration of society, confusion, anarchy, and
the ruin of the universe. These two great laws are operating in our midst. (W.
Hay-Aitken, M.A.) Christ Himself the sole protection against the assaults of
unbelief :—It is not by limiting the intellectual side of our religion, but by exalting
its spiritual side, that we can be safe and keep others safe. It is not by striving to
repress intellectual activity, nor by jealously warning it off the precincts of revealed


bi
1
4
‘
4
i
7
5
>


omar. vi] ST, JOHN. 593


religion ; it is by liftiag up before men’s eyes the Cross of Christ, and teaching
them personal affiance in Him, that we shall keep uninjured the great deposit of
the truth. And this is the only talisman: without it all speculations upon the
mystery of life and of God are full of danger; for though such peril is pre-
eminently present in studies and inquiries which tend to shake received belief as
to things sacred, it is not with them only that it is present. It is almost as easy
for controversial orthodoxy, as for adverse speculative criticism, to land the spirit
in the valley of the shadow of death. Nothing can more endanger the true life of
the spirit than the cold charnel-house breath of a mere reasoning, unloving, un-
charitable orthodoxy. Alas, the pathway of the Church, through times of great
controversy, is marked by the mouldering corpses of such combatants for truth.
This, and this only, can keep us safe amongst our own perils—to have known our-
selves the love bred within the soul by a true belief in Christ’s atoning blood, in
Christ’s perpetual presence, in Christ’s abiding love. And of this we may be sure
no speculative difficulties can endanger one soul, which has been tanght by
experimental knowledge to say in times of darkness, ‘“‘ Lord, to whom shall we
go? Thou hast the words of eternal life.” (Bp. S. Wilberforce.) A reason
against turning back:—When Christian, in the ‘ Pilgrim’s Progress,” thought
about going back, he recollected that he had no armour for his back. Look at that
fact whenever you are tempted. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Christ alone can satisfy the
soul:—Timour the Tartar desired universal dominion, saying the earth was too
small for more than one master. ‘It is too small to satisfy the ambition of a great
soul.” ‘*The ambition of a great soul,” said the Sheik of Samarcand to him one
day, ‘‘ is not to be satisfied by the possession of a morsel of earth added to another,
but by the possession of God alone sufficiently great to fill up an infinite thought.”
(Lamartine. ) I have received from Taubenheim one hundred pieces of gold, and
fifty pieces of silver from Schart, so that I begin to fear lest God be giving me my
portion here below. But I solemnly declare that nothing can make me happ

except God. (Luther.) The world cannot confer happiness :—‘‘ One should think,”
said I, ‘that the proprieter of all this (Keddlestone, the seat of Lord Scarsfield)
must be happy.” ‘Nay, sir,” said Johnson; ‘all this excludes but one evil—
poverty.” (Boswell.) Christ only is worth serving:—A great statesman, aban-
doned in his old age by his sovereign, lay dying one day in England; and it is
recorded of him that he said, “‘ If I had served my God as faithfully as I have served
my king, He had noi cast me off now.” How true! Blessed God! Thou will never
abandon any who put their trust in Thee. (Dr. Guthrie.) The hopelessness of
humanity away from Christ :— To whom shall we go?” Poor humanity, dis-
tracted by many perplexities, bleeding from many wounds, weeping over many
griefs, must go somewhere: she cannot eat out her own heart with grief and con-
sume her own life with sighing. Whither shall we go? Where shall the great
mystery of our existence be unveiled to us? Is Nature to be the temple of our
worship, with its skies, now bright and now cloudy, arching over us in alternate
loveliness and terror? Ah, there is no gospel in her sighing wind, and all
her resurrections die again, and all her waves break upon a strand that is un-
known and far. Can infidelity reassure us? Is there safety in the everlasting
“No?” Can we vanquish the danger by denying it? Can we overcome the peril
by putting it faraway? Men try this sometimes, but it is a sombre region to dwell
in where dead leaves crackle under foot. Ah, no! there is a shuddering and
sickly air, as of some ghost-haunted wood or precincts stern and savage ; and
it is useless, for Death will come, although society join us in the conspiracy to
cheat him, and although friends forbear kindly to inquire about our age, and
although decay can go and rouge over its wrinkles, and compliment itself into
youth again, Death will come ; and there is something in all of us that will keep
on asking, ‘“ What then? what then?” ‘“ What after death for me remains ?”
Oh, it is wiser surely even with the Egyptian to shape the coffin in the lifetime, or
with the Jew to build the sepulchre in the garden. Speaking of Jews, would
Judaism serve to shelter us? It has glorious types—a wonderful history, many
lighted windows of worship. Shall we enter the door? Nay, don’t exhume it:
it has been in the sarcophagus, a corpse, now for more than a thousand years,
Christ would have been the soul of it once, but it rejected Him, and struck its own
suicide in a mistaken chivalry which preferred death to what it deemed to be dis-
honour, Judaism can do nothing for us. Then shall reason light us down the
vale, or morality put a staff in our hand, or superstition torture us into safety, or
formalism ferry us over the swellings of Jordan? Alas! they are all miserable


; ae!
594 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [crap. VI.


comforters; they lift no cloud; there it hangs, mysterious and solemn, over the
passage into eternal life. Jesus of Nazareth, Divine human Saviour! we come to
Thee: we pray to Thee. In Thee is all the beauty which the Greek worshipped :
in Thee is all the law which the stern Roman loved. Thou art Nature’s great
interpreter; and infidelity shrinks away from Thy presence; and J udaism is
fulfilled in Thee; and superstition becomes reverence as Thou speakest; and
formality gets an inner spirit; and faith in Thee is the highest reason; and love to
Thee is the grandest morality. (W. M. Punshon, LL.D.) No retreat :—When
Garibaldi sailed from Genoa in 1860 he took with him a thousand volunteers. They
landed at Marsala almost in the face of the Neapolitan fleet, When the commander
of Marsala, returning to the port, saw the steamers, he gave orders to destroy them.
Garibaldi having landed his men, looked with indifference, almost with pleasure
on the work of destruction. ‘Our retreat is cut off,’’ he said, exultingly; “‘ we
have no hope but in going forward: it is to death or victory.” (H. O. Mackey.)


Ver. 69. We believe and are sure that Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living
God.—The Christ of God :—Faith without knowledge is mere fancy. For the want
of knowledge the faith of the ancient Jews gave way in the wilderness. So here the
nominal disciples went away because they did not know who He was from whom
they went. To the apostles this knowledge gave stability to their faith and they
remained. I, Tue testimony. That Christ was the Messiah. 1. The provision
that is by this Christ could not be by any other. (1) His sacrifice is of eternal
worth. (2) It eternally satisfies the soul. (3) It is the ground upon which all
things work together for good. (4) We should labour by faith and prayer for this
meat. 2. By partaking of this provision we shall never come to want. Away then
with anxieties andfears. 3. To accept this provision is the counsel of God to man.
II. Tue Sonsuip. Christ is the Son of God in a way no other can be. 1, Because
He was born as no other was ever born. 2. Because He was a complex person—
God and man. 38. Because of His infallible purity. 4. Because He embodies bless-
ings which no other person ever did. 5. Because He included in His sonship
millions of others. IIJ. Tue norz or pistincrion. ‘‘ Living” in contrast to idols
and false religions (Isa. xxvi). Because God never dies His people can never die.
IV. THE ASSURANCE oF FAITH. (James Wells.) The threefold Christ :—I. THE
Cunrist OF PROPHECY, 1. Christ was the Desireof all nations, the Saviour for which
all nations yearned. 2. His coming was in accordance with the plan of God from
the first. Hence then were preparations not only among the Jews but in general
history for His coming. 8. But the Christ who was blindly felt after by sage and
seer was the Christ of an assured prophecy in Judea. Abraham had seen His day.
Even earlier to Adam and Noah the promise had gone forth. You know the tenor
of Isaiah, Daniel and the minor prophets. II. TH Curist oF HIsTory corresponds
in every particular to the Christ of prophecy. Hight different writers record His life,
but they all agree in saying that Christ was what many more before He came said He
was tobe. III. Tam Curist of EXPERIENCE. 1, Christ’s promise was that He would
manifest Himself to and live in His people. The Apostles point out this as the
central Christian privilege. It therefore becomes our duty, that as there is an
indwelling Christ in every true believer, to bring out in ourselves the Christ should
be ourendand aim, 2. The Christ of prophecy was needed as the initiation of the
Divine plan for our salvation. But the benefits of the Christ of prophecy to us are
simply that they confirm our faith and raise in us a more exalted idea of His
excellence, 3. The Christ of history, too, has passed away, but the Christ of
experience is based upon and modelled after and by the Christ of history. (A. B.
Livermore.) A simple confession :—I. AN ANTECEDENT FalTH. The disciples
commenced their investigations into the theme of Christ’s personality. 1. Not by
practising unlimited credulity as opposed to sober inquiry, 2. Not by superstitiously
committing themselves to extravagant conceptions as to His rank. 38. By accept-
ing honestly and trustfully the evidence placed before them in the character and
works of Jews without partiality or prejudice, and then forming their conclusion.
II. A CONSEQUENT KNOWLEDGE. The result was that they arrived at a clear and
intelligent judgment as to who Christ was. The glory of the Incarnate Son having
shined into their souls they were enabled to realize the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, (7. Whitelaw, D.D.)


Vers. 70, 71. Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil !—Judas
Iscariot:—I. WHo THEN WILL SAY THAT THE MEN WITH WHOM CHRIST BEGAN His


cHaP, vr.] ST. JOHN. 595


NEW KINGDOM WERE MORE THAN MEN; not bone of our bone, but a princely sort,
quite away from the common herd? On the contrary, they fairly represented
human nature in its best and worst aspects—geutleness, ardour, domesticity, enter-
prise, timidity, courage, and one of them was a deyvil—_a man like the others, but in
him a pre-eminent capacity for the foulest mischief. II. A wonderfully instructive
fact is this that Jesus DID NOT POINT OUT THE SUPREMELY WICKED MAN, but simply said,
“One of you is a devil.” Thus a spirit of mournful self-suspicion was excited,
culminating in the mournful ‘‘Is it 1?” Itis better not to know the worst man in
the Church: to know only that judgment will begin at the House of God, and to be
wondering whether that judgment will take most effect on ourselves. No man fully
knows himself. The very star of the morning fell from heaven: why not you or I?
III. Iscarror’s WAS A HUMAN SIN RATHER THAN A MERELY PERSONAL CRIME. Indi-
vidually, I did not sin in Eden, but humanly I did; personally, I did not covenant
for the betrayal of my Lord, but morally I did; I denied Him, and pierced Him;
and He loved me and gave Himself for me. IV. Wuy pm CHRIST CHOOSE A MAN
whom Hz KNEW TO BE ADEVIL? A hard question, but there is one harder still. Why
did Jesus choose you? (J. Parker, D.D.) A solemn warning :—I. For THE
TWELVE. Peter had spoken in their name as well as for himself: Christ replies that
nevertheless there is ground for self-examination, Their honour and the position
they enjoyed as apostles, and possible future heads of the Church, was no infallible
guarantee oftheir sincerity. ‘There was, therefore, with a devil in their midst, room
for heart-searching before God, II. For Jupas. How Christ came to elect him
presents no more inseperable problem than that involved in any attempt to
harmonize Divine sovereignty and human freedom, Why should God employ
wicked men anywhere, particularly in His Church? All men are dealt with as free
agents. If Christ elected Judas, it was probably because—1l. He recognized that
to be the Father’s Will. 2. He would rescue if He could a soul as black as his. 3.
He would make it clear that Judas was self-destroyed. The warning was mani-
festly for the sake of Judas to discover to Him his awful danger. (7. Whitelaw,
D.D.) Judas :—Did Christ know the character of this man of Kerioth (chap.
ii, 24, 25; xiii. 11)? A number of questions will suggest themselves ; but we note
only the brief account given in the Bible. I. THE DEVELOPMENT OF HIS DEPRAVITY.
As treasurer, he develops selfishness, avarice, thievishness: a typical defaulter.
The anointing at Bethany showed satan in possession. Conference with the chief
priests, and the compact with them. The upper room, the betrayer revealed. The
kiss, and the cowardly disappearance. II, His DREADFUL DEATH. The accounts in
Matthew and Acts are not contradictory: one is supplemental to the other. Con-
viction, remorse, suicide (Matt. xxviii. 3-5.) III. His poLEFUL DESTINY. “ Own
place” (Matt. xxvi. 24). The two Scripture hints indicate his dark doom. Remarks:
1. This betrayer a minister. Official prominence has special dangers, Hierarchies
have been traitors, in destroying foundation doctrines, and individuals have pierced
Christ in the house of his friends. 2. But the loyal far outnumber the betrayers.
Do not forget the faithful standard-bearers. 3. A warning to all against making
worldly gain out of professed godliness. Let avarice be shunned. 4. Each im-
penitent sinner will have his ‘‘ own place.”? Remorse will be his constant com-
panion. 5. Contrast the joy in prospect of departure which loyal faith yields
(2 Tim. iv. 6-8). (H.F. Smith, D.D.) Why Judas was chosen :—In reference to
the apostleship of Judas, certain questions are eagerly pressed. If Jesus knew all
men, was He deceived in Judas? If not deceived, why did He call him? When
He discovered his true character, why did He not dismiss him? In view of such
questions, it is to be noted (1) that he attached himself to Jesus as a disciple before
he was made an apostle; and for his profession of discipleship he is himself
responsible ; (2) that, being a professed disciple, Jesus appointed him to be one of
the twelve; (3) that Jesus, on whom no mock faith could impose, knew what
manner of man he was; and (4) that his testimony in favour of Jesus, in its own
place, and within its own limits, is as valuable as that of any. Had there been fault
in Jesus, he was the man to find it out and tell it ; indeed there was the strongest
possible reason why he should have told it, to quiet his own conscience and justify
his conduct. Not one of the twelve has borne more distinct testimony to the truth—
vital to the Christian system—that Jesus is the Sinless One. (J. Culross, D.D.)
The character of Judas :—If the choice of the false disciple was not due either to
ignorance or to foreknowledge, how is it to be explained? The only explanation
to be given is that, apart from secret insight, Judas was to all appearance an
eligible man, and could not be passed over on any grounds coming under ordinary


596 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHar. vr
nn — ——
observation. His qualities must have been such, that one not eens: the eye of
omniscience, looking at him, would have been disposed to say of him what Samuel
said of Eliab: “Surely the Lord’s anointed is before him” (1 Sam. xvi. 6). In
that case, his election by Jesus is perfectly intelligible. The Head of the Church
simply did what the Church has to do in analogous circumstances. The Church
chooses men to fill sacred offices on a conjunct view of ostensible qualifications,
such as knowledge, zeal, apparent piety, and correctness of outward conduct. In
so doing, she often makes unhappy appointments, and confers dignity on persons
of the Judas type, who dishonour the positions they fill. The mischief resulting is
great ; but Christ has taught us, by His example in choosing Judas, as also by the
parable of the tares, that we must submit to the evil, and leave the remedy in higher
hands. Out of evil God often brings good, as He did in the case of the traitor.
Supposing Judas to have been chosen to the apostleship on the ground of apparent
fitness, what manner of man would that imply ? A vulgar, conscious hypocrite,
seeking some mean by-end, while professedly aiming at a higher? Not necessarily ;
not probably. Rather such a one as Jesus indirectly described Judas to be when
he made that reflection: ‘“‘ If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.”
The false disciple was a sentimental, plausible, self-deceived pietist, who knew and
approved the good, though not conscientiously practicing it; one who, in esthetic
feeling, in fancy, and in intellect, had affinities for the noble and the holy, while in
will and in conduct he was the slave of base, selfish passions; one who, in the last ;
resource, would always put self uppermost, yet could zealously devote himself to .
well-doing when personal interests were not compromised. In thus describing }
Judas, we draw not the picture of a solitary monster. Men of such type are by no
means so rare a3 some may imagine. History, sacred and profane, supplies
numerous examples of them, playing an important part in human affairs. Baalam,
who had the vision of a prophet and the soul of a miser, was such a man;
Robespierre, the evil genius of the French Revolution, was another. The man who
sent thousands to the guillotine had, in his younger days, resigned his office as a
provincial judge, because it was against his conscience to pronounce sentence of
death on a culprit found guilty of a capital offence. A third example, more remark-
able than either, may be found in the famous Greek Alcibiades, who, to unbounded
ambition, unscrupulousness, and licentiousness, united a warm attachment to the
greatest and best of the Greeks. The man who in after years betrayed the cause of
his native city, and went over to the side of her enemies, was in his youth an
enthusiastic admirer and disciple of Socrates. How he felt towards the Athenian
sage may be gathered from words put into his mouth by Plato in one of his
dialogues, words which involuntarily suggest a parallel between the speaker and the
unworthy follower of a greater than Socrates: ‘I experience towards this man
alone (Socrates) what no one would believe me capable of: a sense of shame. For
I am conscious of an inability to contradict him, and decline to do what he bids me;
and when I go away, I feel myself overcome by desire of the popular esteem.
Therefore I flee from him, and avoid him. But when I see him, I am ashamed of
my admissions, and oftentimes I would be glad if he ceased to exist among the
living; and yet I know well, that were that to happen, I should still be more
grieved.” The character of Judas being such as we have described, the possibility
at least of his turning a traitor becomes comprehensible. One who loves himself
more than any man, however good, or any cause, however holy, is always capable
of bad faith more or less heinous. He is a traitor at heart from the outset, and all
that is wanted is a set of circumstances calculated to bring into play the evil
elements of his nature. (Ad. B. Bruce, D.D.) Treachery is not hidden from
Christ :—Alexander I. of Russia professed a strong friendship for Napoleon, but
when nearly all Europe had turned against him, he also became his enemy. An
Austrian courier was taken prisoner. There was found in his possession a letter
from the commander of the Russian forces, addressed to the Archduke Ferdinand,
congratulating him upon his victory, and expressing the hope that very soon the
Russian Army would be permitted to co-operate with the Austrian’s against the
French. Napoleon immediately sent the letter to. Alexander without note or com-
ment, (Abboti’s ** Napoleon.”) The baseness of treachery :—Of all the vices to
which human nature is subject, treachery is the most infamous and detestable,
being compounded of fraud, cowardice, and revenge. The greatest wrongs will not
justify it, as it destroys those principles of mutual confidence and security by which
only society can subsist. The Romans, a brave and generous people, disdained to
practise it towards their declared enemies; Christianity teaches us to forgive


;
}
>


CHAP. VII, ] ST. JOHN. 597
a
injuries: but to resent them under the disguise of friendship and benevolence,
pore 5 degeneracy at which common humanity and justice must blush. (L. M.
Stretch.


CHAPTER VII.


Vers. 1-13. After these things Jesus walked in Galilee.—The situation sur-
veyed :—I. THE scenz in Gauinuz: the attitude of Christ’s brethren. 1, The
counsel they offered. That Christ should repair to the centre of the theocratic
kingdom and make His Messianic claims where they could be competently examined
(ver. 3), 2. The argument they used. He could not acquire fame in Galilean
obscurity, but only in the metropolis (ver. 4)—a perilcus temptation He had twice
encountered (Matt. iv. 9; John vi. 15). 3. The spirit they cherished. They disbe-
lieved in His Messiahship, but could not deny His miracles. Hence they wanted
His true character settled. If He was the Christ they wanted to see Him crowned,
if not, the bubble should burst. 4. The reply they received. Christ was not going
up for the purpose suggested. (1) His hour for that had not come—there being for
every purpose under heaven (Eccles. iii, 1), much more for this, a seasonable
moment. (2) To go before that time would not secure what they desired—the
great world of Jerusalem not being prepared to welcome Him (ver. 7). Any time
would do for them, but not for Him. II. Tur scunz at Jenusauem. 1. The blood-
thirsty Sanhedrists—(1) Searched for their victim among the city throngs. (2)
With unsieeping hostility, which they had nursed for eighteen months, (3) With
murderous intent. (4) With eager inquiry. (5) With contemptuous scorn. ‘‘ That
celebrity who has been dazzling you with His wonders.” 2. The whispering
multitudes. These were—(1) Divided in their judgments concerning Him, as Simeon
had predicted (Luke ii. 34), and Christ affirmed they would be (Matt. x. 34, 35),
and as history proves they ever have been. (2) Afraid to speak openly about Him,
which betokened insincerity as well, They were prepared to do as their leaders
bade them. Miserable crew! Learn: 1. It is becoming and right to walk prudently :
Christ did so. 2. In religion the wisdom of this world is almost wholly wrong. It
was s0 with Christ’s brethren. 3. A man’s friends are often the last to believe
in His greatness and goodness. It was so with Christ. 4. The more a man re-
sembles Christ, the more he will be hated by the world. 5. The best of men may
be evil spoken of. Christ was. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) Infidelity :—I. Szupom
LACKS EVIDENCE. These brethren must have had ample evidence of Christ’s Mes-
siahship. As boys they must have seen something of His transcendent character.
No doubt many had pointed out to them extraordinary phases of His birth and life,
and how they had witnessed His public life for a considerable time, with its teaching
and miracles. So infidels have plenty of evidence. All nature is full of proofs of
God; and as for Christ the congruity of His biography with contemporaneous
history, and of His system with the conscience, reasoa, and wants of humanity, and
the immense and growing influence of His gospel upon the sentiment, spirit. and
character of mankind are evidence enough. The cause of infidelity is in the heart
rather than the head, II. Is auways vain. His brethren mainly from vanity
counsel Him to make a display in Jerusalem on a great national occasion (ver. 4).
His life was too obscure and His works too unostentatious, They wanted to share
the honour that would accrue. Infidelity is always vain. The vainest speakers,
authors, members of society, are those who profess infidel opinions. They are vain
of their imaginary intellectual independency, of their superior mental insight and
grasp, of their superiority to current creeds. It must be so. ‘The man who believes
in nothing greater than himself, will have both space and aliments in his mind in
which his egotism can grow to the most offensive proportions. Faith in the infinitely
great and good can alone burn out the native vanity of thecorrupt heart. Infidelity
is a negation. ‘ Light empty minds,” says Leighton, “are like bladders blown up
with anything.” III. Is nverR IN AGREEMENT WITH THE WORLD (ver. 6,7). By the
world is meant the prevailing ideas, spirit, and aims of corrupt humanity. And
the mind of His brethren was in accord with this, but it was dead against Him. What
is the spirit of the world? Materialism—the body is everything. Practical
atheism—God is ignored. Regnant selfishness—self is supreme. Infidelity agrees
with all this; there is no moral discrepancy, no reason for mutual antipathies and


.


~


598 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHar. Vil.
ee


battling. IV. Never THwarts THE DIvINE PURPOSE (ver. 10). Christ’s plan was
not to go up to Jerusalem at the time they requested Him; but in His own time.
Their counselling influenced Him not. Infidelity can never modify, check, or retard
the decrees of heaven. Conclusion: Such is infidelity in some’of its phases. Itis
a wretched thing, however enriched with learning, energized with logic, embellished
with culture and genius. “seem,” says Hume, “affrighted and confounded with
the solitude in which I am placed by my philosophy. When I look abroad on every
side I see dispute, contradiction, and distraction. When I turn my eye inward, I
find nothing but doubt and ignorance. Where am1? What amI? From what
cause do I derive my existence? To what condition shall I return? Iam con-
founded with questions, I begin to fancy myself in a very deplorable condition,
surrounded with darkness on every side.” (D. Thomas,D.D.) Christ and man :—
I. THE DESPERATE HARDNESS AND UNBELIEF OF HUMAN NATURE. Even His brethren
did not believe in Him, who should have been the first to do so. This was worse
than the unbelief of the Jews. 1. The doctrine of man’s need of preventing and
converting grace stands ont here as a sunbeam. Seeing Christ’s miracles, hearing
Christ’s teaching, living in Christ’s own company, were not enough to make men
believers. The mere possession of spiritual privileges never made any one a Chris-
tian, Allis useless without the work of the Holy Ghost (chap. vi. 44). 2. Chris-
tians in every age will do well to remember this. They are often troubled to find
that they stand alone, and are ready to blame themselves because their families
remain worldly and unbelieving. But let them look at the case before us. In our
Lord Jesus Christ there was no fault either in temper, word, or deed. Yet even
Christ’s own “‘brethren did not believe in Him.” 3. Christ has truly learned by
experience how to sympathize with His people who stand alone. He has drunk this
bitter cup. Let all who are cast down because relations despise religion turn to
Him for comfort (Heb. ii. 18). II. Tu reason WHY MANY HATE CuHRisT (ver. 7).
1. It was not so much the high doctrines He preached as the high standard of
practice; not so much His Messianic claims as His protest against their wicked-
ness. They could have tolerated His opinionsif He had spared their sins. 2. This
principle is of universal application and holds good to-day. Men dislike the gospel
because of its holy demands. Teach abstract doctrines, and few will find any fault.
Denounce the fashionable sins of the day, and call on men to repent, and thousands
at once will be offended. The reason why many profess to be infidels and abuse
Christianity is the witness that Christianity bears against their own bad lives
(1 Kings xxii. 8). II. Toe srRaNGE VARIETY OF OPINIONS ABOUT CHRIST, WHICH WERE
CURRENT FROM THE BEGINNING (ver. 12). The words which old Simeon had spoken
thirty years before were here accomplished (Luke ii. 34-35). 1. In the face of
such a passage as this, the endless modern divisions about religion ought never to
surprise us. The open hatred of some towards Christ—the carping, prejudiced
spirit of others—the bold confession of the few faithful—the timid, man-fearing
temper of the many faithless—the war of words and strife of tongues—are only
modern symptoms of an old disease. Such is the corruption of human nature, that
Christ is the cause of divisions among men, wherever He is preached. So long as
the world stands, some, when they hear of Him, will love and some will hate—
some will believe, and some will believe not (Matt. x. 34). 2. What think we of
Christ ourselves? This is the one question with which we have to do. Let us
never be ashamed to be of that number who believe, hear, follow, and confess Him
before men. While others waste their time in vain jangling and unprofitable con-
troversy, let us take up the cross. The world may hate us as it hated Him because
our religion is a standing witness against them. (Bp. Ryle.) Christ an example
of prudence :—Our Lord’s example recorded in this verse shows clearly that Chris.
tians are not meant to court martyrdom, or wilfully expose themselves to certain
death, under the idea that it is their duty. Many primitive martyrs seem not to
have understood this. (Ibid.) How Christians should act in times of danger :—
The Roman rule in battle was neither to fly from dangers nor to follow them The
Christian’s motto is, ‘‘ Neither timorous nor temeranous.” We must not basel
desert the cause of Christ when called out to defend it. ‘‘ Either vanquish or die i
_the Black Prince’s father said to him. Hither live with the gospel or die for it Yet
we may not rashly run ourselves upon unnecessary dangers, but decline them when
we can with a good conscience. Christians are permitted to fly when they are sought
for to the slaughter, so it be with the wings of a dove, and not with the pene of
a dragon. (J. Trapp.) We must not seek martyrdom :—In Tourney, about 1544
a very noted professor of the Protestant religion, being earnestly sought after, had


—y ae —"


CHAP, VII.] ST. JOHN. 599


concealed himself so closely that his persecutors were unable to discover where he
was hid. Contrary, however, to the advice and entreaty of his wife and friends, he
gave himself up, desirous of the glory of martyrdom; but being adjudged to be
burnt, he recanted, and abjured the faith in order to be beheaded. The Papists im-
proved this in order to decoy his fellow-sufferers to the like recantation; but they
replied, ‘‘ He had tempted God by rushing upon danger without a call, but they had
to the utmost of their power shunned it, and hoped that, since He had called them to
suffer, He would support them under it.” And it so happened they went to the fire
in solemn pomp, and were consumed loudly singing the praise of God even in the
flames, till their strength was exhausted. We are not to court sufferings; it is
enough if we cheerfully endure them when, in the providence of God, we are called
to it. Our Lord Himself says to His disciples, ‘‘ When they persecute you in one
city, flee ye into another.” The Jews’ feast of tabernacles was at hand.—The
feast of tabernacles (Levit. xxiii. 34-43 ; Exod. xxiii. 16; Deut. xvi, 13-15) lasted
seven days, from the fifteenth to the twenty-first of the seventh month, Tisri,
October. An eighth day was further celebrated as a closing festival, like the first
day, with a Sabbath rest and a holy convocation. The feast served asa thankful
remembrance of God’s gracious protection of the nation during its desert wanderings,
and as a joyous celebration of the harvest then completed with the gathering in of
the fruit and wine. It was therefore considered by the Jews after the exile to be the
greatest and most glorious feast, and its celebration was distinguished by various
customs. 1. By an arbitrary interpretation of Levit. xxiii. 40, those who visited
the feast carried in the left hand a lemon, and in the right a palm branch, bound
with sprays of willow and myrtle. 2. At every morning offering, a priest, amid
music and songs of praise, poured into two perforated vessels on the next side of the
altar water which he had drawn in a golden pitcher from the fountain of Shiloah
(comp. Isa. xii. 3). 3. On the evening of the first day of the feast—according to
later Rabbinical accounts, on each of the seven days—there was an illumination in
the court of the women by means of a great golden candelabra, accompanied by a
torch dance before them. (Prof. Luthardt.) This was perhaps the most joyous
of all the Jewish festivals—the great annual holiday of the nation. During this
festive period the people all left their houses and lived in tents or booths, which were
erected in the streets and market places, and on the flat terraced roofs of the houses.
From this circumstance it was called the “feast of tents ” (text and Lev. xxiii. 34).
It was likewise named the “ feast of ingatherings” (Exod. xxiii, 16, xxxiv. 22), be-
cause it took place at the close of the vintage, when the fruits of the year were
gathered in. It was designed as a sort of a national praise-offering. The people
assembled in the courts of the sanctuary to adore the bountiful providence of God
which had crowned their labours with success, to rejoice in His goodness, and to
implore His blessing on the following year. Josephus calls it ‘a most holy and
eminent feast.” (J. T. Bannister, LL.D.) Church festivals :—Let it suffice
men of sober minds to know, that the law both of God and nature alloweth generally
days of rest and festival solemnity to be observed, by way of thankful and joyful
remembrance, if such miraculous favours be showed towards mankind, as require
the same; that such graces God hath bestowed upon His Church as well in later as
in former times; that in some particulars, when they have fallen out, Himself hath
demanded His own honour, and in the rest hath left it to the wisdom of the Church,
directed by those precedents and enlightened by other means, always to judge,
when the like is requisite. Touching those festival days, therefore, which we
now observe, what remaineth but to keep them throughout all generations
holy, severed by manifest notes of difference from other times, adorned with
that which most may betoken true, virtuous, and celestial joy. (Hooker.)
His brethren.—The family dispute which John relates from personal knowledge,
with the frankness and simplicity of a genuine historian, gives us an insight into
the domestic trials of our Saviour. The unbelief of His brothers need not surprise
us any more than the unbelief of the Nazarenes generally (chap. iv. 44). Not un-
frequently the nearest relatives throw more obstacles in the way of God’s children
than strangers. Christ entered into the condition of fallen humanity with all its
temptations and miseries. Hence His sympathy in this as in all (Heb. ii. 17, 18; v.
7, 8). But the full significance of the passage depends upon the proper view of the
brothers of Jesus. Here I must dissent from the cousin theory of Jerome, which
assumes that three of them, James, Simon, and Jude, were apostles. This passage
is one of the strongest arguments in favour of the more natura] view that they were
members of the Holy family, and under the care of Joseph and Mary, in whose com.


600 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. vn


Ni heen iene tte ent ne a ee eer!
pany they constantly appear. 1. It is plain that John here, as in chap. ii. 12, and
in harmony with the Synoptists and Acts i. 13, 1 Cor. ix. 5, distinguishes the
brothers of Jesus from the apostles. 2. But what is more conclusive, John repre-
sents the brothers as unbelievers, and as using irreverent language against Christ,
which could not have been the case had they been apostles. Not that they were
unbelievers in the same sense as Jews or pagans, but not believers as the apostles
must have been, at least from the miracle at Cana (chap. ii. 11; comp. ver. 22;
xvi. 17; xvii. 8). It would have been easy for John to have said, ‘some ” of His
brethren did not believe, had the others been believing apostles. John recognizes
different degrees of belief (comp. chap. ii. 23; iv. 39; viii. 31; xii. 42), and of unbelief,
but he never confounds the sharp lines between belief and unbelief. Moreover, the
language of the brothers contrasts with the reverence shown by the apostles on
every occasion, even when they could not understand His conduct (chap. iv. 27).
3. Our Lord characterizes them as men of the world whom the world cannot hate
(ver. 7); while He says the very reverse of the apostles (John xv. 18; Matt. x. 5,
22, 40). We infer, then, that all the four brothers were distinct from the apostles,
and not converted till after the Resurrection (Acts i. 14; 1 Cor. xv. 7). As to the
other question whether they were older from a former, otherwise unknown, marriage
of Joseph (the Greek tradition defended by Epiphanius), or younger children of
Mary and Joseph (the view held by Tertullian and Helvidius, and denounced first
by Jerome as heretical and profane, because of its conflict with the tenet of Mary’s
perpetual virginity), the passage gives no decisive answer. The patronizing tone of
the brothers seems to favour the former view ; but may be found also with younger
brothers. (P. Schaff, D.D.) Jesus and His brethren :—The injunction was neither
inspired by a too impatient zeal for the glory of Jesus, nor by the odious desire of
seeing Him fall into the hands of His enemies. The truth lies between both these
extremes. They seem to have been puzzled by the claims of their brother. On the
one hand, they could not deny the extraordinary facts which they every day wit-
nessed; on the other, they could not decide upon regarding as the Messiah one
with whom they were accustomed to live upon terms of the greatest familiarity.
They desired, therefore, to see Him abandon the equivocal position in which He
placed Himself, and was keeping them, by so persistently absenting Himself from
Jerusalem. If He were really the Messiah, why should He fear to appear before
judges more capable of deciding on His pretensions than ignorant Galileans? Was
not the capital the theatre on which Messiah was to play His part, and the place
where the recognition of His mission should begin? The approaching festival, which
seemed to make it a duty that He should visit Jerusalem, appeared, therefore, to
make a favourable opportunity for taking a decided step. There is a certain amount
of similarity between this and Mary’s request (chap. ii.), as there is also between
our Lord’s conduct on the two occasions. (Prof. Godet.) For there is no man
that doeth anything in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly.—Show
thyself to the world:—A single word will often lay bare a man’s object, habit of
mind, whole bent of nature. This is a revealing sentence involving a perpetual
principle of the carnal mind. Christ had been doing and saying great things, but
of the latter these people made no account. They fix upon that which struck the
eye. I. THis 1s A SPEECH OF WORLDLY MINDED MEN, and presents to us the worldly
mind in its foolishness, making false deductions because unable to understand the
things of God. Rising no higher than Christ’s outward deeds, no wonder that they
anticipated no nobler result than the world’s praise. It is just the old story—
“What will the world say?” It is sad to judge and live with a false standard of
value. Were a man to go about with a piece of straw and measure men and even
principles by his worthless standard we should think him mad; and yet this is the
world all over. It takes its own empty opinion as the standard of all things. What
did this involve ? It put before Christ a false end of action, and had He gone on
the principles here suggested, He would have become alienated from the Father
and been $6 of the world,” and so no Saviour. For there is here involved an entire
perversion of His mission. His whole life was a testimony against the world, but
His brethren say, ‘‘Go and take its admiration by storm with your wonderful deeds.”
Note the following lessons—1. How entirely the things of God are mistaken by the
world, and not only by the profligate, but by the simply unbelieving. 2. How foolish
for the people of God to be led by the world’s opinion. 38. How it requires sym-
pathy with the mind of Jesus to detect and repel the mind of the world. 4. What
mischief results from ignorant or bad advice, even when well meant and of friends
5. What a warning against what is merely colourably good! 6. What little im


a i ‘


oth pee


CHAP, VII.] Pes Lend OLEN: 601


portance is to be attached to the terrible formula, ‘* What will the world say?” 7.
Beware of mistaking the end of. your position, life, gifts, none of which is given to
gain the world’s praise. 8. Beware of reasoning on the world’s principles. 9. Be
wary when a course of action has as its simple end your own honour. 10. In all
solicitations of the world go down into the mind of God and your relationship with
Him, and judge each by the light you have of them. II. THe wrone rTnovucHrs
WHICH, IN CONNECTION WITH THIS MATTER, RISE IN THE MINDS OF THE PEOPLE or Gop.
1. Discontent at being put and kept in the background—and hence discomfort and
weakness in work. This arises from exaggerated views of our importance, and from
not seeing that God will appoint what is best, and from that superficiality which
prevents our seeing that show and noise are not power, and that many of the
greatest processes which issue in manifold results are secret. We do not under-
stand the beauties of the background of the Christian life where Jesus was for many
a long year. This background is at least safe, and many of God’s dearest walk
there unnoticed of men but honoured by Him. 2. Discontent at there being so
little to show. What is this but coming into the world’s court and pleading for a
verdict there. The believer must have no care about his work being seen by the
world. If he live there will be no occasion for him to thrust himself forward. He
must by his life condemn it, and that will create sufficient attention. God’s child
must not be discontented at seeing honours and riches flowing in upon those who
serve the world. ‘‘The world loves its own.” Let us calmly live before God.
Here is comfort for those who are laid aside too weak or poor to do aught that can
attract observation. They are seen by God in secret and will be rewarded openly.
(P. B. Power, M.A.) Self revelation :—Cnidius, a skilful architect, building a
watch-tower for the King of Egypt, caused his own name to be engraved upon a
stone in the wall in great letters, and afterwards covered it with lime and mortar,
and upon the outside of that wrote the name of the King of Egypt in golden letters,
as pretending that all was done for his honour and glory. But herein was his
cunning, he very well knew that the dashing of the water would in a little while
consume the plastering (as it did) and then his name and memory should abide to
after generations. Thus there be many in this world, who pretend to seek only the
glory of God, the good of His Church, and the happiness of the state; but if there
were a window to look into their hearts we should find nothing there within but
self-seeking. (J. Spencer.) For neither did His brethren believe in Him.—The
prophecy that the Messiah should be ‘‘ despised and rejected by men” was here
fulfilled to the very letter. His brethren, who should have been the first, were the
last to believe on Him. I. How srrancE Tuts was. 1. They had heard His doctrine,
not as strangers or near neighbours, but in the familiar intercourse of home. 2.
They had seen His miracles (chap. ii. 11,12). 3. They had known the circum-
stances and manner of His life. They had heard no doubt of the marvels atten-
dent on His birth, and had watched His pure and benevolent life for thirty-three
years. II. How 17 May BE ACCOUNTED FoR. This is necessary, for the text is a great
favourite with modern Jews and infidels, who hold that His brethren could not
have been more incredulous than others. It is singular, however, on this theory,
that John should have made so damaging an admission. But—1. It is no uncom-
mon thing for men to disbelieve in the face of the clearest evidence. To the Jews
we reply that the Israelites did not believe in the Lord and Moses, though they
could not deny the miracles; and to the deists that many deny God and immor-
tality, notwithstanding the variety and strength of arguments in favour of both. 2.
These men had strong prejudices against Christ. (1) Some were common to them
as sinful men, arising from the purity of His doctrine and the stringency of His
demands. (2) Some were peculiar to them as Jews arising from their conceptions
of a temporal Messiah. They did not contest His miracles but thought that they
should be displayed, if Messianic, at Jerusalem, so as to receive the suffrages of the
great, and not in the obscurity of Galilee. 3. They were under the influence of an
ambitious worldly spirit as Christ intimates in the next verse. Application: 1. Let
us not wonder if some, who have enjoyed the greatest religious advantages, do not
believe. What advantages these brethren must have had! And yet how little the
impression produced. Do not wonder then, Christian parents, if, with the best of
training, your children are not yet converted. But do not despair. Remember
that Christ’s brethen eventually became His disciples (Acts i. 14). 2. See what
an enemy to Christianity a worldly spirit is. With their views Christ’s
brethren held that if He were Messiah they would share His temporal glory. A
worldly covetous disposition hinders multitudes from believing and obeying Christ,


-_~


“


602 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar. HL
Oe ee
3 How much better isa relation to Christ by faith than by nature. (J. Orton.) The
unbelief of Christ’s brethren :—The subject suggests that—I. Curist OWED NOTHING
To Man’s sympatuy. A man’s own relations of all men ought to manifest this,
They are his own flesh and blood. To feel for him is only a step beyond feeling for
selves. We do for the inner circle of our relatives what we should never think of
doing for outsiders. But this common privilege was denied our Lord. We gather
that His brethren were aware of His pretentions and of His works in support of
them. But all they do is to dare Him to go to Judwa (ver. 4). An enemy might
have spoken so, as indeed the Pharisees (Matt. xvi. 1), the chief priests (Matt. xxvii.
41-43), and the soldiers (Matt. xxvii. 29). In all cases He was treated as one who
had His claims to make good, so great was the chasm between those nearest to
Him and Himself. There was one world of feeling within Him, and another around
Him. How much went out from the One ; how little came in from the other. IL.
He owWED NOTHING TO MAN’s HELP. The rare instances in which He received a
little sympathy show this. The confession of Peter (Matt. xvi. 16) fell on His
heart like cold water on a thirsty tongue; but. like water spilt on the ground, so
the next moment it was gone. In Gethsemane the disciples so far sympathized
with Him as to catch the infection of His grief, but that which made Him watch
made them sleep. It was not by His disciples, or mother, or brethren (Luke ii. 49;
John ii. 4), but notwithstanding them tnat He effected His great work. Consider
the cost of that work to Himself. It was one continuous sacrifice, and through the
whole He was unaided and alone. (Mathematicus.) An unsuccessful ministry :-—
I. THE UNSUCCESSFULNESS OF oUR SaviouR’s ministRY. 1. The causes of our un-
successful ministry. (1) Ignorance of Scripture truths. (2) Lack of effective
expression. (3) Want of harmony between the minister’s private life and public
teaching. (4) Absence of a prayerful spirit. 2, These causes did not operate in
the case of Christ. He knew the Scriptures, spake as never man spake, was
blameless, and went about doing good, and was mighty in prayer. Still, His
brethren did not believe in Him. 3. The lessons which the Saviour’s unsuccessful
ministry suggest. (1) That a man should not always be held responsible for the
unreligiousness of his family. (2) A true ministry may be unsuccessful when the
greatest success may be expected. (3) Success is no proof of the true value of,a
ministry. II. INFIDELITY EXISTING IN THE MOST FAVOURABLE CIRCUMSTANCES TO BE-
tier. This must be because of—l. Prejudice. 2. Intellectual pride. 3. Hardness
of heart. (D. Lewis.) Unbelief an obstruction:—An empty vessel capable of
holding water, if tightly corked none can enter it, though water is poured upon it
in abundance; nay, it may be thrown into the sea and still remain empty. So it
is with our hearts. Unbelief closes them so that overwhelming evidence can bring
no conviction of the truth, and the most powerful influence can secure no entrance
for the grace of God. Want of religious sympathy at home :—When Bunyan’s
Pilgrim became alarmed about his state he found no sympathy from his friends.
He told them of his fears, but ‘‘ at this his relatives were sore amazed, nor for that
they believed what he had said to them was true, but because they thought some
frenzy distemper had got into his head, therefore, it drawing toward night, and
they, hoping that sleep might settle his brains, with all haste they got him to bed

When the morning was come they would know how he did. He told them worse
and worse. They thought to drive away his distemper by harsh and surly carriage
to him; sometimes they would deride; sometimes they would chide, and sometimes
they would quite neglect him.” (‘‘Pilgrim’s Progress.”) |My time is not yet come;
but your time is alway ready.—I. Guorious DANGER. 1. Jesus was in extreme
peril. The storm, the first mutterings of which had been heard long before seemed
now to concentrate its violence upon Him. Derision had become inveterate hatred

The scribes, &c., now longed to kill Him, and were doing all in their power to
compass that end. That end was only a matter of time, and the limit was only
imposed by Christ Himself. 2. He might have escaped it all, and been the leader
and King of the people had He conciliated, compromised, and compounded. 3

But He would not. ‘‘ He saved others, Himself He cannot save.” His danger was
glorious, because it arose from a persistent refusal—(1) To live any life lower than
the highest. (2) To accept any modification of the supreme law of righteousness

(3) To become anything less than the Saviour of the world. II. Inctorrous SAFETY.
His brethren were safe. They might go when and where they liked. They would
meet with no exasperated enemies, but rather with their true relations—unbelievers
They were safe because—1. They were not opposing evil. Their true kinship wag
with the world, and the world would love and spare its own (chap. xv. 19; cf. 1 John


ee oh omen eon


OHAP, Vil.) ST. JOHN. 603


iv. 5). They wete going with the stream. 2. They were not accomplishing any
high mission in life. Having no work of Divine appointment-—their “ time was
alway ready’’; they had no “hour,” no climax. III. In varyIne DEGREES THE
CHOICE BETWEEN GLORIOUS DANGER AND INGLORIOUS SAFETY LIES BEFORE ACH ONE
OF US, in regard to—1. Business. Which shall we conform to, the average standard
of commercial morality or the highest? 2. Politics. Shall we merely follow the
party, or be true to our deepest conviction of rights? 38. Religion, Shall we accept
doctrines and creeds that are simply popular, or stard by that which in our heart
_we feel to be the truth? Conclusion: 1. To live the high life, to be true to con-
viction, to dare to stand alone—if need be, oppose evil, breast the stream—this is
hard, painful, dangerous, but gloriously so. 2. To live the average life, to accept
the present condition of things, to conform, to compromise, to go with the tide;
this is easy, generally pleasant, profitable, and for awhile safe, but inglorious. (L.
Shackleford.) Salvation :—The world never ready for Christ’s salvation, but
always ready for its own secular pleasuresand profit. I. The ansorBING EXCELLENCE
of Christ’s salvation. 1. We fail to properly esteem it. 2. Or, confessing its
excellence, we are too indolent to give it the preference over our other pursuits.
Other things take our time and energy. 3. Or, proposing to pursue it, we do not
make it our sovereign pleasure. (1) This is because of our vitiated taste. (2) We
do not acquire the liking for religious duties by sufficient practice of them. (8) Or,
if we give them time, we do not give to them more than half our hearts. II.
Heuprun nutes. 1, Study the reasons for Christian life until you have a strong
conviction regarding them. 2. In all doubt, be reminded that Christian life alone
has a hope set before it. Let this determine the scale. (Massillon.) Limitations
of human greatness :—1. Those who believe in the Divinity of Christ may wonder
that He should be under the limitations of time. It was not until the time
appointed that He was born, nor could He die till His hour was come. The
Redeemer is put under sharper restrictions than are His disciples, for their time
was alway. 2. Here was a focal centre to which preparatory events converged.
The promise in the garden; the words of prophecy, the symbolism of ancient days
—all were knit into the Redemption’s plan. But why was salvation so circuitous?
Why wait solong? 38. We cannot comprehend the secrets of the Infinite Mind,
nor argue @ priori in the matter. We must move from our standpoint upward.
Consider the limitations of human greatness and, by inference, those of Omnipo-
tence itself. I. INcREASE OF POWER DOES NOT INCREASE THE RANGE OF FREEDOM FROM
taw. Itvrather hinders. Power can do some things, and some things it cannot io.
To weld iron to iron, a man needs a blacksmith’s arm and muscle. To instruct a
child’s intellect or develop its moral nature, physical power is not counted. 1. We
cannot argue from the almightiness of God, seen in the material creation, that He
will force men into heaven. The order of things is a narrowing condition. For
example, an act of parliament cannot banish the plague. The disciples would have
called down fire from heaven and have honoured God by destroying His enemies.
This spirit established the Inquisition. It would break through the order of the
universe to accomplish a subsidiary end. But God does not propose to outrage
man’s faculties in man’s salvation. 2. Increasing power puts under restraint, by
making needful the hiding of power. The crowd would proclaim Christ king. He
checked them. So, again and again, He said to those on whom He had wrought
miracles, “ Tell it to no man,” knowing that the blazing abroad of it at that time
would precipitate His conflict with the civil power. He also guarded these miracu-
lous energies, so as not to paralyze human responsibility. Thousands of hungry
ones were fed. Their horizon is opened and they thought, perhaps, that no more
labour would be needful, now that the granaries of heaven were open by Divine
power. “Gather up the fragments !”’ How strange, when there is such a power
to create supplies! So, too, there was danger of becoming estranged from the
practical duties of life, as in the case of Peter, who wished to abide on the mount.
This was rebuked by Christ. He kept in the realm of humanity. He laboured to
prove Himself human. Men were already convinced that He was Divine. 3. This
necessary control and restriction of increasing power is seen among men. A little
boat in the river moves hither and thither as its rower pleases, but the huge ocean
steamer, with its vast momentum, must be guarded in its movements, lest its iron
weight and onward speed send it crashing into other craft, like some blind Poly-
phemus to devour and destroy. A child’s movements may not affect anything
outside its home, but a Napoleon is watched by the nations with fear. How much
more the tremendous power of God and His responsibility as related to the order


604 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. vi.


and harmony of the universe! II. THE INcREASE OF KNOWLEDGE ALSO BRINGS RESTRIO-
vions. 1. The child sees no significance in the congeries of forces about him.
He moves about freely. He plays with water, and knows not that each drop is a
universe, and that every motion of his finger is felt in Sirius. Higher knowledge
puts us uader sense of higher responsibility. 2. The power and use of speech is
another field of illustration. As childhood ripens into manhood, this trust is more
appreciated, Christ’s use of parables is a solemn rebuke to those who, had they ~
fully known the truth, would have abused it—would have ‘‘ held down the truth in
unrighteousness” (Rom. i. 18). Throw pearls to swine, and they will rend you.
i‘ools rush in where angels dare not tread. Knowledge dwarfs our self esteem.
The more wisdom the more modesty. The ignorant look at the sky and see but
specks of light, and fancy this globe great. The astronomer reveals a gigantic
system. We shrink abashed before the Father of lights, and fear to despise His
mercy or trifle away our probation. III. GoopNESs DOES NOT BROADEN, BUT LIMITS
FREEDOM IN SOME RESPECTS. 1. The wicked have ‘‘no bands in their death,” and
in life they often revel in unlicensed liberty; but men like Paul deny themselves
meat if it cause a brother to fall. Christ says, ‘‘ For their sakes I sanctify Myself.”
The good man separates himself from luxury and ease, and from all that hinders
his work. 2. The man obtuse through sin or self-will shuts his eyes and ears to
the suffering. The good man is sensitive. ‘If any suffer, I suffer ; if any is weak,
Iam weak,” 3, A pure heart, too, is pained by sin, as a cultured ear is pained by
the discords of music. The man who is destitute of musical sensibility is unaffected.
Holiness, essentially, is a separating process. A Brahmin cannot touch food or
drink prepared by one of lower caste. The shadow of such a one pollutes the air.
He must therefore assume the burden of furnishing himself withfood. Conclusion:
1. As obedient to the Father’s will, Christ the Holy One was under restrictions the
most exacting, Step by step He fulfilled His course. Christ could not wander a
vagrant. He steered between those who, on the one hand, said, ‘‘ Show Thyself,”
and those who, like Peter, cried, ‘‘ Far be it from Thee,” and kept to the lines
appointed him. When the clock of the universe pointed to the hour, He must be
put upon the cross. 2. Gaze into the heavens where stars are wheeling in courses,
the delicacy and exactness of whose curves it takes pages of figures to compute,
The safety of worlds depend on their perfect harmony of movement. The
astronomer calculates, centuries in advance, their various intersections. But in
the moral world there is the same exactness. Jerusalem had her ‘day of visita-
tion.” You and I have our day of mercy. The hour hastens when it will be said,
“Tt is the last time.” God will not then move back the index on the dial plate.
J. B. Thomas, D.D.) Your time is alway ready.—Did we see the husbandman
reaming away his time, when all his fields lay uncultivated; or the generals of an
army trifling an hour at cards, whem the enemy was preparing to storm the camp;
or a pilot asleep, when the ship was running directly uponarock; and did all these
allege, as the reason of their behaviour, that they had ‘‘ nothing to do,” we should
think a madhouse the only proper place for them: and we should think right. But
why do we not perceive that there is not less of absurdity and madness in the con-
duct of that Christian who wastes his precious hours in idleness, and apologizes
for it by saying in the same manner, that he has ‘‘nothing to do,’? when perhaps
the work of his salvation, that greatest of all works, the very work for which God
sent him into the world, is not yet so much as entered upon, or even thought of?
(John xi, 9; 1 Cor. iv. 2). (Bp. Horne.) Misused opportunity :—Many do with
opportunities as children do at the sea shore; they fill their little hands with sand
and then let the grains fall through, one by one, till they are all gone. (TZ. Jones,
D.D.) Opportunity unused :—Opportunity is like a strip of sand which stretches
around a seaside cove. The greedy tide is lapping up the sand. The narrow strip
will quickly become impassable; and then how sad the fate of the thoughtless
children who are now playing and gathering shells and seaweed inside the cove!
(Union Magazine.) Opportunities of doing good should be seized eagerly :—When
the earth is soft the plough will enter. Take a man when he is mourning, or newly
stirred by some moving sermon, and then set it home and you may do him good.
Christian faithfulness doth require us not only. to do good when it falls in our way
but to watch for opportunities of doing good. (Richard Baczter.) Christians may
jind opportunities of doing good at any time and anywhere :—Some persons are so
extremely particular as to where they begin to work for Christ that they lose much
time in what they think is wise waiting for opportunities. But it was not so with
Uncle John Vassar (the American colporteur), He would begin anywhere, One


ee eee


—_


CHAP, vi.) ST. JOHN. 605


day a minister met him at the railway station and was about to take him home
with him before commencing his work. Uncle John proposed that they should
work on tne way home. “ But where shall we begin?” said the minister. ‘‘Oh,”’
he replied, “let us begin at the station-master’s.” They did so, and before ten
minutes had passed one poor discouraged backslider had opened her heart to the
stranger’s earnest appeals and was kneeling in true penitence at the throne of
Divine mercy. (R. Lrewin, “ Lecture on Uncle John Vassar.”) The world cannot
hate you; but Me it hateth.—The antagonism between Christ and the world :—I,
CHRIST’S POSITION ONE OF ANTAGONISM TO THE GENERAL CURRENT OF HUMAN THOUGHT
AND FEELING. The great idol of humanity is self. Every one worships it in one
form or other. Christ comes to overthrow this idol and to claim all men for His
Father. This claim is resented. In other words, Christ, by His Person, teaching,
example, testifies of the world that its works are evil. The light rebukes the dark-
ness. Christ does not say, ‘‘ You are very nearly right”; but, “ You are altogether
wrong.” Nor will He rest until His statements are believed and His claims
accepted. So Heis hated. Men say they are indifferent, but they hate. II. Ir 1s
THE FACT OF THIS ANTAGONISM WHICH MAKES MANY SHRINK FROM JoINING Him. They
dread running counter to general opinion. They cannot stand opposition or
ridicule. They feel instinctively that the dislike with which the world regards
Christ is extended to His disciples; and at this dislike they shudder. But their
condition is a very perilous one. It is to Him that “ overcometh ” that the blessing
is given. The “fearful” are cast out with the ‘false and abominable.” Hence
infer—(1) that weakness towards the world is hardness towards Christ ; and (2) that
Christ, if we look to Him, will give us the needful strength. (G. Calthrop, M.A.)
The world’s treatment of Christ :—The world gave Him a cradle, but it was a
manger; a throne, but it was a cross; a crown, but it was thorns; a sceptre, but
it was a reed; homage, but it was derisive mockery and bitter scorn; companions,
but they were crucified criminals; a kingdom, but it was a grave (James iv. 4). (Hs
Van Doren, D.D.) The world’s treatment of the Church :—In Brazil there grows a
common plant, which is called the matodor, or murderer. “Its slender stem creeps
at first along the ground; but no sooner does it mect a vigorous tree than with
clinging grasp it cleaves to it, and climbs it, and as it climbs, sends out at
short intervals arm-like tendrils that embrace the tree. As the murderer
ascends, these ligatures grow larger, and clasp tighter. Up, up it climbs, one
hundred feet, nay, two hundred, if needs be, until the last loftiest spire is gained
and fettered. Then, as if in triumph, the parasite shoots a huge flowery head
above the strangled summit, and thence from the dead tree’s crown, scatters its
seed to do again the work of death. Even thus does worldliness strangle churches.
(S. Coley.) Truth begets hate. (Terence.) Go ye up to this feast. I go not
up yet.—Whether ‘not yet” or ‘‘not”’ be adopted as the true reading, the utterance
is not to be explained as an indication of fickleness, or of honest purpose subse-
quently changed, or of intentional evasion as if He wished to leave His counsellors
uncertain how He meant to act, or signified that though He was really going to
Jerusalem He was not going just yet—with a mental substitution of a now, or with
the public caravans and feast trains, or to attend the feast in a legally prescribed man-
ner, all of which have been suggested. The sense Christ desired His words to bear was
probably that He was not yet (though afterwards He would), or not (absolutely for the
present) going up to manifest Himself unto the world; if He went up, it would not be
yet for any such purpose as they contemplated, because His time was not yet fulfilled.
The seasonable moment when He would manifest Himself into the world was not to
arrive till the next passover. And, having said these things, He abode in Galilee,
waiting the signal from His Father which determined all His earthly movements
(chap. xi. 6). His brethren having gone, then went He also up, not publicly as they
desired, but as a private person incognito. Whether or not Christ travelied through
Samaria, thus avoiding the ordinary path, He did not accompany any of the public
caravans, but selected a solitary route. The ‘in secret’? shows that this was
neither the journey mentioned in Luke ix. 51, nor the final departure from Galilee
(Matt. xix. 1, 2), both of which were public. Though Christ’s journey was in secret
it is not said that His visit to the feast was. (TZ. Whitelaw, D.D.) Then
the Jews sought Him at the feast.—Striking contrasts :—I. Basr cowaRDICE
AND SUBLIME couRaGE. 1. Base cowardice (vers. 11-13). (1) For these chief men
of the nation to be in cunning search for the life of one lonely man. “ Where is
He?” Wewant Him. Whatfor? To listen to His doctrines ? honestly to test
His merits, to do honour to His person or His mission? No; but to kill Him.


oo
a


606 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, (cHaP. VIL.
a Da ROE Hi OC
Here are a number of influential men banded together to crush one humble
peasant! (2) In the people meeting together in secrecy, and talking about Him.
Why not openly? Sin is always cowardly: virtue alone is courageous. Sin’s talk
is swaggering, and its attitude often defiant ; but it is essentially craven-hearted.
“Thou wear a lion’s hide! Doff it for shame, and hang a calf’s skin on those re-
creant limbs” (Shakespeare). 2. In contrast with this, we have the sublimest
courage (ver. 14). When the festival was at its height, and the concourse
swollen to the greatest number, and national enthusiasm most intense, this poor
peasart Reformer confronted public sentiment when its billows were thundering at
high tide. Where in all history have you an example of courage comparable to
this? II. ConvENTIONAL SCHOLARSHIP AND DIVINE INTELLIGENCE. 1. Conventional
scholarship (ver. 15). The question breathes contempt. The idea is, He has
never been to our seats of learning and studied under our rabbis; what can He
know? He is an uneducated man and, forsooth, presumes to teach. There is
much of this spirit now. There are those who hold that a man cannot know much
unless he has graduated at some university. This isa great fallacy; some of the
most educated men have never passed the college curriculum. This idea fills
society with pedants, and our pulpits with men who have neither the kind of lore,
or genius to preach the gospel. 2. Divine intelligence. Note here that (1) God is
the sole Teacher of the highest doctrine (ver. 16). Although I have not studied
under you, rabbis, I have got my knowledge directly from the primal source of all]
true intelligence. Do not content yourself with sipping at the streams of conven-
tional teachings, go to the fountain head. (2) Obedience is the qualification for
obtaining the highest knowledge (ver. 17). Philosophy and experience show the
truth of this. ‘‘ The essence of goodness consists in wishing to be good,” says
Seneca. And well too as Pascal said, that ‘‘a man must know earthly things in
order to love them, but that he must love heavenly things in order to know them.”
(3) Entire devotion of self to the Divine is necessary in order to communicate the
highest knowledge (ver. 18). Itis not only as a man becomes self-oblivious, and
lost in the love and thoughts of God, that he can reflect the bright rays of Divine
intelligence upon his fellow-men. We must allow ourselves to become mere
channels through which the Divine will flow. (D. Thomas, D.D.) Why Christ
hid himself :—To kindle the desire of seeing and hearing Him so much the more;
or to discover whether there were any numbers disposed by His first preaching to
receive Him, to the end that He might not show Himeelf in vain. (J. Trapp.)
Where is He.—Jesus went to the feast in secret, and the Jews sought Him. From
differing motives they inquire for Him, but they did inquire. No man, having
once heard of Jesus, can any longer remain indifferent to Him: he must take some
sort of interest in the Lord Jesus. From many quarters come the question,
‘Where is He?” We will at this time—I. ConsIpER THE WAYS IN WHICH THE
QUESTION HAS BEEN ASKED. 1. Hate, ferociously desiring to slay Him, and over-
throw His cause. Herod was the type of this school. 2. Infidelity, sneeringly
denying His existence, taunting His followers because His cause does not make
progress (2 Peter iii. 4), 3. Timorous fear, sadly doubting His presence, power, and
prevalence (Job xxiii. 8, 9). 4. Penitence, humbly seeking Him that she may con-
fess her sin, trust her Lord, and show her gratitude to Him (Job xxiii. 3). 5. Love
heartily pining for communion with Him, and for an opportunity to serve Him
(Solomon's Song iii. 3). 6. Fear, bitterly lamenting His absence, and craving His
return. 7. Desire, ardently aspiring to meet Him in His second advent, and to
behold His glory (Rev. xxii. 20). Il. Give ra saints’ EXPERIMENTAL ANSWER. He
is—l. At the mercy-seat when we cry in secret. 2. In the Word as we search the
sacred page. 3. In the assemblies of His people, even with two or three. 4. At
His table, known in the breaking of bread. 5. In the field of service, aiding, sym-
pathizing, guiding, and prospering. In all things glorified before the eyes of faith.
6. In the furnace of trial, revealing Himself, sanctifying the trial, bearing us
through. 7. Near us, yea, with us, andin us. III. Rerurn rue Question To you.
Is He—1. At the bottom of your trust? 2. At the root of your joys? 3. On the
throne of your heart? 4. Near by constant converse? 5. Is His Spirit mani-
fested in your spirit, words, and actions? 6. Is He before you, that to the end
of your journey, the terminus towards which you are daily hastening? IV. Asx rr
OF THE ANGELS. They, with one voice, reply that He is—1l. In the bosom of the
Father. 2. In the centre of glory. 3. On the throne of government. 4. In the
place of representation. 5, Inthearmoury of mercy. 6. Within reach of you and
all needy sinners who will now seek Him. Conclusion: 1. Come, let us go and


CHAP, VII.) ST. JOHN. 607


d Him. We will hold no feast till Heisamongus. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Where
ts He? I. Is Hein your cnurcnuon Sunpay? 1. Do you thither repair expecting
to meet Him? 2. Does His presence banish every irreverent and worldly feeling?
3. Does He meet out to you the Word of Life, and render it sweet to your taste,
and nourishing to your soul? II. Is Hz in your prayer-mertina? 1. Do you,
in company with others, meet together weekly and claim the fulfilment of His pro-
mise? 2. Is He then causing your hearts to burn within you, and strengthening
your grasp on His promises? 3. When you leave does your conduct say, “ We
have been with Jesus”? III. Is He 1x yourrammy? 1. Has he made your home
His abode? 2. Does His presence refresh the weariness of toil, loosen the burden
of care, and brighten the smile of affection? 3. Does He take your children in His
arms and bless them? 4. Does He assure you that you shall form an individual
family in heaven? IV. Is Hz 1n your HEART? 1. If so He isever near. 2. If
not, seek the Lord while He may be found. (Homiletic Review.) Motives for
seeking Christ :—How diverse were the motives from which men sought Jesus: the
Magi to adore Him; Herod to crush a rival prince; Greeks to satisfy curiosity ;
Jews to see miracles, or to crown Him a king to promote their carnal interests;
only a few hungry souls sought Him as the Bread of Life. Some seek Him to find
ground of objection to His mission. How many frequent His church and ordin-
ances but never seek Him. To how many of the earth’s feasters would He prove an
unwelcome guest? (W.H.VanDoren,D.D.) Christ found:—Many years ago, there
was @ young man in Birmingham whose dissipation and excess had brought into a
condition from which he endeavoured to extricate himself by crime. The fear of
detection, exposure, and ruin goaded him on to such a pitch of desperation that he
left his father’s house resolutely bent on self-destruction. God’s good providence
led him through Bond Street; and, under some inexplicable impulse, he found
himself sitting in the Baptist Chapel almost before he was aware. The minister,a
Mr. Edmonds, was reading from the Book of Job, occasionally throwing in some
shrewd parenthetic remark. Coming to verses 8 and 9, the young man’s attention
was irresistibly arrested : ‘ Job, Job,” the preacher cried entreatingly, ‘“* why don’t
you look upward?” These words were as nails fastened in a sure place, and the
young man ever thanked God for the belief that he was unconsciously drawn by
the Holy Spirit to enter that place, and that the preacher was impelled to the use
of those words, to the end that his life might be redeemed from destruction, and
crowned with lovingkindness and tender mercy. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Where to
find Christ :—I saw a young brother last Friday, and, in answer to the question,
How were you converted ? he said it was through reading Luther on the Galatians.
I said, ‘I am glad to see the man that reads Luther on the Galatians.’ He wasa
young man employed in the city, and I admired him for preferring Luther to the
wretched novels of the period. ‘‘ Tread it twoor three times,” he said, ‘and I saw
the difference between the covenant of works and the covenant of grace; I saw how
man was ruined by his works, and how he must be saved by faith, and I found the
Saviour while reading that book.” Oh, if people would but read the Bible, and
books about the Bible, with the desire to know what the gospel is, they would soon
find Him of whom Moses and the prophets wrote. (Jbdid.) And there was
much murmuring among the people concerning Him. Christ when He comes brings
division :—Describe the scene, the variety of characters and feelings and opinions,
at this most popular of all the feasts; the movement, the stir, all circling round
the central figure, Christ. Now discussion about Christ may be allowable enough,
but as discussion proceeds the crowd takes sides, and there is a party for, and
a party against, Christ. It isso now. The proclamation of truth separates men.
Jesus is either a great foundation or else a stone of stumbling. Men are attracted
or repelled, hardened or softened. Letus consider then—I. Tux Diving irenrion.
This is that all men shall be saved. God so loved the world, and His goodness
shouldlead to repentance. But—II. Such is the mystery that attaches to our creation,
that MAN HAS IT IN HIS POWER TO FRUSTRATE THIS INTENTION OF Gop. The Holy
Spirit pleads with him, but he resists. He can resist. Were it not so, he would be
but a machine. Hearts cannot be compelled; they can only be drawn, Christ
knocks at the door; but we can, if we choose, keep it bolted on the inside, and
Christ will not force the way in. We must be persuaded to admit Him. He wishes
to be a guest. “I will come in and sup with him, and he with me.” IL. Gop
DOES ALL IN His POWER TO WIN THE HUMAN HEART. To say that He multiplies kind-
nesses is to say little. He sends, He gives, He spares not His own Son. This
is His last effort. Beyond this there is nothing. And if the heart can resist such


608 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cuap, vi.


an evidence of His love, its case is hopeless, There is nothing left that will touch —


it. How isit with us? Which side arewetaking? For Christ? or against Him?
“He that is not with Me is against Me.” There is no intermediate region; no
neutral ground. Men start in life as boys, hand-in-hand, but on opposite sides of a
little mountain rill. The widening stream soon compels them to unclasp their
hands; and the distance between them increases as they advance. Presently they
are out of sight of each other; and at last a broad, impassable gulf rolls be-
tween them. (G. Calthrop, M.A.) Diverse effects of contact with Christ :—The
coming of our Lord acted as a moral shock upon the existing fabric of thought
and life; it broke up the stagnant, fixed modes of feelings and thinking; it set
men in movement; it led to anxious self-questionings, to widespread anxiety of
mind, to general unsettlement; it destroyed that tranquil satisfaction with
things as they were in Israel which had secured so much repose of mind to so
many classes. Such an event would reveal above all the true character of
the time; it would act as many a flash of lightning on the crew of a wreck;
it would dispel illusions somewhat rudely, often at the cost of happiness and temper,
and as a result it would be regarded in more ways than one. Those who wish to
know the truth and to live in it at all costs, would welcome it, and thank God for
it; those who did not wish this would slink away from an influence which made
them uncomfortable, even though they might have reason to think that in the end
it would make them better than they were. In ordinary life there are occurrences
which act upon men in different ways, which bring out unsuspected tendencies for
good or for evil. A railway accident, a fire, the outburst of an epidemic, or the
sudden inheritance of a fortune, are each in their own way revelations of character.
They break through the ordinary habits, and surprise men for the moment into
being perfectly natural, They reveal unexpected beauties in this man’s character,
heroism, generosity, &c.; or they bring any little weakness to the surface in that
man, and show him to be selfish or cowardly, or in other ways unlike what he was
supposed to be. In the same way a great controversy acts as a solvent upon all
sorts of persons. It throws them back upon the principles which really rule them ;
it precipitates a great deal in them which else might have remained undecided ; it
forces them to take a side, and, by taking that side, to make a revelation of cha-
racter. And much more is this the case when men are brought into contact with
a mind and heart of unwonted greatness. Such a personality is too imperative to
leave other men just as they were; such a personality sets feeling, thought, will, all
in motion—not always in friendly motion—towards itself, not unfrequently in
hostile and prejudiced motion. And this was especially the case with our Lord. Men
could not, if they would, regard Him with indifference. They could not escape from
some sort of profound emotion at coming into contact with Him. When He made
His entry into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, ‘‘ Whoisthis?” And this
was a sort of concrete representation of what took place on a vast historical scale
on His entrance into the world. That event produced a varied and prolonged
emotion in human souls. It stirred the lowest instincts as well as the highest
thoughts of men. It was a fulfilment of that pregnant saying, ‘‘Yet once more do
I shake, not the earth only, but heaven.” But its result was not, could not be
uniform. It was for the rising or fall of many a human soul. (Canon Liddon.)
Howbeit no man spake openly of Him for fear of the Jews.—WMoral cowardice :—
I, Tur ract—‘‘ No man spake openly of Him.” To this there was a large excep-
tion. His friends were silent, not His enemies. They were loud enough in their
reproaches, &c. ‘This is the case still to a largeand lamentable extent. How much
there is said and written against Christ which His professed followers allow to pass
without protest or counter demonstration! There is no lack of private confession it
may be. They that fear the Lord still speak ‘tone to another’; but those who
love Him will surely speak to others also. What Christ wants is confession before
men, for the defence of His honour, the confutation of unbelief, the extension of
His cause. II. Irs pxpnranartion—‘ For fear of the Jews.” This fear was and ig
twofold. 1. Nervous shrinking. To men, e.g., in the position of Nicodemus, there
was not much to dread from the hostile majority. So many to-day hesitate to con-
fess Christ and rebuke sin, say, to relatives and intimate friends, not because of
consequences, but because of the tax it would make upon a highly-strung nervous
organization. Over sensitiveness an enemy to the cause of Christ. 2. Rank
cowardice. Taking sides for and with Christ in the case of many then meant
pains and penalties, and they were not prepared to pay the cost of their convictions.
To some extent discipleship still involves tribulation, but of how much milder a


CHAP, VII.] ST, JOHN. 609
type! Yet men and women seal their lips because they are afraid of being called
contemptuous names. III. THE Lessons ror us. 1. Our duty—to make a bold
manly, and decisive stand for Christ. (1) He deservesit. What a stand He made
forus! No fear of the Jews deterred Him from pleading our cause. (2) He will
reward it with present approval and final blessedness, 2. Our privilege. ‘ God
hath not given us the spirit of cowardice,” &c. Christ does not ask us to under-
take this or any duty without qualifying us for its discharge. 3. Our warning
“‘Whoso is ashamed of Me of him will I be ashamed.” (J. IV. Burn.) The jolly
of moral cowardice :—When the passengers gallop by as if fear made them speedy
the cur follows them with an open mouth. Let them walk by in confident neglect,
and the dog will not stir at all. It is a weakness that every creature takes advan.
tage of. (J. Beaumont, M.D.) Cowardly Christians :—What would Her Majesty
think of her soldiers, if they should swear they were loyal and true, and yet should
say, “‘ Your Majesty, we prefer not to wear these regimentals ; let_us wear the dress of
civilians ! we are right honest men, and upright ; but do not care to stand in your
ranks, acknowledged as your soldiers; we had rather slink into the enemy’s camp,
and into your camp too, we therefore prefer not to wear anything that would mark
us as being your soldiers!”” Ah! some of you do the same with Christ. You are
going to be secret Christians, are you, and slink into the devil’s camp, and into
Christ’s camp, but acknowledged by none? Well, ye must take the chance of it,
if ye will be double-minded; but I should not like to risk it. It is a solemn
threatening—‘“‘ Of him will I be ashamed when I come in the glory of My Father,
and all His holy angels with Me!’’ It is a solemn thing, I say, when Christ says,
‘“‘ Except a man take up his cross and follow Me, he cannot be My disciple.” (C.
H, Spurgeon.) We must openly show our love to Christ :—Some time ago, when
in a mine, looking through its dark corridors, I now and then saw the glimmer of
& moving lamp, and I could track it all through the mine. The reason was the
miner carried it on his hat—it was a part of himself and showed where he was. I
said, ‘* Would that in this dark world every miner of the Master carried his lamp
to show where he walks.” (Dr. Cuyler.) Openly religious :—It is not sufficient
to carry religion in our hearts, as fire is carried in flint stones ; but we are outwardly,
visibly, apparently, to serve and honour the living God. (Hooker.) Christ must
be openly praised :—If people are loud in the praise of a physician who has cured
them of some deadly malady—recommending others to trust and seek his skill,
why should not Christ’s people crown Him with equal honours, commend Him toa
dying world and proclaim what He has done for them? (Dr. Guthrie.)


Vers. 14-16. Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the Temple
and taught.—Christ as a teacher :—Whatever theory men hold respecting Christ's
person and work, all regard Him as an unparalleled teacher, Four things distin-
guish Him from all His competitors. I. Hz PoPULARIZED RELIGION. The common
people heard Him gladly. What audiences He drew! When He began to teach
religion had lost its hold on the world. People were wearied of the parodies which
went by the name. Christ taught that it was not a doctrine but a life; not
a speculation, but a love ; not conversion to a sect, but change of heart; and that
teaching was at once a revelation and a revolution. What, in despair, the
people had come to regard as dreary and repulsive, He made them feel was bright
and beautiful, and so popularized religion. II. Hm REVOLUTIONIZED THINKING. It
is more important to make men think aright than to teach them what is right. You
cannot ensure their believing or obeying your instruction, but if you can start them
in conscientious search of what is good, you do them enduring service. Christ did
both, but pre-eminently He liberated the intellect and rationalized its operations.
There was plenty of colossal thinking before Christ, but it was simply constructive
speculation or destructive criticism. And when He came, it was not as anothe:
philosopher, to build another stagey system. Men complain that His thinking is
defective because fragmentary ; but this is its strength. When men asked for His
principles He threw in a simple sentence, ‘“‘ You must be born again,” ‘‘ Love your
neighbour,” some terse, pregnant vhrase which has become the current mental
coin of the leading people of the earth. Any other teacher would have said,
‘‘Come into my class-room and take my lectures; the curriculum is seven years.”’
Christ could settle it in seven minutes. 1. He initiated spontaneous judgment.
Instead of sending people to books, He sent them to their own hearts. 2. He in-
troduced liberty of conscience. Whoever heard of men demanding freedom to think
and judge for themselves before He came ? And yet that freedom has been a ruling


P—


610 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. VIL
SR eee
maxim of society since. Out of these two changes have grown infinite results, and
are quite sufficient to prove that He revolutionized thinking. I. He Reorcanizep
society. The liberty He vindicated involved equality and fraternity. It is fashion-
able to denounce Socialism, and when it becomes Nihilism or Communism it isa
senseless burlesque. He meant that men should serve each other, and not that
the lazy should share with the diligent; that as there was a common Fatherhood
in God there must be a common brotherhood among men. So He reconstructed
society op the basis of mutual respect and reciprocal love. This reconstruction
nmeant—1. That He recruited our hopes. He came to a weary world. Then a few
yroud, petrified men ruled, and the heart of the crowd was crushed and despairing.
The Beatitudes feil on their sad hearts like rain on a drooping flower, and they
looked up and felt that a new chance was open to them all. So it is wherever
Christ comes now. 2. That He verified our aspirations. Men sighed for another
world, but they scarcely knew whether or not to look for it. He came and said,
“If it were not so I would have told you; I go to prepare a place for you.” IV.
He DIGNIFIED Passion. Passion, whether good or bad, is the greatest power in the
world. When He came it was everywhere disordered. He purified and released
and transformed it into affection. Up to that time men knew not exactly what to
make of the emotions implied by such words as sorrow, pain, suffering. He gave
them at once a status and vindicated their place in the economy of God. The
tendency previously was to stifle pathos, and sneer at sentiment. Hesanctifiedand
employed them for the noblest ends. (W. R. Attwood.) Characteristics of
Christ’s teaching :—Wherein did its peculiar power consist? The secret of its in-
fluence lies in no peculiar excellence of diction. Jesus was no poet, orator, or philo-
sopher. It is not the charm of poetry that attracts us, not the ingenious application
which surprises, not flights of eloquence which carry us away, not bold specu-
lation which evokes our astonishment. No one could speak with more sim-
plicity than Jesus, whether on the Mount, in the parables, or in the high
priestly prayer. But this is the very reason of His influence, that He utters
the greatest and most sublime truths in the present words, so that, as Pascal
says, one might almost think He was Himself unconscious what truths He was
propounding, only He expressed them with much clearness, certainty, and convic-
tion, that we see how well He knew what He was saying. We cannot fail to see
that the world of eternal truth is His home, and that His thoughts have constant
intercourse therewith. He speaks of God and of His relation to Him, of the super-
mundane world of spirits, of the future world and the future life of man; of the
kingdom of God upon earth, of its nature and history; of the highest moral truths,
and of the supreme obligations of man; in short, of all the greatest problems and
deepest enigmas of life—as simply and plainly, with such an absence of mental
excitement, without expatiating upon His peculiar knowledge, and even without
that dwelling upon details so usual with those who have anything new to impart
as though all were quite natural and self-evident. We see that the sublimest truths
are His nature. He is not merely a teacher of truth, but is Himself its source,
He can say ‘‘ I am the Truth.” And the feeling with which we listen to His words
is, that we are listening to the voice of truth itself, Hence the power which these
have at all times exercised over the minds of men. (Prof. Luthardt.) Though
criticised and ridiculed we must go on with our work :—Suppose a geometrician should
be drawing lines and figures, and there should come in some silly, ignorant fellow
who, seeing him, should laugh at him, would the artist, think you, leave off his em-
ployment because of his derision? Surely not ; for he knows that he laughs at him
out of his ignorance, as not knowing his art and the grounds thereof. (JJ. Preston.)
And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, never having
learned.—This testimony of enemies to a fact well known to them strongly confirms
what we otherwise must know or must conjecture concerning Christ’s education
or rather the absence in His case of the ordinary ways and means by which other
men receive their knowledge. He was neither school-taught, nor self-taught, nox
even God-taught (like inspired prophets), in the usual sense of those terms. Noa
doubt He learned from His mother, went to the synagogue, heard and read the
Scriptures, studied nature and man, and the Holy Ghost descended upon Him: yet
the secret fountain of His knowledge of God and man must be found in His
mysterious and unique relation to the Father, and derived from direct intuition
into the living fountain of truth in God. He was and continued to be in the bosom
of the Father, and explained Him to us as no philosopher or prophet could do. He
spent His youth in poverty and manual labour, in the obscurity of a carpenter's


CHAP. VII.] ST. JOHN. 611


shop; far away from universities, academies, libraries, and literary or polish

society ; without any help, as far as we know, except that iientioned above? Chri
can be ranked neither with the school trained, nor with the self-trained or self-made
men ; if _by the latter we understand, as we must, those who, without the regular
aid of living teachers, yet with the same educational means, such as books, the
observation of men and things, and the intense application of their mental faculties
attained to vigour of intellect, and wealth of scholarship—like Shakespeare, Bome,
Franklin and others. All the attempts to bring Jesus into contact with Egyptian
wisdom, or the Essenic theosophy, or other sources of learning, are without a
shadow of proof, and explain nothing after all. He never quotes from books except
the Old Testament. He never refers to any of those branches of knowledge which
make up human learning and literature. He confined Himself strictly to religion.
But from that centre, He shed light over the whole world of man and nature. In
this department, unlike other great men, even the prophets and apostles, He was
absolutely original and independent. He taught the world as one who had learned
nothing from it, and was under no obligation to it. He speaks from divine intuition,
as one who not only knows but isthe Truth; and with an authority that commands
absolute submission or provokes rebellion, but can never be passed by with contempt
or indifference. (P. Schaff, D.D.) The originality of Christ as a teacher :—We
have a great many men who are original in the sense of being originators, within a
certain boundary of educated thought. But the originality of Christ is uneducated.
That He draws nothing from the stores of learning can be seen ata glance. Indeed,
there is nothing in Him that belongs to His age or country—no one opinion, taste,
or prejudice. The attempts that have been made to show that He borrowed His
sentiments from the Persians and the Eastern forms of religion, or that He had
been intimate with the Essenes and borrowed from them, or that He must have
been acquainted with the schools and religions of Egypt, deriving His doctrine from
them—all attempts of the kind have so palpably failed, as not even to require a
deliberate answer. If He is simply a man, as we hear, then He is most certainly a
pew and singular kind of man, never before heard of, as great a miracle as if He
were not a man. Whatever He advances is from Himself. Shakespeare, ¢.g.,
probably the most creative and original spirit the world has ever produced, and a
self-made man, is yet tinged in all His works with human learning. He is the
high-priest, we sometimes hear, of human nature. But Christ, understanding
human nature so as to address it more skilfully than he, never draws from its
historic treasures. Neither does He teach by human methods. He does not
speculate about God like a school professor. He does not build up a frame of
evidence from below by some constructive process, such as the philosophers delight
in; but He simply speaks of God and spiritual things as one who has come out
from Him to tell us what He knows. At the same time He never reveals the
infirmity so commonly shown by human teachers. When they veer a little from
their point or turn their doctrine off by shades of variation to catch the assent of
multitudes, He never conforms to an expectation even of His friends. Again, Christ
was of no school or party, and never went to any extreme, words could never turn
Him to a one-sided view of anything. This distinguishes Him from every other
known teacher. He never pushes Himself to any extremity. He is never a radical,
never a conservative. And further, while advancing doctrines so far transcending
all the deductions of philosophy, and opening mysteries that defy all human powers
of explication, He is yet able to set His teachings in a form of simplicity that
accommodates all classes of minds. No one of the great writers of antiquity had
even propounded, as yet, a doctrine of virtue which the multitude could understand.
But Jesus tells them directly, in 2 manner level to their understandings, what they
must do and be to inherit eternal life, and their inmost convictions answer to His
words. (H. Bushnell, D.D.) The teaching of Christ the marvel of unbelief :—The
wisdom of Christ’s teaching has proved a hard problem to infidels for 1,800 years.
To this day it stands above the efforts of the mightiest and most trained minds.
(W.H. Van Doren, D.D.) And Jesus answered them and said, My doctrine is not
Mine, but His that sent Me.—The teaching of Christ :—I. Irs contents. 1. Concern-
ingGod. (1) His nature—spirit (chap. iv. 24). (2) His character—love (iii. 16). (3)
His purpose—salvation (iii. 17). (4) His requirement-—faith (vi. 29). 2. Concerning
Himself, (1) His heavenly origin—from above (vi. 88). (2) This higher being—the
Son of the Father (vi.17). (3) His Divine commission—sent by God (v. 37). (4) His
gracious errand—to give life to the world (v. 21; vi. 51). (5) His future glory—to
raise the dead (v. 28). 8. Concerning man—(1) Apart from Him, dead (v. 24) and


612 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (omar. vit. .)


ishing (iii. 16). (2) In Him possessed of eternal life. 4. Concerning salvation—
{ty Its 0 eee Sit life (v. 24). (2) Its condition—hearing His word (v. 24),
believing in God (v. 24), coming to Him (v. 40). IL. Irs pivirry. Three
sources possible for Christ’s teaching. 1, Others. _He might have acquired it by
education. But this Christ’s contemporaries negatived. He had never studied at
a rabbinical school (ver. 15). 2. Himself. He might have evolved it from His
own religious consciousness, But this Christ here repudiates. 3. God. This He
expressly claimed, and that not merely as prophets had received Divine communica-
tions, but ina way that was unique (chap. v. 19, 20; vill. 28 ; xi. 49), as one who had
been in eternity with God (i. 1, 18; iii. 11). III. Irs crEDENTILs. 1. Its self-
verifying characier : such as would produce in the mind of every sincere person who
desired to do the Divine willa clear conviction of its divinity (ver. 17). 2. Its God-
glorifying aim, Had it been human it would have followed the law of all such
developments; its Publisher would have had a tendency to glorify Himself in its
propagation. The entire absence of this in Christ’s case was a phenomenon to
which He invited observation. The complete.absorption of the messenger and the
message in the Divine glory was proof that both belonged to a different than human
category. 3. Its sinless bearer. This follows from the preceding. A messenger whose
devotion to God was perfect as Christ’s was could not be other than sinless. Butif
the messenger were sinless there could be no unveracity in His message or in what
He said concerning it. Lessons: 1. The marvellous in Christianity. 2. The
insight of obedience. 3. The danger of high intellectual endowments. 4. The
connection between truth and righteousness. , 5. The sinlessness of Jesus an
argument for His divinity. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.)


Ver. 17. If any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine (in connection
with chap. viii. 47).—Our Lord asserts—First: That if a man is in a right
state of mind, he will know and believe the truth. Secondly: That those who are
in a wrong state of mind reject the truth ; 7.e., the cause of faith, or the reason why
a man believes, is to be found in his right moral state, and that the cause of wrong
belief and infidelity is a wrong moral state. This, reduced to one proposition, is that
the faith of a man, so far as religious truth is concerned, depends on his moral
state. Proof that this is true. 1. The declaration of our Lord is sufficient proof.
The expressions, ‘‘ If any man,” &c., and, ‘‘ He that is of God,” amount to the same.
The one means if any one sincerely desires to please God, and the other if any man
is godly—i.e., of the same mind as God. Faith in the truth of God, He says,
certainly flows from this congeniality with God; and, on the other hand, unbelief igs
due to, and therefore is the evidence of, a want of this congeniality, 2. This, how-
ever, is proved by other declarations, Christ says, ‘‘ If God were your Father, ye would
love Me.’”’ He uniformly refers the unbelief of the Jews and their rejection of Him to
their wickedness ; it was because they were of their father the devil that they re-
jected and bated Him. St. John asserts that, “ He that knoweth God, heareth us,”
and that believers have the witness or evidence of the truth in themselves. The Holy
Spirit, or an unction from the Holy One, is given to all God’s people, whereby they
know the truth. Paul says that the natural or unrenewed man, and because he is
unrenewed, perceives not the things of the Spirit; whereas the spiritual man, and
because he is spiritual, perceives all things. He elsewhere says, “If our gospel be
hid, it is hid to them that are lost.” This is the constant doctrine of the Scrip-
tures, 3. Itis also the doctrine of experience. The good uniformly believe the
truth , the wicked disbelieve or neglect it. Trace the history of the Church, and you
will uniformly find truth and piety united on the one hand, and error and irreligion
on the other. The more serious the error, the more clear the evidence of the sin-
fulness of the errorists. This is true everywhere. The infidels of England, France,
and Germany, are uniformly irreligious, and generally immoral, On the other hand,
you never find the evidence of godliness without finding with it the firm belief of
all truth connected with religious experience. Experience, therefore, is in accord
with Scripture. 4. A fourth argument is from analogy. There are different kinds
of truth. Some are speculative and addressed to the intellect, as truths of mathe-
matics, science, history. Some are esthetic, as addressed to the taste or sense of
the beautiful. Some are moral and suppose a moral sense for their apprehension,
Some are religious or spiritual and suppose a religious or spiritual etate of mind
for their apprehension. The evidence of any one of these is suited to its nature,
The evidence of speculative truths is addressed only to the understanding, and re-
quires only intellectual ability to comprehend and receive it. They force assent,


en ee


CHAP, viI.] ST, JOHN. 613
The evidence of gsthetic truth supposes cultivation. If a man denies the beauty of
what the mass of educated men pronounce beautiful, it is proof positive of his want
of taste. So with morals. A good man inevitably approves of what is morally
right and good. If a man pronounce the decalogue evil, or the Sermon on the
Mount immoral, it is proof positive that he is immoral. If this is so, why should it
not be true that the religious man should receive religious truth and the ungodly
reject them? Inferences: 1. The folly of the opinion that a man is not responsible
for his faith. This is transferring a maxim, true in one sphere, to another in which
itis not true, Our character is determined by our faith, because our faith depends
upon our character. Therefore we should be humbled because of our unbelief;
consider it an evidence of a dull and sluggish heart. 2. We see the true way to
increase the strength of faith. We must grow in holiness, 3. Theconsolation and
security of believers. No speculative objection can subvert a faith founded on moral
or religious evidence. Science can never disprove the decalogue. (C. Hodge, D.D.)
Obedience the organ of spiritual knowledge:—1. The Jews marvelled at Christ’s
spiritual wisdom. The cause of wonder was His want of scholastic education. He
said, ‘* My doctrine is not Mine,” &¢. The principle whereby He attained spiritual
wisdom (chap. v. 30) He extends to all, ‘If anyman.” Here, then, are two opinions
respecting the origin of spiritual knowledge—the popular one relying on a cultivated
understanding, ‘“‘that of Christ which relied on trained affections and habits of
obedience.” Whatis truth? Study, said the Jews. Act said Christ, and you shall
know. 2. Religious controversy is fast settling into a controversy between two ex-
treme parties. Those who believe everything, and those who believe nothing, the
credulous and the sceptical. The first rely on authority—Romanists and all who
receive their opinions because their sect or their documents assert them. The
second rely on culture. Enlighten, and sin, which is an error of the understanding,
will disappear, and we shall know all that can be known of God. These disciples
of scepticism easily become disciples of credulity. It is instructive to see how
those who sneer at Christian mysteries believe in the veriest. imposture. In opposi-
tion to both stands the Christianity of Christ. I. Curistain KNowLEDGE. 1. Its
object, “‘ The doctrine.” Doctrinal is now opposed to practical, We call the Sermon
on the Mount practical, and Paul’s epistles doctrinal. But Christ’s doctrine means
His teaching and embraces everything He taught. In two departments of doctrine
the principle of the text will be found true. (1) In speculative truth. If any man
will do God’s will he shall know what is truth and what is error. How is it that
men are almost sure to arrive at the conclusion reached by their party? Because
fear, interest, and vanity bias them. This hindrance is not to be removed by culture.
By removing self-will the way is cleared for an approximation towards unity on
points speculative. (2) In practical truths. Our opinions depend on our lives more
than our lives on our opinions. Men think in a certain mode because their life is
of a certain character, and opinions are invented afterwards as a defence for their
life. “Let us eat and drink,” &c. First they ate and drank, then believed to-
morrow we die. Slavery is defended philosphically. The negro on his skull and
skeleton, they say, has God’s intention of his servitude written. But did
not men first make slaves, and then search for plausible reasons? So too a
belief in predestination is alleged in excuse of crime. 2. Its certainty. ‘‘ Shall
know,” not have an opinion. There is a wide distinction between supposing and
knowing, fancy and conviction. Whatever rests on authority remains only sup-
position. You know when you feel. In matters practical you know only so far as
youcan do. Read a work on “ Evidences,” and it may become highly probable
that Christianity is true. That is an opinion. Feel God. Do His will, till the
Absolute Imperative within you speaks as with a living voice; then you do not
think, you know that there is a God. II. THE coNnDITION OF ITS ATTAINMENT. iN
The universe is governed by laws. By submission to them you make them your
own. Obey those of the body—temperance and chastity; of the mind—fix the
attention, strengthen by exercise; and then their prizes are yours—health, strength,
tenaciousness of memory, nimbleness of imagination, &c. Obey the laws of your
spiritual being, and it has its prizes too. The condition of a peaceful life is sub-
mission to the law of meekness; the condition of the Beatific vision is purity of
heart ; the condition of spiritual wisdom and certainty in truth is obedience to the
will of God. In every department of knowledge, therefore, there is an appointed
“organ” for the discovery of its specific truth. In the world of sense, the em-
pirical intellect ; here the Baconian philosopher is supreme. The religious man
may not contravene his assertions; but in the spiritual world, the organ of the


ea


614 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaP. VII.
inna ieee aE
scientific man, sensible experience, is powerless. If the chemist, &c., say we find
in the laws of affinity, in the deposits of past ages, in the human frame no trace of
God, no one expected they would. Obedience is the sole organ here. ‘“ Eye hath
not seen it.” And just as by copying perpetually a master-painter’s works, we get
at last an instinctive and infallible power of recognizing his touch, so by copying
and doing God’s will we recognize what is His—we know of the teaching whether
it be of God, or whether it be an arbitrary invention of a human self. 2. The
universality of this law. ‘If anyman.” In God’s universe there are no favourites
who may transgress its laws with impunity; none who can take fire and not be
burnt. In God’s spiritual universe there are no favourites who can attain know-
ledge and wisdom apart from experience. See the beauty of this arrangement. If
the certainty of truth depended on the proof of miracles, prophecy, &c., then truth
would be in the reach chiefly of those who can weigh evidence, investigate, &e. ;
whereas, as it is, ‘The meek will He guide in judgment.” The humblest may
know more by a single act of charity, or a prayer of self-surrender, than all the
sages can teach or theologians dogmatize upon. 3. Part of this condition is
earnestness. ‘ Will” here is volition, not the will of the future tense. So it is
not a chance, fitful obedience that leads to the truth, but one rendered in entire-
ness and in earnest. (F. W. Robertson, M.A.) An obedient spirit the key of
truth :—In judging the Bible, there is a great diversity of opinion. One regards it
as a mass of contradiction and fable, which interest has imposed on credulity ;
while another receives it as the oracles of God. Some find in it the atonement and
the necessity of a vital change, others see nothing of the sort. Yet these men may
be of equally sound judgment in other matters. Nay, the same man views the
Bible in all these varied lights at different periods. Does this diversity arise from
the Bible or from its readers? Ifa number of men were placed at different heights,
and one should declare that the sun had risen, another that he was rising, and a
third that he had not risen, we should ascribe this diversity not to anything in the
sun, but to the different altitudes of the observers. The varied judgments on the
Bible are to be accounted for in the same way; for—1l. Our text shows us that
there is nothing in the Bible which necessarily leads men to err respecting its doc-
trines. If our Maker gave a revelation to man, we should expect that it should be
attended with such evidences that every man might know that it really came from
Him, and that every man might know precisely what it taught. And this has been
done. ‘If any man will do His will, he shall” not be inclined to believe that the
Bible is true, but ‘‘shall know,” &. The apostles echo this; they say, “ We
know.”? God does not make this revelation certain and clear, irrespective of
character. We might as well expect the sun to be visible alike to the dwellers in
caves or the open air. Both the sun and the Scriptures are so placed that all who
place themselves in a proper position may know the truth of the one and see the
light of the other, 2. What is this position? ‘If any man will do.” An
obedient spirit is the key of Divine truth. The holiest man will best understand
the Bible. This is reasonable. Who would think of going to a wicked man to
learn religious truth? We feel that he is best qualified to teach who has learnt to
practice. The same qualification is necessary in the learner. A rebellious child is
more likely to mistake his father’s meaning than one who is obedient. 3. We need
the aid of the Holy Spirit in discerning spiritual things. The Bible is clear, but
we are dark. A man suddenly emerging from long imprisonment is bewildered by
the light; so Bible perplexities are due mostly to our sinful blindness. It is the
office of the Holy Spirit to cleanse and strengthen the spiritual vision. To whom,
then, will God give His Spirit? Not to him who will not follow the light he has.
The universal maxim is that to one who improves, more shall be given. And yet
wicked men complain that they cannot understand the Bible. As well might a
spencthrift complain because he did not receive his father’s whole estate. Bishop
Wilson says, ‘‘ When religion is made a science, nothing is more intricate; but
when made a duty, nothing is more easy.” A French infidel once said to Pascal,
“Tf I had your principles, I should be a better man.” ‘Begin with being a better
man, and you will soon have my principles,” was the reply. 4. Our subject shows
us what they must do who are troubled with doubts. Shall he read volumes of
“Evidences”? The first step is to give up sin. Having done this, let him read
the Bible wtth a mind open to conviction. Such a person begins to do the will of
God, and he will become a believer in the Word. He hears that prayer is necessary
ere he can understand the Bible, and consequently prays, and obedience is again
rewarded. Admitting the truth of the Scriptures, he yet finds doctrines he cannot


OG > eerie


CaP. vi1.] ST. JOHN. 615


understand. Let him do the will of God, and all that is necessary for him to know
about the atonement, regeneration, assurance, &c., will be made clear. 5. We need
not stop here. In heaven we shall know, because we shall follow on to know the
Lord. (IW. H. Lewis, D.D.) Obedience not compulsion :—It would have been as
easy for God to fill the world with obedient subjects as it is for a man to fill his
garden with flowers. If it is only flowers that he wants, he can get them at once
and keep them for ever, without any trouble of raising or tilling. He has but to go
to a milliner’s shop, and take home his treasures and plant them. But suppose he
wants living flowers. In that case he wants to know something more than the way
to the milliner’s shop. He has need of wisdom and patience. Flowers must be
cherished and coaxed ; they will not grow for the telling. If all that God wanted
were obedience, He could make a splendid world to-day. He has but to will it,
and all would be orderly in an instant. Not a thought, word, deed, misplaced.
Kings and subjects, masters and men, all at peace. No war, untruth, tears; sin
and sorrow all gone. But it would be splendid death. No wrong and no right;
no tears and no joy. The world would go as a sewing-machine, because it must.
That is not the obedience God wants to see. He wants obedience with a heart in
it. And so He waits and is patient. A thousand times He comes, and still the
door is bolted and barred; and yet again He comes, if haply He may find it open.
(H. W. Burgoyne.) Via Intelligentice :—The ancients tell us that when Jupiter
saw men striving for Truth, and pulling her to pieces to secure her for themselves,
he sent Mercury, who dressed Error up in the imagery of Truth; and though then
men were sure to get but little truth, they were as earnest as ever, and lost peace,
too, in their contentions for its image. This is no wonder; but when truth and
peace are brought into the world together, to see men contending for the truth to
the breach of the peace is the greatest wonder. Disputation cures no vice, but
kindles a great many. Christianity is all for practice; and the time spent in
quarrelling about it is a diminution to its interest. Christ’s way of finding out
truth is by doing the will of God. Consider—I. THz ways MEN HAVE PROPOUNDED
TO FIND TRUTH, AND ON THAT FOUNDATION TO ESTABLISH PEACE IN CHRISTENDOM.
1. That there is but one true way is agreed upon, and therefore every Church pro-
pounds a system, and says that is the true religion; like Brutus and Cassius, of
whom one says, ‘‘ They supposed themselves were the commonwealth.” But of
this there can be no end; for divide the Church into twenty parts, and you and
your party are damned by the other nineteen. 2. Others conclude that this evil
must be cured by submission to an infallible guide; but this can never end our con-
troversies, because the greatest controversies are about this guide, and because—(1)
We cannot find any such guide. (2) Nor do we find one necessary. (3) Those
who pretend to be such are deceived. (4) They do not believe in their infallibility,
for they do not put an end to their own questions. (5) Given such a one, we
should fail of truth, for perhaps he would not perform his duty, or we should at
times misunderstand or be perverse. God is an infallible Guide, yet by our faults
we are as far off from peace and truth as ever. 3. Some wise men have undertaken
to reconcile the differences of Christendom, by projecting that each side should
pare away something of their propositions, and join in common terms of accomoda-
tion. This has been tried, but has produced nothing but a fantastic peace. 4,
Others, observing that many controversies are kept up by ill stating of the question,
endeavour to make the matter intelligible ; but we find by sad experience that few
questions are well stated; and when they are not consented to, and when agreed
upon by both parties to be well stated, are simply armies drawn up with skill and
waiting to thrust their swords in each others’ sides. 5. Some have propounded a
way of peace rather than truth—universal toleration. This relies on a great
reasonableness, since opinions cannot be forced; and when men receive no hurt, it
is to be hoped they will do none. But there are many who are not content that
you permit them; they will not permit you. Their way is not only true, but neces-
sary, and all moderation is but want of zealforGod. Whatisnowtobedone? Must
truth be for ever in the dark, and the world divided? We have examined all ways
but one; and having missed in every other, let ustry this. Let every man in his station
do the duty which God requires of him, and then he shall be taught of God all that is
fit for him to learn (Psa. cxi. 10; cxix. 100). ‘Theology is rather a Divine life than
a Divine knowledge. II. CeRTAIN CAUSES OF OUR ERRORS ARE NOTHING BUT DIRECT
sins. 1. No man understands the Word of God unless he lays aside all affections
to sin. ‘ Wickedness,” said Aristotle, ‘‘ corrupts a man’s reasoning,” it gives him
false principles and evil measures of things. A covetous man understands nothing


616 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHAP. VIR

ae nn ee ee

to be good that is not profitable. A voluptuary likes your reasoning well enough it
you discourse of the pleasures of sense, but if you talk of religion he cries out,
“© What is the matter?” A man’s mind must be like your proposition before it can
beentertained. We understand so little of religion because we are in love with that
which destroys it; and as a man does not care to hear what does not please him,
go neither does he believe it. 2. He that means to understand the will of God
must lay aside all inordinate affections to the world. A veil was on the hearts of
the Jews (2 Cor. iii. 14), because they looked for a temporal prince and secular
advantages, and so they would not accept the poor, despised Jesus. The argument
of Demetrius is unanswerable, ‘‘ By this craft they get their living.” When men’s
souls are possessed by the world, their souls cannot be invested with holy truths,
because a man cannot serve two masters or vigorously attend two objects. 3. No
man, however learned, can understand God’s word, or be at peace on religious
questions unless he be a master over his passions. When a man is mingled with
his congenial infirmities of anger and desire, he judges of heavenly things
accordingly. Truth enters into the heart when it is empty, and clean, and still;
but when the mind is shaken with passion, you can never hear the ‘‘ voice of the
charmer, though he charm very wisely.”” But all this while we are in preparation
only. When we have cast off sin, the world, and passion, then we may say, “Speak,
Lord, for Thy servant heareth’”’; but we are not yet instructed. III. Waar is THaT
PRINCIPLE OR MEANS BY WHICH WE SHALL CERTAINLY BE LET INTO ALL TRUTH? Do
God’s will and you shall understand God’s truth. 1. This must be taken for a
precognition that every good man is taught of God, and unless He teach us we
shall be poor scholars and worse guides. By how much nearer we are to God, by
so much better shall we be instructed. This being pre-supposed, we can proceed by
wonderful degrees in this Divine philosophy. 2. There is in every righteous man a
new vital principle ; the spirit of grace is the spirit of wisdom, and teaches us by
secret inspirations, effects and energies (1 John ii. 27). Which principle divers
fanatics, misunderstanding, expect to be conducted by ecstasy. But God’s Spirit
does not destroy reason, but heightens it. He opens the heart not to attend to
secret whispers, but to hear the Word of God, and gives us a new heart to under-
stand it, otherwise the gospel is a dead letter (1 Cor. ii. 14). When the wicked
governor asked of Christ concerning truth, Christ gave him noanswer. He was not
fit to hear it. 3. A good life is the best way to understand reason and religion, be-
cause by the experiences and relishes of religion there is conveyed to us a sweetness
to which all wicked men are strangers. When reason is raised by the Spirit of
Christ, it is turned quickly into experience. So long as we know God only in the
ways of men, by learning and dispute, we shall see nothing but a shadow of Him,
but when we know Him with the eyes of holiness, we shall hear what we never
heard and see what we never saw. 4. There isa sort of God’s dear servants, who
perfect holiness in His fear, who have a degree of charity and Divine knowledge
more than we can discourse of. This is to be felt and not to be talked of. A good
man is united to God as flame touches a flame, and combines into glory. He is the
friend of God and best knows God's mind, IY. By war MEANS IS IT BFFECTED
THAT A HOLY LIFE IS THE BEST DETERMINATION OF ALLL QUESTIONS, AND THE SUREST
WAY OF KNOWLEDGE? Is it to be supposed that a godly man is better enabled to
determine the questions of purgatory and transubstantiation? Is a temperate man
a better scholar than a drunkard! Answer: In all things in which true wisdom
consists, holiness, which is best wisdom, is the surest way of understanding them.
And this—1. Is effected by holiness as a proper and natural instrument, for
naturally everything is best discerned by its proper light. As the eye sees visible
objects, and the understanding intellectual, so the spirit the things of the Spirit.
Who can tell better what is and what is not true reformation, than he who is truly
reformed. He knows what pleases God and can best tell by what instruments He
is reconciled (Prov, x. 31-32). 2. Holiness is not only an advantage to the learn-
ing all wisdom and holiness, but for discerning what is wise and holy from what is
trifling, useless, and contentious. If God’s Spirit be your teacher, He will teach
you such truths as will make you know and love God, and become like Him and
enjoy Him for ever, But what are you better if any man should teach you whether
every angel makes a species, or what place Adam should have lived in if he had not
fallen? 3. Holiness is the best way of finding out truth, not only as a natural
medium, or as a prudent medium, but as a means by way of Divine blessing (chap.
xiv. 21). Love is obedience, and we learn His words best when we practise
them. 4. When this is reduced to practice and experience, we find not ‘only in


oHAP. vIT.] ST. JOHN. 617


practical things, but even in the deepest mysteries, not only the most eminent
saints, but every good man, can best tell what is true and reprove an error. He
that goes about to understand the Trinity by words of man’s invention, he may
talk something, but he knows not what. Butthe goad man that feels the ‘“‘ power
of the Father,” to whom the Son has ‘‘ become wisdom.and righteousness,” &c.,
and in whose heart ‘‘ the love of God is shed abroad by the Holy Ghost,” though he
understands nothing of what is unintelligible, yet he only understands the mystery
of the Trinity. Experience is the best learning. Application: 1. That is no
religion whose principles destroy any duty of religion. 2. It is but an ill sign of
holiness when a man is busy in little scruples and fantastic opinions about things
not concerning the life of religion. 3. That is no good religion which disturbs
governments and shakes the foundation of the public peace. (Jeremy Taylor.)
Faith culture :—It is quite possible for any one of us to go out on the street, and by
a number of rapid and unnatural revolutions of the body, so to confuse the brain,
that all the objects around us, and even the solid earth beneath our feet, will seem
to dance before our eyes, and to whirl round and round in a most bewildering con-
fusion. So, also, is it possible for a man to whirl round and round in an unworthy
and bad life, until his moral nature is so confused that the most unmoving facts of
the moral world will dance before his mental vision, and the very foundations of
moral truth be broken up in a mocking, whirling, hopeless maze. But, in both of
these cases, the disturbance is within, not without. It is in the eye which sees,
not in the things which are seen. So in the case of the sceptic, His disobedience
of moral law, the false and unnatural movements of his spirit, have set everything
whirling and spinning. Eternal verities now dance before his mind as so many
unsubstantial fancies, only because his moral vision has been deranged. And the
remedy in both cases is the same. Let the drunken man become sober, and he will
see things as they are. Let the sceptic turn to duty, and he will come to know truth.
How can the impure man believe in purity? Is it for his interest to do so? Is it
for his peace and happiness? Would not such faith work as fire in his veins?
Faith fails, and must fail, when life withdraws its support. But a short time ago,
I heard of a man whose antecedents were religious and whose own freely formed
relations are such also, who publicly, and with all seriousness, questioned the truth
of human immortality. Do you ask, What shall be said in explanation of such a
phenomenon? Why this—there is no mystery about it. Let that man continue a
few years longer in political life (such as he makes it), let him continue a few years
longer to grow rich amazingly fast upon an amazingly small salary, and he will
have no doubts upon the subjects which he is now debating. He will then be sure
that there is no future life; probably also, that there is no God. How can such a
man believe in heaven? Has he much interest in it? How can he believe in hell?
Has he not too much interest in this? The truth is, the man has so abused his
moral nature, so riddled it with transgressions, that it is no longer capable of
holding faith—faith in a God who will punish sin, Faith leaks out of such a man,
as water runs from the tub which has stood for weeks in the blazing sun. So there
are scores around us whose immorality has made them sceptics. They have not
grown beyond faith mentally, but they have sunk below it morally. First, the life
was lowered, then the creed. First, practice was loosened, and then the creed was
liberalized. They first trampled under foot a mother’s example, and then into the
game mire threw her Bible. The new crew was first received on board, and then
the new flag was run up to the mast-head. They never thought of changing their
views as to the obligations of the Sabbath until they had violated, or wished to
violate, its sanctity. Search these persons out, and you will find that the atmos-
phere in which they live, and through which they look upon spiritual things, is by
no means a pure one; and this is the reason why they do not see moral truth
clearly, and hold it firmly. One has thickened his atmosphere with a conscience-
less greed for gain. Another, with a fierce and unprincipled desire for power. Still
another has poured round her the thickening, dead-sweet nebula of silly and sense-
less pleasure, and from the midst of this she looks out upon spiritual things;
seeing them about as clearly as you see the leaves of the tree or the face of the sun
through the medium of stained windows. I. First—a LARGE PART OF MORAL AND
RELIGIOUS TRUTH IS PRACTICAL, AND CANNOT BE KNOWN EXCEPT THROUGH EXPERIENCE ;
THAT 13, THROUGH LIvING rT. You can believe in London—that there is such a
place, without ever having seen it. It is a mere exercise of the intellect to do this.
So you can demonstrate that the angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles.
There is no need, no place, for experience here But take this declaration—a pure


a ey


618 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP, Vil.


a TITTIES nnn


and good life is the happiest. How can you, how can any one, surely know whether
this is true or not until by experience you test it? So Christ stands before the
world and says, “‘Come unto me, and I will give you rest.” But it is not possible
for any one to know that this is true or not true until he makes trial—until he
actually does come unto Christ. Or, take this declaration—God hears and answers
prayer. There is no way of putting this to the test, except by living a life of prayer.
And here let me say to those among you who, in the presence of neglected duty, are
waiting for more light and stronger faith, that you will wait in vain. You may say,
‘Tf I believed all that the Christian does, I would commence.” But I tell you that
you shall never have more faith until you bow right loyally to the Right which you
now see, to Duty already known. The starving man may not wait for more strength
before he takes of the food placed before him. Every day that you deny to moral
truth already known the obedience of your life, you do so much to obscure this
truth. II. A second justification of the principle of the text is this—sPrRITUAL
THINGS ARE SPIRITUALLY DISCERNED. So it is with scientific things. Newton was
living in the atmosphere of science, with the faculty of observation in fullest
exercise, or he would not have seen the apple drop. An accident you may call it.
But it was an accident which could only have happened to a Newton. So always
scientific things are scientifically discerned. A blind man would never have
recognized Frauenhofer’s spectroscopic lines. Now, there is in man a moral faculty
which is set into relation with moral truth. But this faculty, like all others, to be
useful, must be exercised. The lapidary tells the quality of the stone by the touch
of his tongue. So the tea-taster goes from box to box, by a single taste fixing the
value of the box. So the moral faculty, exercised in the direction of truth and
duty, becomes quick and unerring to detect them. The conscience, like Ithuriel’s
spear, discloses falseness and error by a single touch. Many a man who is in no
sense intellectually great is yet wonderfully able to disentangle sophistry, to lift the
truth which is covered over with error, to cut the path of duty plain and straight
through the most tangled maze. You will readily recall here the old phrase of
“threading the labyrinth.” The one who desired to visit the dark and winding
passages used to take the end of a spool of thread in his hand, unwinding it as he
went into the maze. And when he desired to return to the light, all that he needed
to do was to follow back his guiding thread. Now, to a good man, to an obedient
spirit, conscience is this thread. Out of the darkest windings it leads unto the
light. There is not that labyrinth of error on earth in which such a man can be
lost. He will reach unto the day, as surely as the blind instinct of the cellar vine
turns to the’ sun. I know faith is spoken of as the gift of God. But, like all other
gifts of God, this has its conditions. God can no more give it unto a bad life, than
He can give beauty and sweetness to the flower which never sees the light, or bone
and muscle and strength to the man who will not allow food to pass his lips, or
riches to the idler and the spendthrift. I turn now to make some applications of
this subject. 1. First—It furnishes a solution of the scepticism of some men of
science. Your power of observation may be good, but human eyes cannot take in
God as they can a fossil or a planet. They are not the organ of reception here.
A man who would came into the presence of God must walk the path which leads
unto this presence. There is a hill of science, and there is another hill. We say
not, that the former commands not a noble prospect. It does. Is well worth
climbing. All that we affirm, and what the Bible declares is, that the outlook from
it is not the same as that from the other hill called Calvary. Right living, not sharp
thinking, is the condition here. 2, Again—This subject also helps to discern the
origin, and to determine the value, of another very common species of scepticism,
which we may term popular in distinction from scientific. Many men who are
prominent in public life are more or less sceptical. The explanation of the scepti-
cism which you see is to be found in the life, all of which you do not see, And
this thought leads naturally to another application of the truth which we are con-
sidering. 3. It is this—the fearful danger which attaches to continued impenitence,
This impenitence of yours, this holding back from duty, is the slow murdering of
your faith. 4. I only add, as a closing application of this subject, that it is useful
for direction to those who would enter upon the Christian life. The way to do
this is not to wait for more feeling, not to delay for stronger faith, but to take up
that duty or duties already known, already before you. (S. S. Mitchell, D.D.)
The true order of religious knowledge :—In this instance ‘will do” does not express
future action simply. The “will” is not a mere auxiliary, it is an independent
verb, and receives the main emphasis of the verse. The revised version correctly


Fe
;
4
‘4
7


omar. vit] ST. JOHN. 619


renders it: “If any man willeth,” &c, The true order of religious knowledge,
then—(1) Willing. (2) Doing. (3) Knowing. Such an order, however, does not
accord with man’s preconceived notions. The first statement in the process seems
to him superfluous, and the last two appear unnaturally reversed. He raises the
objection: ‘‘I must know a doctrine before I attempt to put it into practice. For
me to undertake to do what I cannot understand is absurd.’’ But how is it in
other departments of life and thought? Does theory precede practice, or does
practice prepare for theory? Did men never sow and reap until they had analyzed
soils and developed the whole system of agriculture? Did they never use wheat
until chemistry had taught them just how much gluten, starch, and phosphate there
is in that grain, and explained its wonderful adaptation to the human constitution ?
Did they never lay the four walls of a dwelling until they had reasoned out the
geometrical truth that two straight lines cannot enclose a space, and had mastered
the entire science of architecture? The question, in fine, resolves itself into this:
Is science based upon art, or art upon science? Do children study grammar, or do
they learn to talk first? Do they not walk until they have been instructed in the
intricate physiological processes and mechanical principles involved in that act?
Did men wait until Aristotle had constructed his logic, to reason? Did they write
no poetry until the science of prosody had been perfected? Did they never paint
pictures until the laws of perspective had been carefully studied, and the theories of
combination and contrast in colours were well understood? Now there is a religious
art and a religious science, the art of holy living and the science of theology. The
relation between the two is most vital. The practice of the one is the indispensable
condition of the successful acquirement of the other. As the practice progresses
the doctrine develops. Knowledge grows from more to more, and clear conceptions
and positive convictions become at length the priceless possession of the soul. But
granting the reasonableness of the requirement that doing shall precede knowing,
why is it necessary, it may be asked, to make this threefold division and to specify
willing? Is not that already implied in the doing? Can there be doing without
willing to do? Certainly there can be no rational and responsible action without
the forthputting of volition. But this willing means more than that. It means
willingness, the moral determination of the mind toward God, the complete sub-
mission of the affections and desires to His will, the making of that will our
supreme and ultimate choice. Something like this is true of all knowledge. Its
attainment is conditioned on the mind’s receptivity and openness to the truth. It
is only when the mind has divested itself of prepossessions and prejudices, and is
supremely anxious to know the truth for the truth’s sake, and is willing to follow
wherever that truth may lead, that it can succeed in its search. Pascal truly says,
“The perception of truth is a moral act” ; and Fichte, “If the will be steadfastly
and sincerely fixed on what is good, the understanding will of itself discover what
is true.” Similar testimony is borne by the two great masters of modern science.
Prof. Tyndall says of inductive inquiry: ‘The first condition of success is an honest
receptivity, and a willingness to abandon all preconceived notions, however
cherished, if they be found to contradict the truth. Believe me, a self-renunciation
which has something noble in it, and of which the world never hears, is often
enacted in the private experience of the true votary of science.” Prof. Huxley goes
so far as to say, ‘‘ The great deeds of philosophers have been less the fruit of their
intellect than of the direction of that intellect by an eminently religious tone of
mind. ‘Truth has yielded herself rather to their patience, their love, their single-
heartedness, and their self-denial, than to their logical acumen.” Even the pagan
poet, Sophocles, saw and stated this truth: ‘‘A heart of mildness, full of
good intent, Far sooner than acuteness will the truth behold.” This rightness
of heart is the one and indispensable condition of all religious knowledge.
There the moral disposition is everything. ‘ With a heart man believeth unto
righteousness.” An absolute renunciation of self, and an unqualified surrender te
the Divine will, must precede and give rise to all right doing and all real knowing.
In the heart’s unreserved consent to the will of God lies the secret of all attainment
in religious knowledge. Here is the dividing line between the children of God and
aliens. Here is the starting point in spiritual experience. Here is the beginning
of true wisdom. In the heart’s consent—when that is yielded all else will follow
as naturally as noon-day follows the dawn. One who submissively consents to the
will of God, will do that will, and in the doing will come to a knowledge of all
essential truth. (Christian Advocate.) Knowing by doing :—1. It was a frivoloug
question those Jews raised. It was not whether there was anything in the


1 ry i


a


620 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. Vit.


teaching worth heeding, but how had Christ learned it. Our Lord turns their
thought to the question they ought to have asked: Is this the teaching of God ?
This is the first question that any new teaching should raise now; but now,
as then, the question is, What is His school? The Bible test of all teaching
is, Is it of God? Never mind the school. 2. The old question suggested
by Christ is not yet laid. Teachers are in multitudes with all sorts of credentials.
But earnest souls are asking, Whence is the teaching? Much of it is countersigned
by the schools, but we find the schools wrangling. And not only rival books and
systems make trouble for us. We are pointed to facts, and told that God teaches
by providence as well as His Word, and yet many of the facts are ugly. The
seething deeps of society throw to the surface horrible practical problems not
classified in the canons of Westminster and Dort. The tendency of a good many
minds is to set down the whole matter as a hopeless muddle. 3. And yet thus much
is plain. Given the Being we are taught to believe in and worship, and obey as God,
an intelligible revelation of His will follows of necessity, else loyalty and duty are the
veriest farce. And if Christ is to be believed, all the teaching necessary to blessed
and useful living is clearly given by God. ‘‘ The light is with you,” He tells the
Jews, ‘“‘ walk while ye have it.” Christ claims to be this light, and to meet the
demand for God’s teaching. ‘‘ My teaching is that of Him who sent Me.” ‘So
far, well,” says the world. ‘‘That is a fair response to our challenge; but how
shall we testit? Howshall we know?” Christ answers, ‘‘Byexperiment. Prac-
tice the teaching and it will vindicate itself as Divine.” 4. Christ thus puts
practice before knowledge, and as a means to it, and in this lays down no arbi-
trary or unfamiliar law. The best of our knowledge, all of it that is useful, is
gained through practice. So the teaching of Christ will not vindicate itself as of
God by merely studying it. No man ever learned to paint or play by mastering the
theories of painting and music. He must handle the brush and finger the keys
himself. Doing is a mode of study. Practice vindicates theory. Christ thus
invites the fairest, simplest, and most decisive test of His teaching. Try and see
if it works. JI. THE FIRST STEP TOWARD KNOWING THE TEACHING oF GoD IS A
DETERMINATION TO DO 1T. Will means, not wish, but resolution. A man says, “I
should like to know how to write shorthand.” That is all it comes to. Another
says, ‘¢I will learn shorthand,” and goes to work at it. There is the difference.
There is a great deal of vague wishing and talking about wanting to know God’s
will. Nota few take it for granted that the teaching of Godis a hazy sort of thing,
and rather comfort themselves with this haziness, and take refuge in it from clear
dictates of duty. Christ nowhere concedes this haziness. He sets the teaching of
God in the light, and says, ‘‘ Man shall know,” and the first step towards that is
determination. Some people take the attitude of willingness to know if knowledge
shall be forced on their conviction ; but God’s teaching is not brought in that way ;
it is something to be won, and a man’s professed willingness is a sham if it do not
translate itself into the energy of a resolved will. II. THis ENERGY DISPLAYS ITSELF
In suBJECTION. If one wills to do another’s will, he puts himself under that will
absolutely, and obeys it, surrendering his own. Christ here lays down no new or
arbitrary law. Everywhere obedience is the first step in learning—doing what is
told because another wills it. A child sits down to take his first lesson in music,
and knows not what it tends to; but the teacher knows. By and by, through the
mechanical drudgery, rudimental conceptions of harmony begin to take shape, and
so on until he interprets the works of a Beethoven. Many fail in Divine knowledge
because they do not like to obey without knowing the reason why. They want God
to treat them as equals, notas inferiors. ‘ Except ye become as little children,” &c.
There is a system and a plan-book of all the details of obedience, but the way to them
is by these details. III. Teacnine you By PRACTICE, GOD WILL GIVE YOU LESSONS OUT
OF MUCH BESIDES BooKs. You are resolved to follow Christ’s method: well, the
practical test is, are you ready to do the first thing Christ tells you? In that case your
first teacher will probably be not a robed priest or grave professor, but some trouble-
some beggar or disturbing child. Your lesson-book may open at that commonplace
occasion which calls for a kind word or deed, a restraint of temper or sacrifice of
convenience. Through your bearing your brother’s burden, and taking his sorrow
on your heart, you have got a look into God’s heart, and a conception of God’s vast
tender meaning towards humanity underlying His teaching about love, &c. And
so, More and more, you find yourself, not only gaining new knowledge, but gaining
it by a new and unsuspected way. (M. R. Vincent, D.D.) Knowledge of the
doctrine of Christ the fruit of willing to do tt:—I. THE PRockss BY WHICH THE


a


CHAP, vil] | ST. JOHN. — 621


KNOWLEDGE OF THE DOCTRINE THAT 1s OF GoD IS REACHED. 1. This knowledge,
though its propositions are to be received by the intellect, requires before the intel-
lectual a certain moral capacity. The will must be set to do the will of God
before the intellect can act without embarrassment, because the doctrine is not
the teaching of a philosophy, but the revelation of a person. All the doctrine
is impersonated in Him, so that to receive Him is to receive the doctrine, and to
reject Him is to reject the doctrine. 2. Acts done by a person receive their truest
significance from what we know of himself. The revelation of a person by his acts
is often imperfect and misleading. Weneed to know that hidden link between the
act and the motives. This is why historians, admitting the same facts, differ so
widely in their estimates of the persons, e.g., Henry VIII., Mary, Elizabeth. This
must be so because the mystery of a second personality lies beyond the acts, and
because it is apprehended by one possessing the same mysterious gift, and is there-
fore apprehended, not in its bare proportions, but according to the conditions of
the receptive faculty. Even in the more delicate processes of modern art, with
what care must the negative surface be prepared which is to receive aright the lines
and proportion of the object it is to image forth. Now, in the living recipient of the
impress of another’s character the difficulty is immeasurably increased. There is
formed a relation of concord or antagonism, and motives, and a meaning is attri-
buted by the observer to the outward actions, The same act is welcome or intoler-
able as our minds picture the motive, and this affects the whole power of compre-
hending a character. This is the reason of the solitariness to which the greatest
spirits are exposed. Such are almost always misjudged, not because they give
occasion for it, but because in those around them the receptive faculty is not qualitied
to sustain the impress of their great being. It is only some one with a kindred gift
of genius who is able to understand them. 3. Here, then, we may see why, from
the laws of our own nature, it is true that he who wills to do the will of God comes
to know the Lord. It is like which comprehends and is drawn to the like. Now the
law of Christ’s being was the doing the will of the Father. When, therefore, the
will of any man is set not to do the will of God, there is a repugnancy between him
and Christ which forbids his knowing the Lord of Life, and conversely, Il. Tue
PROMISE OF A REVELATION AND OF POWER TO RECEIVE IT. Christ stood among men
not so much their intellectual teacher as their renewer. These words are not only
a mapping out of man’s nature, but are also a promise of grace. That first turning
of the will was itself, doubtless, in the mystery of the spiritual probation of one
gifted with free agency, the yielding to grace already given: and this next step marks
the increased gift of that same grace. Itis the carrying out of the promise ‘‘ to
him that hath shall be given.” ‘‘If any man love God,” even in this first bending
of the will to Him, ‘‘the same is known of Him,” and such knowledge is but the
first beginning of greater gifts; the pledge that forthwith the power of the receptive
faculty is increased, and of a greater revelation (chap. xiv. 21). And in that is
all that the soul needs (Rev. iii. 20). From its recipient many of the old difficulties
which beset his belief melt away, like the mist of the morning before the sun ; and
even those which do remain, and must remain until faith is exchanged for sight, no
longer hide from him the truth they once shut out; he has risen toa loftier eleva-
tion, and his eye now ranges freely over the intermediate heights, and takes in the
fair proportions of the land which is very far off. Conclusion, 1. Encouragement.
To every one who has that will, the text assures a certain grant of all he desires. If
the Authorized Version were correct it would not speak in the same tone of comfort;
for who would dare to decide that He did the will of the Father? But these words
promise the great benediction to him who wills to do the Father’s will; to him who,
in the midst of failures and discouragements, still holds on because his will is set;
to the beginner in the Christian course as well as to him who has reached furthest
in it. And this it proposes to all, If there be one tried by intellectual difficulties
concerning the revelation of Christ; if there be hearts longing for this revelation
of Him who seems hidden, let them take comfort. The time of granting the reve-
lation rests with Him, but granted it must be. It may be thou “ couldest not bear
it now”; that thou hast more to learn of thyself, a deeper self distrust ; that thy im-
perfect graces need a higher training; that He would first strengthen thy spirit by
wrestling with Him. But though the vision tarries, wait for it, for it is sure at
last. 2. Warning. The text explains why so many miss God, uot from lack of
any Mere power of intellect, not from mental perplexities, not from obscurity of
texts or Bible difficulties, but from alienation of the soul, For it is not through a
direct act of the will that a man can make himself believe or disbelieve; but unier


ss


622 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP. VIE.
inn Teac ANEMIA
the power of God’s grace a man can by degrees so educate His will that it does one
way or the other determine his belief. Any allowed habit of sin is whether we
know it at the time or not, really hardening our will against the will of Christ, and
so making a true filial trust impossible. (Bp. S. Wilberforce.) Duty and know-
ledge: —1. The doctrine here taught is that if a man be sincere and accept the
truth that God’s will is to be supreme, he shall be able to determine God’s doctrine.
The sufficiency of sincerity in religion is loudly proclaimed. It is supposed to be
the solvent of all religious difficulties. It is set up as the antagonist of doctrine,
and as performing a function the exact opposite of that assigned to it here. With
Christ it was the high road to truth; with some modern thinkers it is its substitute.
Where there is such a contradiction of view as to the function of sincerity there
must be some difference of judgment as to its meaning. 2. The sincerity which
alternates the importance of truth cannot be the same as that meant to find truth.
A languid, sentimenta! desire to be right is far from a purpose to do the will of God.
We may desire to be learned and yet not study, and desire to be wealthy without
self-denial and enterprize. Consider some of the tests of true sincerity. I. Ir 4 man
BE WILLING TO DO GOD’sS WILL HE WILL CONFORM HIS LIFE TO SUCH KNOWLEDGE AS
HE POSSESSES OF THAT wiLL. The text clearly supposes this, 1. No man is in
complete ignorance of the Divine will; for no one is in complete ignorance of right
and wrong, which have their roots in the Divine nature. Conscience is more or less
a Divine witness within all men, and is swpported by the facts of life, the con-
sequences of actions; for we learn that that which is injurious cannot be His will,
and that that which promotes the general happiness must. Our Saviour is con-
templating the case of such as are in doubt whether His teaching on some matters
be true, but who have some acquaintance with the will of God. The advice to the
same class now-a-days is the same. Do the will of God as far as you know it, and
you will know of the doctrine of which you are at present in doubt whether it be of
God. 2. This is not exhorting a man to set about the work of saving himself
instead of exhorting him to believe. The Saviour is dealing with doubters who
think they have reasons for doubting. A man cannot drive out his doubts by a
mere act of will. Besides, a man is morally bound to do God’s will whatever the
consequences. If he knows it to be the will of God that he should be truthful,
sober, &c., it is his duty to eschew the opposite, whether he ever become a believer
in Christ or not. If renunciation of evil will not help his salvation it will not
hinder it; and it is obvious that no one can earnestly desire to know any doctrine
whether it be of God unless he honours God by compliance with what he knows to
be His will. For what can be a man’s purpose in desiring to know any doctrine
except that he may derive benefit from it? An inefficacious doctrine which impels
no man to a Diviner life cannot be of any importance, and no one can sincerely desire
to know a doctrine which constrains to a better life unless he is already yielding a
loyal obedience to the laws he knows to be from God. 3. The difficulty of gaining
admission for truth into the minds of men whose lives are in disconformity with it
is proverbial. If a man’s interests or pleasures are involved in his continuance of
any course of action, you know what a mass of evidence is required to convince
him that he is wrong. If a craft, however iniquitous, be in danger, how hard to
convince those who are enriching themselves by its gains! Hence the opinions of
men are as frequently the product of their practices as their cause. Thieves do not
first excogitate evil maxims and then begin to steal. The worse the man the worse
his principles, and the better the man the better his principles, asa rule. 4. If aman
be willing to do the will of God he will be watchful against the prepossessions which
would hinder him from knowing that will. We may inherit opinions from our
fathers, as we inherit property, and there may gather around them a sort of
halo. But hereditary beliefs, which are no more than notions, are of no value: and
if any man be willing to do God’s will he must be prepared to relinquish all
traditions which are merely such. Christ contemplates the man to whom all light
is welcome from any quarter. It may disturb old convictions, alter the proportions
and relations of truths, but to know the will of God is worth it all. II. How ruts
EARNEST PURPOSE OPERATES AND LEADS TO THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE DOCTRINE
WHETHER IT BE oF Gop. 1. Who can set himself to this higher life without a
sense of the contrast between it and that which he has been leading. The birth of
this heavenly resolution is not unmixed pleasure. The man feels that, however he
may do the will of God in the future, the claims of the past are not cancelled by
this altered life. What has infinite Justice to say to it? Is it not just here that
the soul welcomes the cry ‘‘ Behold the Lamb of God,” &c., and the assurance that


CHAP, Vil.] ST. JOHN. 623
Christ bas been set forth as a propitiation? Does he not feel that the doctrine is
of God, whatever its mysteries, because it addresses itself to the awakened con-
science and does not sweep justice away that it may find room for mercy, but blends
the claims of both. 2, And we can see how this purpose leads to the knowledge of
another doctrine—the necessity for the influence of the Holy Spirit. No one
knows how much he needs supernatural help until he sets himself to lead a holy
life, for not until then is he adequately conscious of the difficulties. But is it not
just at this point that we welcome the doctrine that the Spirit helpeth our infirmities,
and that we can be strengthened with might by that Spirit in our inner man?
(EZ. Mellor, D.D.) The tendency of religious practice to promote right sentiments :—
I. THE REQUIREMENT to do the will of God. Included in it is—l. A desire to have
just and correct views of that will, 2. A disposition to acquiesce in it, and give it
a cordial reception. 3. Practical conformity to it. 4. A willingness to surrender
what is incompatible with obedience. 5. A sincere concern about real religion and
the salvation of the soul, II. THz promis—E—‘ he shall know,” &c. 1. This alone
will break the force of prejudice. 2. It will put restraint upon evil propensities,
which, if indulged, cannot fail to obstruct the acquisition of religious knowledge.
8. It will lead to the right use of the necessary means. 4. It will direct the mind
towards God, seeking His guidance and blessing. 5. It will give us a due impres-
sion of our responsibility. (Congregational Remembrancer.) Honest seeking for
the truth :—Generally we mean by evidences of Christianity proofs which mostly
appeal to the educated. What, then, are the illiterate todo? Have they no suffi-
cient reason for believing the Bible to be God’s Word, beyond the fact that it is
received as such by their Church and country? This would be to place their faith
on a very precarious foundation; and we know that cottagers and artizans have
been as well able to withstand scepticism as ‘the wise and prudent.” Our
text satisfactorily accounts for the matter by declaring that a readiness to
do God’s will shall be followed by a discovery of the origin of the doctrine.
It sets before us a method of demonstration which may be tried by the igno-
rant as well as by the learned, inasmuch as it must be worked out by the heart
rather than by the head. I. Wy sHoULD THE BEING READY To DO Gop’s WILL
ENSURE THE ASCERTAINING WHETHER A DOCTRINE BE FROM Gop? 1. This readiness
marks honesty of character and freedom from those prejudices which impede the
search for truth. (1) A man who sets himself to investigate a doctrine may see
that if established it will entail duties he has no wish to perform ; and what chance
is there of his deciding that the doctrine is true when he desires to prove it false?
It would be greatly for the interest of a worldly-minded man to prove Christianity
false; he would get rid thereby of much that menaces him in his pleasures, and
secure himself against the pleadings of conscience. His disposition is opposite to
that of our text: in place of a readiness to do God’s will, whatever that may be,
there is an eagerness to keep it out of sight whenever at variance with his own.
How then can it be expected that, prejudiced against Christianity and inclined to
its rejection, he could be a fair judge of evidences. (2) But suppose a man anxious
to discover God’s will that he may perform it: we may be sure that he is already
striving to be obedient up to the full measure of his knowledge. There could not be
this readiness if the conduct were not regulated by such portions of the Divine will
as have already been ascertained. It follows from this that he will not be the slave
of depraved inclinations, and therefore will search after truth with the clear-
headedness of one whose understanding is not darkened by mists which rise from a
heart in love with vice. And, further, it is evident that, as he is prepared to obey if
he can determine what is truth, he will not be swayed by partialities; he has no
private interest to serve, and we may therefore calculate on his conducting his
inquiry with that fairness and integrity of purpose which almost ensure that his
conclusions will be sound. Is it likely that such a man should fall into fatal error?
Impossible, for—2. You must add to considerations drawn from the structure of the
human mind that the special assistance of God may be expected. The attributes
and Word of God clearly pledge Him to communicate a knowledge of His will
wherever faithfully sought. If it be a principle in the Divine dealings to give over
to a reprobate mind those who like not to retain God in their knowledge, and allow
the understanding to be darkened to believe a lie, when they take pleasure in
unrighteousness, it must be equally a principle with God to guide the meek in
judgment, and to teach the meek His way, so that they who heartily seek shall
assuredly discover the will of God. Therefore we believe that the Holy Spirit will
assist every man who, with readiness to obey, proceeds to examine the Bible. 3


See
624 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cnar. vi.


i


What does all this assume? ‘That the Bible is its own witness, and can prove of
itself that it came from God, There is an evidence of God speaking in the Bible,
which is only to be found and appreciated where certain moral qualities are
possessed, and is fully as convincing as the combined testimony of miracles and
prophecy. (1) The Bible sets out with a broad statement of human corruption,
and descending into particulars, it speaks of the deceitful heart; of the tendency
of the affections to fasten on anything rather than God, &e. As the man of honest
mind peruses this stern and revolting picture of himself, and compares what he
reads with what he feels, the comparison assures him of the accuracy of the
delineation. (2) The self-evidencing power of the Bible is seen further in what it
says of our salvation. The man who has felt himself to be a sinner will be conscious
of such a suitableness in the whole scheme of redemption as will be an irresistible
argument in favour of its truth. If the adaptation of the material world to our
natural circumstances be allowed as good evidence that God made the world, the
just as exact adaptation of the gospel to our spiritual circumstances should be
received as good evidence that God planned the gospel. (3) There is yet ancther
evidence, that which results from putting Scripture to the proof, and finding it made
gooa. If I act on the directions, and find myself a partaker of its promises, I am
witness that both are of God. If the Bible tells me that if I pray in Christ’s name I
shall obtain what I need—if thus praying I receive—if it tell me that through
believing in Christ I shall be progressively sanctified, and I find holiness following
on faith, &c., there is a growing evidence of the Divine origin of Scripture. II.
THE PRACTICAL INFERENCE—a readiness to perform God’s will is the great security
and guide to its discovery. If the doctrines of Scripture remain hidden it is not
through deficiency of revelation or defect of intellectual power. The only reason
for the rejection of those doctrines is one derived from the heart, not from the head.
You would quickly comprehend the truth if you were prepared to make it the rule of
your practice. Do I wish to be convinced? would be a hard question for many
readers and hearers. Should I like to be taken at my word? would be a hard
question in the hour of prayer. Men talk very plausibly of not being answerable
for their faith, as though it were not optional to believe or disbelieve; but it is
optional whether to mortify or indulge a passion, whether to persist in or abstain
from practices which are sure to warp the understanding and influence its decisions.
Let what will be said of Bible mysteries and the weakness of human faculties,
regulate your life by what you know, and you will be sure to know more, So that in
our text lies a principle on which the last Judgment may proceed, one on which
every unbeliever may be tried and condemned. (H. Melvill, B.D.) Christ’s
method of Christian evidence :—The error of the Jews is the error of many to-day.-
The humblest class falls into it. They say, ‘* We cannot be expected to have much
religion; we were not educated.” The intellectually proud make the same mistake.
Both classes forget that, as Jesus reminds us, the first condition of certainty in
Divine things is formed by the conscience, not by the intellect; and lies not in book
learning but in the disposition of the soul, its willingness to do God’s will. I. Tue
PRINCIPLE HERE ANNOUNCED. Lay emphasis on each word. 1. ‘*Do His will.”
Doing is the way of knowing in things Divine. Lord Bacon discovered the instru-
ment of the physical sciences—careful experiment and observation. Before his
time men speculated and dreamed. Since his time men have learned to know.
Jesus promises satisfaction in another region, and reveals a method adapted to the
end, We are to know the teachings of God not by sensible experiment, ‘‘ Eye hath
not seen’; nor by mental toil, but by being true to God, conscience, life. There
is nothing unreasonable in this. Pascal says, ‘In the things of men, by knowing
we come to love; in the things of God, by loving we come to know.” In things
moral you cannot suspend action till you have learned. Some of you say that you
have not settled, e.g., if God hears prayer, if there be a day sacred to God, if there
be a judgment, if Christ be the supreme Lord; and yet you are acting in your
prayerless, sinful life as if these questions were settled on the negative side, and
thus are daily annihilating your only excuse, viz., that you had not made up your
mind whether the doctrine was of God. 2. “If any man be willing.” It would
have filled men with despair if Christ had made knowledge contingent on perfect
obedience. Then the way of salvation would have been barred for ever to every
child of Adam. What He says is, “If any man have this disposition, if it be his
supreme desire to be right with God, then he shall know now. Only observe He
requires not a fit of obedience in a life of disobedience, not a mood of willingness
when things go well with us, but a constant and cherished disposition. 3. ‘‘ His


a
=
:
ra
§
ri
:


enaP. vit.] ST. JOHN. 628


will.” What is that? Some say Christianity. But Jesus could not have meant,
‘* first do what I tell you, and then you will know whether to believe what I say.”
They were in doubt about whether He was the Christ; but had they been willing to
do the will of God as they knew it in their own Scriptures they would have had no
doubt at all. ‘If ye had believed Moses ye would have believed Me.” Now if any
' man presents himself in our day in this attitude, saying that he wants to be con-
vinced of the truth of Christ and His gospel, the principle touches him exactly.
Are you willing to do God’s will as far as you know it? Are you living up to what
is binding on conscience, then, fuller light will come and you will know of this
doctrine. II. Irs apprication. 1. To those who are anxious to escape the whirl-
pool of unbelief. Take some cases. (1) A man takes religion speculatively, as a
thing chiefly of proofs, and says, ‘‘I will accept revelation when I am satisfied as
to its claims.” Now when a man’s disposition is to throw the burden of proof upon
God, and treats his Maker as bound to render him a reason in everything, and
remove all possibility of mistake, he is hopelessly distant from salvation. If a man
refused to enter upon any enterprise till he was ensured against all failure he would
be reckoned a fool. The doubter is never the discoverer. It is the truth seeker
that finds the truth. (2) There are others who are not so much sceptical as
captious, and are apt to shift the real question. They think they have decided for
* evolution,” not knowing much about it. They have gathered from newspapers,
&c., something of the controversies about some of the books of Scripture, and not
having much furniture in their minds on the subject, they come more easily to a
conclusion, and are inclined to decide against standard beliefs. Now, when such
things are presented as serious difficulties we must instantly go deeper. The real
question is not one concerning science or criticism, but how a man can be just with
God. He has not lived so long in the world without sinning against the will of
God as already known. Is his real anxiety to be at peace with God? If God has
revealed His will at all it is to bring about this end; and if the end for which he
desires to know God’s will be not chiefly to this purpose, it matters very little what
a man holds about the Bible or what he rejects. ‘ Seek ye, then, first the kingdom
of God,” &c. (3) Here is another, who seems to be in earnest. He is a truth-
seeker who examines as one whose life depends on the issue. So you found him in
youth and find him still, giving his whole life so that he may be able to outsoar
every doubt; but till then—What? Wasted youth, duty neglected—a vain and
sinful dream. ‘‘ Awake thou that sleepest,” &c. If the truth is to be of any use to
me whose life is but a breath, and I am to live by it, I must find it speedily. 2.
This method of Christian evidence is of manifold application to believers. There
are religious difficulties that all must meet in some form, which arise from the
mysterious ways of Providence, the slow progress of the gospel, the fate of the
heathen, &c. The principle of our text points to the right solution. ‘“ Lord, what
shall this man do? What is that to thee? Follow thou Me.” ‘Lord, are there
few that be saved?”’ Be saved, and then thou shalt know as much of salvation as
can be understood on earth. 3. The action of this principle on those who have
submitted to God is obvious. The longer I love my Friend, the closer I walk with
Him, the better I get to know Him; because I learn to sympathize more thoroughly
with Him asI grow more like Him. C . Laidlaw, D.D.) The certitudes of religion :—
Know.eper is not a mere possibility or privilege, but a fundamental, universal
necessity. Matter is governed by natural laws, and the brute creature by instinct ,
but man can become what he ought to be by obedience to knowledge, and by the
use of reason. The pebble, the lily, arid the oak are what they are, with no con-
scious activity on their part. The beaver builds his dwelling place to-day as he did
a thousand years ago; but man acts under higher laws. If he ignore knowledge,
his powers become his shame. If they do not build him a throne, they will dig
him a grave. He will sink even lower than the brute. Therefore it is incredible
to suppose that certainty of knowledge is unattainable as to the life that is and that
which is to come. Man lives not by bread alone. He must meet the burning
problems of a higher life, and Christianity opens the door to certainty. He is not
left in doubt, but ‘‘ he shall xnow of the doctrine.” Four lines of argument, in the
validation of religious truth, may be, though no one test alone may be capable of
universal application. I. Hisrorrcan, 1. The main facts of Christianity lie in the
brief compass of the three years of Christ’s public ministry—and these have been
subjected to the severest tests of historic criticism. From out the fiery crucible the
four gospels come unharmed. 2. The testimony which the conquests of the Cross
afford, as those conquests spread throughout the Roman empire. All over the


ty
SS


626 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fomar. ?tt.


known world the truths of Christ’s death and resurrection were preached, revolu-
tionizing the race by their peaceful triumphs, 3. The present energy of Christ in the
world. The fame of Homer grows dim. Men have even questioned His existence ;
put Christ was never before so truly alive as to-day. We may rest upon the
certainty o! the gospel that centres in Him. II. Monat, that which dwells on the
beauty, purity and consistency of the teachings of our Lord. An immoral religion
cannot endure. To the matchless glory and beauty of God, and of Christ His Son,
the human reason and affections respond immediately. So, too, to the august
dignity of the soul and its grand destiny, man’s moral nature answers at once.
These sublime, unique ideas are above the range of his unaided thought. They
must be of Divine origin. This argument shadesinto another, III. HyporHeEticat,
the argument from probabilities. This has a high place in science. We want a
working theory. We collect facts, guess, and then verify. Nature is full of
mysteries. We stand before closed doors holding a bunch of keys. We try one
after another till we find one that will fit. Then the door swings open to us. How
is sinning man to be saved? Theories of education, philosophy and politics have
been tried in vain. The monk, ascetic, teacher, and statesman failed. Christianity
solved the problem, and it alone. By it the work is done in the world, in society,
and in man’s heart. The fact we know, although the methods of God’s Spirit are
unknown. We know not how heaven’s mystic fires were lighted, or how they now
are fed; nor can we explain the coming or going of the Sun of Righteousness, who
scatters the darkness of sin, and gladdens the earth as the garden of the Lord,
Peace, hope and courage come where He is heard and heeded. IV. ExpERImENTAL.
Doing the will of God illumines the pathway of the obedient disciple. Jesus brings
peace to the soul that trusts and serves Him. We may not appreciate other argu-
ments fully, but this is both personal and practical. To the doubter we simply say,
‘‘Come and see”; “taste and see that the Lord is gracious.” (A.J. Behrends, D.D.)
Scepticism: its cause and cure:—Christianity is emphatically a system of truth.
But what gives it pre-eminence is that it isa system of saving truth. This being so,
it is important that we should know how best to become aquainted with it. Man’s
mode differs from God’s, man says ‘read, study,” &c.; God says, ‘‘Obey.” The
truths of Christianity can only be understood by those who are willing to obey God,
and who are in harmony with Him. Apply this to—I. Tue pocTRINaAL TRUTHS oF
Curistianiry. No serious person can observe the prevalence of scepticism without
asking the cause. 1. The doubters themselves say—(1) The surroundings of
Christianity are so mysterious that there seems no way of getting at its truths.
(2) Some of the doctrines are so inexplicable that there seems no possibility of
obtaining a rational comprehension of them. (3) The evidences are defective.
2. These are not the real reasons. The real cause is not intellectual but moral.
Christ settles that for us, ‘‘ Men love darkness rather than light,” ‘If any man will
do His will.” ‘The condition is not perfect obedience; but full purpose to obey
God’s will as far as discovered. The sceptic’s will is against Christianity. He does
not wish it to be true, and therefore objects to its being proved true. <A variety of
motives lie behind. (1) Fear of old companions, (2) Self interest. A change of
opinion would involve loss. (3) Vanity. A change of opinions would bring the
imputation of fickleness, (4) Party spirit. (5) A bad heart and life. A true
creed is a constant protest against evil. 3. In order to form a right conception of
the doctrine of Christ, there are hindrances which must be removed. Self-will
must be conquered, and prejudices laid aside. In scientific investigation, if your
supreme object be the confirmation of your previous opinions, you will find it an
agreeable task to lay aside every evidence that would overthrow them. But if your
supreme object be truth, then you will not suffer yourself to be hampered by your
old theory, but you will welcome light from whatever source. This is what Christ
requires. Test His system by obeying its laws. In Corinth doubts had arisen
about the Resurrection, and St. Paul constructs a magnificent argument to meet
them. But in the midst he breaks off with “‘Be not deceived,” &c., a statement
around which the whole argument revolves, Corrupted by evil surroundings, their
life had become wrong, and hence their creed became wrong. ‘Give yourselves to
righteousness and you shall know of the doctrine.” A young man brought up
religiously leaves his rural home for the great city. He yields to temptation—does
it a second time and a third, until it becomes a habit. It is thus inconvenient to
retain his belief in the Bible because it protests against his wickedness. There
may be cases in which creed influences life, but mostly life shapes creed. II. Tux
MORAL TRUTHS. These are acknowledged to be the noblest the world has known.


CHay. vit.] ST. JOHN. 627


We hear no objection against Christianity based on their imperfection, but on their
purity. There are commands, says the sceptic, that no man can comply with. The
answer to this is not argument but facts. Men have embodied Christ’s precepts.
Godless surgeons have witnessed the peace and joy of their agonizing patient with
amazement, because they did not themselves know of the doctrine. Men have
suffered wrong with patience and returned good for evil, and have confounded their
unchristian neighbours for the same reason. How are they to learn the secret?
Not by reading essays or hearing orations on submission and forgiveness, but by
practising these things in humble dependence on God’s Spirit. ‘‘ Exercise thyself
unto godliness.” Aristotle said, ‘‘ Things we learn to know we learn by the doing
of them.” But men want to learn things without this—patience without being
patient, meekness without forgiving, heaven without walking in the way, God
without prayer. How can He? Christ’s method is to learn by doing. Virtue must
go before knowledge. ‘‘Grow in grace,” &c. (2 Pet. i. 5, cf 8). ILL Tue expznt-
MENTAL TRUTHS. 1. There is in Christianity, not only something to be believed, but
something to be felt. Some of its truths are beyond the range of the intellect.
There is a “peace which passeth understanding,” ‘“ joy unspeakable,” ‘‘ love which
passeth knowledge.’ These belong to the heart, and to feel them is to know them.
There is a great difference between having an opinion and knowing. You may
master the ‘‘ evidences,” and believe that Christianity is Divine—but that is only an
opinion. Feel God, realize His power, do His will until Christ is formed within you,
then you know that Christianity is true. Fellow Christian! you are mourning the
withdrawal of the Divine favour, your spirit is beclouded, you have faltered in
some duty. Whatisthe remedy? Return and run in the way of God’s command-
ments and the sun will shine upon you again. 2. In a healthy body the organs are
fitted for the discharge of their separate functions—the eye for seeing, the palate
for tasting. But these are only witnesses, they report to the mind which can please
itself about believing the testimony. Iam jaundiced to-day and my eye tells me
that the grass is yellow ; or fevered, and my palate tells me that honey is bitter. So
when a carnal man looks at religion he pronounces it sad. But the fault is not in
religion but in himself. The fever of sin is in his soul, he has anevileye. In order
to know the truth of God he must have a heart in sympathy with holiness, then he
will know of the doctrine. 3. Modern rationalists will not accept this testimony of
experience, They judge of Christianity by the eye of reason alone But there is
enough to demand both eyes. Take a man who has studied scientifically our coal
formations. He can tell you its component parts, and discriminate between
different kinds. But suppose that man crossing the Alps in a snow storm, of
what avail is his theory when perishing of cold? Look, on the other hand, at the
weary son of toil wending his way to his cottage home exposed to the bitter blast.
He seats himself before the fire. He cannot tell what that is made of which warms
him, but he knows something better. He feels the heat. So it is with religion.
Let those who please take the theory; give me to feel the glow. - Conclusion.
1, Let us admire the benevolence of God in making this the condition of knowing. It
places the proof of Christianity within the reach of all. 2. But the truth is also
very admonitory. ‘The wicked shall not understand.” (R. Roberts.) Why
Christ’s doctrine was rejected by the Jews:—I. Tue poctrine or Curisr. This
consisted of—1. Matters of belief relating to His person and offices. These seemed
such as not only brought.a new religion into the world, but to require a new reason
to embrace it. 2. Matters of practice, such as were enforced by the Sermon on
the Mount—Self-denial, purity of heart, &c. These were what grated hardest on
men. For their religion had degenerated into mere outward action, and when
that failed, there was expiation ready. Amongst all their sacrifices they never
sacrificed one Just. Bulls and goats bled apace, but neither the violence of
the one, nor the wantonness of the other ever died a victim on their altars.
No wonder, then, that a doctrine which arraigned the irregularities of the most
inward affections raised such a disturbance. II. MEN’s UNBELIEF OF CHRIST’S
DOCTRINE WAS FROM NO DEFECT IN CHRIST'S ARGUMENTS. 1. These arguments
were in themselves convincing. (1) All the Divine predictions received their
completion in Christ. In Him they met with such lustre as if the penmen of
them were not prophets but evangelists. Could He have all the signs and not be
the thing signified? Could all the shadows that were cast from Him belong to
any other body? (2) He performed miracles, and surely there cannot be a greater
reason for belief than for a man to say, “‘ This is the Word of God, and to prove it
I will do what nothing can do but the Almighty power of that God who can neither


628 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cmar. vt


a


deceive nor be deceived.” And His enemies could not deny His miracles. 2. Their
insufficiency, if there could be any, was not the cause of unbelief. (1) Because
those who rejected Christ’s doctrine and arguments believed other things on less
evidence. They believed the miracles of Moses, but only by tradition, which,
though sufficient, was not equal to that evidence of sense which supported Christ’s.
(2) They believed things which were neither evident nor certain but only probable;
for they frequently ventured their fortunes upon a probable belief of the honesty of
those they traded with. And interest in worldly matters, especially with a Jew,
never proceeds but upon a supposal, at least, of a firm bottom. (3) They believed
in things not so much as probable, but actually false, such as the absurd stories of
their rabbins (chap. v. 43). III. THe TRUE CAUSE OF THIS UNBELIEF—the captivity
of the will and affections to lusts directly opposite to the design and spirit of
Christianity. To see this, notice—1. That the understanding in its assent to any
religion is very differently wrought upon in persons brought up in it, and in persons
converted to it. In the first it finds the mind unprepossessed, and so easily gains
upon the assent and incorporates into it. Butin persons adult and already pre-
possessed with other notions the understanding cannot change these without labour
and examination. 2. In this great work the understanding is chiefly at the dis-
posal of the will. For though it is not in the power of the will directly to cause or
hinder the assent of the understanding, yet it is antecedently in the power of the
will to apply the understanding to or take it from consideration of objects to which
without consideration it cannot assent. From these two we have the true reason
of the Pharisees unbelief; for they could not relinquish Judaism and embrace
Christianity without eonsidering both religions. And this their understanding
could not apply to if it were diverted by their will, and their will would be sure to
divert it, being wholly possessed and governed by their covetousness and ambition
which abhorred Christianity. See John v. 44; Luke xvi. 14—in both of which there
is an incurable blindness caused by a resolution not to see; and to all intents and
purposes, he who will not open his eyes is as blind as he who cannot. IV. A Pious
AND WELL-DISPOSED MIND, ATTENDED WITH A READINESS TO OBEY THE KNOWN WILL
or GoD, I8 THE SUREST AND BEST MEANS TO ENLIGHTEN THE UNDERSTANDING TO A
BELIEF or CuRIsTianiry. That this is so will appear—l. Upon the account of
God’s goodness and the method of His dealing with men; which is to reward every
degree of sincere obedience to His will with a further discovery of it. The Psalmist
(Psa. cxix. 10) got the start of the ancients in the point of obedience, and thereby out-
stripped them at length in point of knowledge. And who in the old time were the
men of extraordinary revelation but the men of extraordinary piety ? The Enochs,
Abrahams, Daniels, &c., who walked with God; and surely he who walks with
another is likelier to understand another than he who follows him at a distance.
2. Upon the account of natural efficiency, for as much as a will so disposed will
engage the mind in a severe search into the truths of religion, and accompany the
search with two dispositions principally productive of the discoveries of truth, viz.,
(1) Diligence, Steady, constant study naturally leads the soul into the knowledge
of that which at first seemed locked up from it, and keeps the understanding in
that long converse with a subject that brings acquaintance. But the willis the
great spring of this diligence, for no man can heartily search after that which he is
not very desirous to find. Diligence is to the understanding as the whetstone to
the razor, but the will is the hand that must apply one to the other. This is true
in science, and it is true also in religion. (2) Impartiality. It is scarcely possible
for him to hit the mark whose eye is glancing upon something beside it. Partiality
is the understanding’s judgment according to the inclination of the will and the
affections, and not according to the exact truth of things. Affection is a briber of
the judgment; and it is hard for a man to admit a reason against the thing he
loves, or to confess the force of an argument against an interest. But impartiality
strips the mind of prejudice and passion, keeps it right, and even from the bias of
interest and desire, and so presents it equally disposed to the reception of all truth.
Where diligence opens the door of the understanding, and impartiality keeps it

truth is sure to find both an entrance and a welcome. Conclusion: 1. The true
cause of scepticism is not from anything wanting in religion. Men question its
truth because they hate its practice. Few practical errors are embraced on convic-
tion, but inclination. It is impossible for one engaged in an evil way to have a
clear understanding of it, and a quiet mind in it. If men would change their
lives there would be no difficulty in changing their judgments. For, notwithstand-
ing all their empty talk of reason, persuade but the covetous man not to deify his


:
'
f


a


— se


CHAP. Vit.) ST. JOHN. 629


money, &c., and these objections would vanish. For a good man is three quarters
his way to his being a Christian whatsoever he is called. 2. We learn the most
effectual means for growth in the knowledge of religious truth. It is a knowledge
that men are not so much to study as to live themselves into; a knowledge that
passes into the head through the heart. And where a long course of piety and
communion with God has purged the heart and rectified the will, and made all
things ready for the reception of God’s Spirit, knowledge will bréak in with such
@ victorious light that nothing shall be able to resist it. 3. If some should object
that if these things are so the most pious are the most knowing which seems
contrary to experience. So they are as to things necessary to salvation; as the
meanest soldier that has fought knows more of war than he who has read or written
volumes on it but has never seen a battle. Practical sciences are only learnt in the
way of action. It is not the opinion, but the ‘‘ path of the just,” that shines more
and more. The obedient are the “ children of light,” that shall outgrow all their
doubts and ignorances until persuasion pass into knowledge, and knowledge into
assurance, and all at length into the beatific vision. (R. South, D.D.) The
mutual relation of obedience and knowledge :—Astronomy is a science. It teaches
us the measurement and distances, and the nature and movements of the heavenly
bodies. Navigation is astronomy applied to practice, and by the help of what
astronomy tells the sailor, he is able to steer his vessel from one port to another,
and ascertain exactly from his chart the position of his vessel. Is it not clear that
every time out at sea the sailor unfolds his map and is enabled to mark on the
chart the very spot where his ship is in the world’s great space—every time he does
that he has a fresh proof that astronomy is true. Every time he is able to bring
his ship safely into port he has a fresh proof that science is true. (Bishop Magee.)
Importance of the will in religion :—The stress is upon “ willeth,” which in our
version reads as if it were only the auxiliary verb. It is not deed which is the out-
come of faith; but will, which precedes it, that is here spoken of. This human
will to do the Divine will is the condition of knowing it. The words are unlimited
and far-reaching in their meaning. Those who heard them would naturally under-
stand them, as it was intended they should, of the Divine will expressed in the law
and the prophets (ver. 19); but they include the will of God revealed, more or less
clearly, to all men and in all times. Our thoughts dwell naturally on represen-
tative lives such as those of Saul the Pharisee, Cornelius the centurion, Justin the
philosopher ; but the truth holds good for every honest heart in every walk of life.
(“ Commentary for Schools.”) The highest truths are only revealed under certain con-
ditions :—Dr, Taylor, of Norwich, once said to me, “ Sir, I have collated every word
in the Hebrew Scriptures seventeen times: and it is very strange if the doctrine of
the atonement you hold should not have been found by me.” I am not surprised
at this. I once went to light my candle with the extinguisher on it. Now, preju-
dice from education, learning, &c., often proves an extinguisher. It is not enough
that you bring the candle: you must remove the extinguisher. Obedience helps
knowledge :—If any man will know the will of Christ, let him do that will. When
a young man is put to learn a trade, he does so by working at it; and we learn
the truth which our Lord teaches by obeying His commands. To reach the shores
of heavenly wisdom every man must work his passage. Holiness is*the royal
road to Scriptural knowledge. We know as much as we do. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
Obedience the key of knowledge :—There is a kind of Divine oracle within the self-
resigning soul, which speaks clearly and plainly, not darkly and ambiguously, as
that oracle in Greece. There is 4 spiritual priesthood, which hath the Urim and
Thummim, not upon the breast, as Aaron had (Exod. xxvii. 30), but within the
breast: light and integrity go together. ‘The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear Him; and He will show them His covenant” (Psa. xxv. 14) ; or, as it
is better in the margin, ‘‘and His covenant to make them know it:” that is, it
is part of God’s gracious covenant not to conceal from them, but to make them
know His will. That which concerns them to know and practice, God will not
hide from the sincerely obedient. God makes such “to know wisdom in the
hidden part” (Psa. li. 6); or, ‘‘in the hidden man of the heart” (1 Pet. iti. 4).


(Worthington.)


Ver. 18. He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory.—The Jews marvelled
that Christ had been educated in noschool (ver. 15). This He contradicts (ver. 16),
for the conclusion would have been that He was self-taught, and was therefore
speaking His own theories, promulgating them on His own authority, and as a


_—
~


630 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. vit.
lal nr LES NR
further consequence seeking His own glory—faults into which self-taught superficial
men often fall, whereas the profoundly learned, recognizing their indebtedness to
others, are usually humble and self-abnegating. Whether this doctrine was His
own or not could be tested in two ways. (1) By willingness to do God’s will. (2)
By an observation of His own character and aim. His words and works would
show in whose name He spake and by whose power He wrought, and thus prove
that His doctrine was of God. The text affords a basis for some remarks on—Con-
ceit and humility :—I. Concztr. 1. Its nature “ speaketh of Himself,” which is
true in two senses. The conceited man—(1) Speaks out of himself. He is known
everywhere by his ostevtatious parade of originality and infallibility. His own
opinions evolved from his inner consciousness, in proud independence of other
thinkers, are the standard of truth and untruth. His predecessors were all very
well in their day ; but their teaching isnow obsolete. His contemporaries are right
according to their light, but their light is only one remove from darkness. To raise
the least objection against his ipse dixit is only an evidence of “‘ knowing nothing
about it.” How many such original geniuses afflict the Church, the state, halls of
science and schools of philosophy! (2) Speaks about himself. The conceited man
is impatient of any talk that does not lead up to himself. He is known in
the pulpit and literature by his extravagant use of the first person singular or
plural. He is known in society by his monopoly of conversation, and his persistent
obtrusion of his own opinions, achievements, property, &c. Who has not suffered
from the infliction of his senseless and incessant babble! 2. Its aim—‘ his own
glory.” This is the end which the conceited man never loses sight of, and every-
thing he does has as its motive the gratification of his own personal vanity. He
dresses and attitudinizes for the purpose of attracting attention ; he talks to secure
praise for his sagacity or adventures ; he schemes and works that he may be talked
about, or to obtain gain. And verily he has his reward. II. Hummiry. 1. Its
nature. (1) Acceptance of a mission from God “ that sent Him.” To go because
sent is an acknowledgment of servitude and obligation; and the consciousness of
being sent by God can only convey the conviction of unworthiness. This is shown
by the unvarying testimony of the greatest of God’s servants—Moses, David, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Paul.. And then the missions on which God sends us are often of the
humblest character—to teach in a ragged school, to visit an obscure invalid, &c.
But humility accepts them unmurmuringly, and fulfils them diligently. (2) Giving
all the glory to God. Sometimes the faithful discharge of some humble duty
secures brilliant results. Here is the great test of humility. Men praise the
missionary who, when he emerges from his obscurity, is found to have civilized a
tribe of barbarians. Will he accept it or give itto God? 2. Its characteristics.
(1) Truth. Truth is everywhere humble, and the humble man is usually safe from
temptations to untruthfulness because he has no appearances to keep up, and no
self-interests to secure. He has given himself to God and lives for God. The
conceited man, on the contrary, has to resort to very questionable practices and pro-
fessions to maintain a reputation for consistency, and is haunted with the fear of
being found out. The humble man is afraid of nothing and noone. (2) Righteous-
ness. God gave us our gifts whatever they are, and the opportunity for using them,
and by Hs influence has produced what results crown our efforts. Humility recog-
nizes His righteous due and gives it. Conclusion: 1. ‘* Pride goeth before destruc-
tion” often in this life and at the hands of men; always in the next and at the
hands of God. 2, “‘Hethat humbleth himself shall be exalted,” perhaps by men,
certainly by God. (J. W. Burn.)


Vers. 19-30. Did not Moses give you the law ?—Murder in desire :—The desire
to kill Christ —I. Was INcoNSISTENT WITH THEIR RELIGIOUS PRoFESsIoN. They
professedly believed in Moses, and esteemed him highly. But there was nothing
in Moses to sanction their antagonism to Christ, 1. The spirit of their opposition
was inconsistent with the moral law of Moses (ver. 19). You seek to kill Me, when
your moral master in God’s name has said, ‘‘ Thou shalt not kill.” None of you
keepeth the law in this respect. 2. The proximate cause of the opposition was
inconsistent with the moral law of Moses—the healing of the impotent man at
Bethesda on the Sabbath day. This was the “‘ one work” which now fired their
indignation. But what did Moses do? What might have been considered more
objectionable than this. He circumcised children on the Sabbath day—a work
that inflicted physical pain and manual labour. And not only did Moses do it,
but Abraham, &., whose authority is of greater antiquity. Could it be right for


i


onaP. vit.) ST. JOHN. 631


them to do, on the Sabbath day, the work of mere ceremony, and wrong for Me to
do a work of mercy? The crime and curse of religionists in all ages and lands
have been the exalting the c2remonial over the moral—the local, the temporary,
and contingent above the universal, eternal, and absolute. II. Impiiep a Great
INACCURACY OF JUDGMENT (ver. 24). Judging from appearance, they concluded—
1. That a mere ordinary peasant had no Divine mission. Perhaps most of them
knew His humble birthplace and parentage, and concluded from His lowly appear-
ance that He was a poor man and nothing more. They were too blinded to
discover beneath such apparently abject forms a Divine spirit, character, and
mission. It has ever been so. Men who judge from appearances have always
failed to discern anything great or Divine in those who occupy the humbler walks
of life. And yet the men of highest genius, divinest inspirations and aims have
been counted the offscouring of all things. 2. That a ritualistic religion was
a religion of righteousness. Had there been in connection with the ceremonies of
the Temple the healing of the sick on the Sabbath day, they would have esteemed
the work as sacred. No ceremony could they allow as of secondary importance. But
the ritualistic religion is sometimes immoral. When men observe even the divinest
ceremonies as a matter of custom and form, they degrade their spiritual natures
and insult omniscience. ‘ God is a Spirit,” &c. The religion of righteousness is
the religion of love, not of law. 3. That by killing a teacher they would kill his
influence. They sought to kill Christ because they knew if His doctrines spread
their authority would crumble. Men who have judged from appearances have ever
sought to kill unpopular teachers. But facts as well as philosophy show that such
judgment is not righteous. The blood of the martyrs has always been the seed of
the Church; their doctrines get free force and sweep from their death. It was so
with Christ. III. InvonveD THEM IN PERPLEXITY (vers. 25-27). There seems much
bewilderment here. They thought they knew Him, yet they felt they did not
know Him. They wondered, too, how a man whom their rulers desired to kill
should speak so boldly without being arrested. Minds under a wrong leading
passion are sure to get into confusion. No intellect is clear, and its path straight
and sunny, that is not under the control of benevolent dispositions. All the con-
flicting theories of the world concerning God, spirit, and morals, have their origin
in a wrong state of heart. The intellectual confusion of hell grows out of malevo-
lence. What they could not see Christ explains (ver. 28). As they had no love in
them, they could not see God; and as they could not see God, they could not
understand Him that He came from God and was sent by Him. Observe what
Christ asserts—1. That He knows the Absolute. He is the only Being in the
universe that knows Him. 2, That He was a messenger from the Absolute. ‘ He
that sent me.” This is the great spiritual ministry of the world. What are popes,
cardinals, archbishops, to Him? ‘ This is My beloved Son,” says God; ‘hear ye
Him.” Whoever else you disregard, ‘‘hear ye Him.” IV. Their desire to kill
Him was DrvineLy RESTRAINED (ver. 30). Why did not their malignant desire
work itself out at once? It was wide and strong enough. The answer is, “‘ Because
His hour was not yet come.” There was an unseen hand that held them back,
He who holds the wind in His fist turns the hearts of men as the rivers of water.
With God for “ everything there is a season.’’ Men may wish to hurry events, and
to go before the appointed time, but there is a power that holds them back until
the hour comes. The power that governs every wavelet in the ocean controls every
passing passion of mankind. Conclusion: Learn—l. That being hated by society
is not always a proof of hate-worthiness. Here is one, “‘who did no sin,” &c.,
hated with a mortal hate. To be hated by a corrupt society is to have the highest
testimony to your goodness. The world loves its own, and hates all moral aliens,
It worships the Herods, and stones the Stephens. “ Marvel not if the world hate
you, it hated Me before it hated you.” 2. That being hated by society is no
reason for neglecting our mission. Though Christ knew that in the leading men
there flamed the fiercest indignation towards Him, yet He enters the Temple on a
great public occasion and fearlessly delivers His message. That love for truth,
God, and humanity which inspired and ruled Him raised Him above the fear of
men, made Him fearless and invincible. (D. Thomas, D.D.) The assailants
assailed (vers. 19-24) :—I. A roURFOLD FACT PREMISED. 1. Moses gave the Jews
the law, moral and ceremonial, with its statutes against murder, about the Sabbath
and circumcision. 2. Moses incorporated circumcision in his statute-book te
prevent the law in this item from being broken as it had been prior to his time.
3. The Jews were accustomed to administer this rite upon the Sabbath. 4. They


=


632 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHAP. VII,
Se a eee
did so that the law might not be broken, as it would have been if delayed, to save
the Sabbath, II, A sImpLE ARGUMENT conDUCTED. 1. The Jews were not wrong
in their procedure with regard to circumcision. He taught that the Sabbath was
made for man (Mark ii. 27, 28). 2. Christ, a fortiori, could not have been wrong
in His work on the Bethesda cripple. If He suspended the law, so did they. If
they had a good reason, He had a better, 3. The leaders of the people were wrong
in seeking to kill Christ. This was obvious, since He had proved that He had
broken neither the Sabbath nor the law. III. A NECESSARY LESSON TAUGHT. 1.
Not to judge according to appearances. Neither men nor deeds can be safely
estimated by their external aspects. As it is the man’s interior that constitutes
the man (Prov. xxiii. 7), so the motive enshrined forms the act. Appearances are
frequently deceptive ; ¢f. Hannah (1 Sam. i. 15) and Paul (Acts xxvi. 25). 2. To
judge according to truth, In every instance there is a judgment of man or deed
which corresponds with truth and justice. This is always the characteristic of
the Divine (Psa. lxvii. 4; xcvi. 13; 1 Sam. xvi. 7; John v. 30; 1 Pet. ii. 23), and
ever should be of human (Lev. xix. 15; Deut. i. 16; Prov. xxxi. 9; Phil. iv. 8)
judgments. Learn: 1. Pretenders to the greatest reverence for Divine law are
sometimes its most flagrant transgressors. 2. A man may meditate murder in his
heart and yet think himself a saint. 3. It is easier to keep the law in the letter
than in the spirit, to circumcise the body than circumcise the heart. 4. The
Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath. 5. Nothing more attests
depravity than to hate Christ and Christianity for their practical beneficence. 6.
The only physician who can work a cure upon the whole man is Christ. 7. The
propriety of setting in judgment on our own judgments, (T. Whitelaw. D.D.)
The law does not save men :—This parlour is the heart of a man who was never
sanctified by the sweet grace of the gospel. The dust is original sin and inward
corruption that have defiled the whole man. He that began to sweep at first is the
law. Now, whereas thou sawest that as soon as the first began to sweep, the dust
did fly about, that the room by him could not be cleansed, but that thou wast
almost choked therewith ; this is to show thee that the law, instead of cleansing
the heart by its working from sin, doth revive, put strength into, and increase in
the soul, even as it doth discover and forbid it, for it doth not give power to subdue
it. (Pilgrim’s Progress.) How to treat slander :—“ Thou hast a*devil.” This
he passeth by as a frontless slander, not worth repeating. Sincerity throws off
slanders, as Paul did the viper; yet, in a holy scorn, it laughs at them, as the wild
ass doth at the horse and his rider. (J. Trapp.) If a man on the Sabbath day
receive circumcision.—I healed a whole man (chap. ix. 34; xiii. 10), whereas
circumcision inflicts a wound. And that is performed on the Sabbath. Which
work is the more sabbatical of the two? Circumcision produces pain, but I have
made a man free from pain. This illustrates the question of the relation of the
Seventh-day Sabbath to the Lord’s day. The law of the former gave way to the
rite which took place on the eighth day. That rite was the typical forerunner of
baptism, which is the sacrament of spiritual resurrection from the grave of sin into
newness of life. Well, therefore, may the Jewish Seventh-day Sabbath give way-to
the festival of Christ’s resurrection, which was on the eighth day, t.e., on the
octave of the first. (Bp. Wordsworth.) Every whit whole :—I. THE GREAT WANT
or man. To be made “whole.” Man is unsound in every part. 1. Corporeally.
Some physical organizations are healthier than others; but even the strongest is
unsound, The seeds of disease and death are in all. The strongest man is, as
compared to the weakest, like an oak to a fragile reed ; but ever at the roots of the
oak there is a disease that is working its way up. 2. Intellectually. The man who
has the strongest mind is subject to some mental infirmity. He lacks elasticity
freedom, clearness of vision, courage, and independency. He cannot see things
completely, or hold them with a manly grasp. The strongest intellects are the
most conscious of their unsoundness. 3. Socially. Men were made to love their
fellow-men and to be loved by them, and thus be harmoniously united in reci-
procal affection and services of mutual goodwill and usefulness. But socially
man is unsound in every point. The social heart is diseased with greed, envy
jealousy, ambition, and malice. So that the social world is rife with discords,
contentions, and wars, 4, Morally. Man has lost at once the true idea of trua
sympathy with right. His conscience is dim, infirm, torpid, buried in the flesh
carnally sold unto sin. Thus man in every part is unsound. He is lost, not in the
sense of being missed, for God knows where he is; norin the sense of being extinct
for he lives a certain kind of life; not in the sense of being inactive, for he is in


;
.


CHAP. VII.] ST. JOHN, 633


constant labour; but in the sense of incapacity to fulfil the object of his being.
He is lost, in the sense that the gallant ship is lost when no longer seaworthy ;
that the grand organ is lost that has no longer the power to pour out music, II.
THE GRAND WoRK oF Curist. To make “‘ man every whit whole.” He makes man
whole—1. Corporeally. It is true that He allows the human body to go down to
dust; but that dust He has pledged to reorganize “like unto His glorious body.”
‘It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption,” &c., &c. How sound will
the resurrection body be! 2. Intellectually. Here He begins the healing of the
intellect. He clears away from it the moral atmosphere of depravity, and opens its
eyes so that it may see things as they are. In the future world it will be ‘“ every
whit whole,” free from prejudice, errors, and all depravity. 3. Socially, by filling
them with that spirit of true philanthropy which prompts them not to seek their own
things, but to labour for the common good of men as men, irrespective of creeds,
countries, races, or religions. This He is doing now, this He will continue to do
on this earth until men shall love each other as brethren and nations beat their
swords into ploughshares and their spears into pruning-hooks, and hear of war
no more, He will make the world, even here, ‘every whit’ socially whole, and in
the Heavenly Jerusalem above the social soundness and order will be perfect. 4.
Morally, by bringing him under the control of supreme love for the Supremely
Good. Thus: He will take away the heart of “stone” and give it a heart of
“flesh.”” At last He will cause all men to stand before Him without “ spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing.” Conclusion: What a Physician is Christ! He cures
all manner of diseases. No malady can baffle His skill, The world has never
wanted men who have tried to make people sound. It has its corporeal, intellec-
tual, social, and moral doctors; but those who succeed most in their respective
departments only prove by their miserable failures that they are miserable
empirics, Here is a Physician that makes a “man every whit whole.” (D.
Thomas, D.D.) Every day is a fit day for doing good :—As burning candles give
light until they be consumed, so godly Christians must be occupied in doing good
as long as they live. (Cowdray.) Appelles the painter much lamented if he
should escape but one day without drawing some picture outline; so ought a
Christian to be sorry if any day should pass without doing some good work or
exercise. (Ibid.) | Doing good a blessed work :—Dr. Guthrie once said: ‘I know a
man (Thomas Wright) who, at the close of each day’s work, turned his steps to the
prison, and with his Bible, or on his knees on the floor, spent the evening hours in
its gloomy cells, seeking to instruct the ignorant and redeem the criminal and
raise the fallen. The judgment day shall show how many he restored, penitent
and pardoned, to the bosom of God; but it is certain that alone and single-
handed he rescued and reformed four hundred criminals, restoring them, honest
and well-doing men, to the bosom of society.” Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judgment.—Judging according to the appear-
ance led the Jews into error—I. Resprectina tHe Lorp Hmseutr. 1. They never
got deeper than the surface of His Person. The Christ they were expecting was
one pieced up of mere outsides of the reality. What resemblance had that sorrow-
stricken prophet of Nazareth to the glare and splendour of the Christ of their
imagination ? He came poor to look at and poor as He seemed. They had no eyes
for the Divinity within. 2. There is the same shutting of the eyes now to the
Divinity in His person; the same refusal to receive Him as Lord. (1) By how
many is nature regarded as greater than Christ! (2) Many accept the opinion of
the world for their idea of Christ. (3) Some habitually exclude from their thoughts
the presence of Jesus in providence. (4) Others, staggered at their sinfulness, are
blinded to the fact that in Jesus there is cleansing for all their vileness. 8. Some
scriptural views which will counteract these errors and lead. to a righteous judg-
ment. (1) It ought not to seem strange to a human being that a Divine Saviour
should be human also. Man cannot draw near to an abstract God. We need one
who has dwelt on earth, who has known our sorrows, and is as near to us as our
nature is; and such a one is Jesus. (2) But a merely human Saviour would not
meet our need. Only God can save us. This Jesus claims to be, and the Gospels
say He was, and prove it on every page. II. Respecting THE WORKS OF THE
Saviour. 1. It was one of these that called forth the unrighteous judgment He
here rebukes. About six months before He had healed the impotent man (chap. v.
1-9). According to appearance He had violated the Sabbath. But in the strictest
sense that was such a deed as the Sabbath was appointed to suggest and pro-
mote. And the misjudging eye followed Him wherever He went, and adjudged


ny
634 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. VII.
Piel i ne cena Dy SE ey TP en,
the miracles, which were manifestations from heaven, to be a sign from hell. 2.
Similar errors are found among us. (1) His work on the cross has been judged
according to appearance, and set down as martyrdom and as the last manifestation
of that obedience which is a model to us. Neither of these views enter into the
inner meaning of the transaction. As for the first, it is not in harmony with the
law of Jesus: ‘‘ When they persecute you in one city, flee ye into another.” But
our Lord sought death. As for the next, the Bible leaves no room for doubt that
there was more in Christ’s death than that ‘‘ Christ died for the ungodly.” ‘“ We
have redemption through His blood,” &c. The primal and essential aim of Christ’s
death was atonement for sin. (2) His work in carrying on His providence. — There
may be an appearance of evil to God’s people, while we know thet ‘no evil shall
happen to them.” The Lord’s dealings with them are transacted beyond the
range of the outward eye. Jesus cannot be unkind to them. IL. Resprcrine
THEIR OWN SPIRITUAL STATE, 1. They did not suspect their own wickedness, but
seemed to themselves to be animated by zeal for God’s law. There was much in
appearances to foment this delusion. Had we arrived on the scene when these
words were spoken, we should have concluded that some grand act of national
worship was going forward; and had we heard this reference to Sabbath violation,
we might have thought the people no respecters of persons in their zeal for God’s
law. But underneath all that show of worship was hollow unbelief, and all that
zeal for ‘*Remember the Sabbath’ was a cloak for their transgression of “‘ Thou
shalt not kill.” 2. Our circumstances are not dissimilar to theirs. Our Lord’s
day is a festival as really as that feast; but is pur heart in Sabbath worship, and
while we bow the head, are we bowing the heart? Excellent though Sabbath-
keeping and Church-going are, they are apt to deceive us. And so with other
religious acts. We may be very scrupulous outwardly, and yet inwardly be far
from God. Conclusion: 1. The world is full of people who seem as though they
were all journeying in one direction; yet part is travelling to heaven and part to
hell. Whatever the outside of our lives may seem to say, we belong to one or the
other. Let us ascertain by the test of a righteous judgment to which we belong.
2. Weare all hastening to a day when judgment will not be according to appearance.
3. But why appeal to the future? God is passing His righteous judgments on our
state and actions now. Let us be judges with God in this matter, and be satisfied
with nothing that will not satisfy Him. (A. Macleod, D.D.) Hiding behind
others :—Here is administered a rebuke to the injustice and peril of making the
apparent inconsistencies of Christians the apology for delay in beginning a religious
life. I. THE INJUSTICE OF JUDGING THE MERE APPEARANCE OF OTHERS. 1, One
cannot always know the actual facts as to another’s inconsistent behaviour. 2.
Nor the balances of better behaviour behind it. 3. Nor the unseen spiritual struggle -
against it. 4. Nor the penitence and prayer which may have followedit. II. Tur
PERIL OF HIDING BEHIND THE MERE APPEARANCE OF OTHERS. 1. It is itself incon-
sistent ; would men follow Christians who are correct? 2. It is evasive: men
only mean to stop appeal. 3. It is illogical: it pays the highest compli-
ment to real religion, 4, It is unreasonable : men know they are independently
responsible to God. 5. It is unsafe: it shows men they know the right way of
living when they criticize what is inconsistent with it. (Charles S. Robinson, D.D.)
Judging by outward appearances :—I. Is Not A TRUE WAY OF JuDGING. Some of
the most delicious fruits are encased in rough and unsightly coverings ; and one whe
had not tasted them before, would be likely to pass them by, and go on to othera
which seemed to be better. One day a man dressed in plain, coarse clothes walked
into a little English village, carrying a bundle tied up in a handkerchief. No one
noticed him, or cared for him. After a while the stage-coach drove up; the little
way-side mail-bag was thrown off, and all the idlers of the village assembled about
the post-office. The contents of the bag were soon assorted, and there was nothing
deserving of notice, except a formidable-looking letter, with a large seal, directed to
Lord Somebody. The postmaster examined it, and read its superscription aloud,
Everybody was on tip-toe of expectation, and for giving the nobleman a grand re
ception. Meanwhile, the stranger in the homespun dress sat silently watching the
proceedings; and, when the public curiosity had worn itself out over the letter, he
claimed it ashisown, Astonishment, indignation, and a variety of other emotions, took
possession of the crowd. But when the postmaster, who had seen the nobleman some-
where before, and now recognized him in his plain clothes, handed him the letter,
every one began to try and do away with the unfavourable impression which had been
made on the stranger by the cool contempt with which he had been treated so long ag


CHAP, VII.] ST. JOHN. 635


he had been thought to be only an ordinary traveller. Lord Somebody, taking his
bundle in his hand, left the village, giving the advice contained in the text as his
parting legacy to its mortified inhabitants. II. Is nor a Just way oF JUDGING.
Many hundred years ago, when the Tabernacle of the Lord was at Shiloh, a good
woman, named Hannah, went into pray, and to ask for aspecial blessing which she
greatly longed for. It was in her heart that she spake to the Lord, and no loud word
was uttered. But He who knoweth all things could hear her, Eli the priest saw
her come in, and, judging from outward appearance, he judged unjustly, rashly con-
cluding her to be tipsy. How Eli’s heart must have been wrung by the reply
(1 Sam. i. 15). People who wear the longest faces, and who talk the most
religiously, have not always the most of the love of God in their hearts, As
Shakespeare has worded it—“*A man may smile, and smile, and be a villain.”
Ill. Is not A SAFE WAY oF JupGiIne. ‘The ice on the river appears to be as safe as
the earth, but how many who venture upon it pay for their temerity! ‘Oh! how
I wish I could ride in a carriage, like that gentleman!” exclaimed a little fellow,
one day, as a handsome coach and four dashed rapidly by him, while he trudged
along the dusty road. ‘Iam sure that man must be as happy asa king. O that
I had been born so lucky!” At no great distance from the spot where the carriage
passed him, it suddenly stopped, and the complaining and envious boy arrived just
in time to see the happy owner of the carriage descend from it. Alas! little of
happiness was to be seen. The rich man was a cripple, and before he could move
a step, a pair of crutches had to be brought to him, and, as he cautiously raised
himself from the seat, his face was distorted with pain. The little boy was
thus taught the lesson of the text. (J. .N. Norton, D.D.) Appearances :—A
traveller showed Lavater two portraits—the one a highwayman who had been broken
upon the wheel, the other was a portrait of Kant the philosopher. He was desired to
distinguish between them. Lavater took up the portrait of the highwayman, and,
after attentively considering it for some time, ‘‘ Here,” said he, “ we have the true
philosopher. Here is penetration in the eye and reflection in the forehead ; here is
cause, and there is effect ; here is combination, there is distinction; synthetic lips
and analytic nose.” Then, turning to the portrait of the philosopher, he exclaimed,
‘The calm-thinking villain is so well expressed and so strongly marked in this
countenance that it needs no comment.” -This anecdote Kant used to tell with great
glee. Judge not by-appearances :—At one of the annual Waterloo banquets the
Duke of Wellington after dinner handed round for inspection a very valuable pre-
sentation snuff-box set with diamonds. After a time it disappeared, and could
nowhere be found. The Duke was much annoyed. The guests (there being no
servants in the room at the time) were more so, and they all agreed to turn out their
pockets. To this one old officer vehemently objected, and, on their pressing the
point, left the room, notwithstanding that the Duke begged that nothing more might
be said about the matter. Of course suspicion fell on the old officer; nobody
seemed to know much about him or where he lived. The next year the Duke at
the annual banquet put his hand in the pocket of his coat, which he had not worn
since the last dinner, and there was the missing snvff-box! The Duke was dread-
fully distressed, found out the old officer, who was living in a wretched garret, and
apologized. ‘ But why,” said His Grace, ‘‘did you not consent to what the other
officers proposed, and thus have saved yourself from the terrible suspicion?”
“Because, sir, my pockets were full of broken meat, which I had contrived to put
there to save my wife and family, who were at that time literally dying of starva-
tion.” The Duke, it is said, sobbed like a child ; and it need not be added that the
old officer and his family suffered no more from want from that day. Appearances
are often deceptive. We don’t know all. Therefore “ Judge not, that ye be not
judged.” We must not judge by appearances :—Whatever truth there may be in
phrenology, or in Lavater’s kindred science of physiognomy, we shall do well
scrupulously to avoid forming an opinion against a man from his personal appear-
ance. If we so judge we shall often commit the greatest injustice, which may, if we
should ever live to be disfigured by sickness or marred by age, be returned into our
cwn bosom to our bitter sorrow. Plato compared Socrates to the gallipots of the
Athenian apothecaries, on the outside of which were painted grotesque figures of
apes and owls, but they contained within precious balsams, All the beauty of a
Cleopatra cannot save her name from being infamous; personal attractions have
adorned some of the grossest monsters that ever cursed humanity. Judge then no
man or woman after their outward fashion, but with purified eye behold the hidden
beauty of the heart and life. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The folly of judging by appear


636 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHar, vil.


ances :—Two knights met in a wood one day, and saw between them a shield
fastened to a branch. Neither knew to whom it belonged, or why it was there.
“Whose is this white shield?” said one. ‘White? Why itis black!” replied
the other. “Do you take me for blind, or a fool, that you tell me what my own
eyes can see is false?”? And so words were bandied about until the dispute became
so violent that swords were drawn, when a third knight came upon the scene.
Looking at the angry men, he said, “You should be brothers in arms. Why do I
see these passionate gestures, and hear these fierce words?” Each knight made
haste to explain the imposition which the other had tried to practice upon him.
The stranger smiled, and riding to one side of the shield, and then to the other, he
said, very quietly, ‘‘Do not charge with your weapons just yet. Change places!”
They did so, and, behold, the knight who had seen the white side of the shield saw
now the black side also; and the knight who had been ready to do battle for the
black stood face to face with the white side. Ashamed of their hot haste, they
apologized one to the other, and rode out of the greenwood as good friends as ever.
The lesson taught in this story is veryimportant. Half the misunderstandings and
quarrels which disturb the peace and destroy the happiness of families and neigh-
bourhoods might be prevented, if those who engage in these disputes could see
both sides of the question at once. How wise, then, are those people who are
careful never to form hasty opinions, and who wait until they have seen or
heard both sides, before venturing to determine which is right! (J. N. Norton,
D.D.) Deceptive appearances :—Rabbi Joshua, the son of Chananiah, was a
very learned and wise man, but he was ugly. His complexion was so dark that
he was nicknamed “The Blacksmith,” and little children ran away from him,
One day, when the Rabbi went to court, the Emperor Trajan’s daughter laughed
at his ugliness, and said, ‘* Rabbi, I wonder how it is that such great wisdom
should be contained in an ugly head.” Rabbi Joshua kept his temper, and, instead
of replying, asked, ‘‘Princess, in what vessels does your august father keep his
wine??? ‘In earthern jars, to be sure, replied she. ‘‘Indeed,” exclaimed the
Rabbi, ‘‘ why all the common people keep their wine in earthern jars ; the Emperor’s
wine should be kept in handsome vessels.” The princess, who thought that Joshua
was really in earnest, went off to the chief butler, and ordered him to pour all the
Emperor’s wine into gold and silver vessels, earthern jars being unworthy of such
precious drink. The butler followed these orders; but when the wine came to the
royal table it had turned sour. The next time the princess met the Rabbi she ex-
pressed her astonishment at his having given her such a strange piece of advice,
and mentioned the result. ‘Then you have learned a simple lesson, princess,”
was the Rabbi’s reply. ‘* Wine is best kept in common vessels: so is wisdom.”
The next time the princess met the Rabbi she did not laugh at his ugly face. (W.
Baxendale. ) Deceptive appearances :—I have heard of one who felt convinced
that there must be something in the Roman Catholic religion from the extremely
starved and pinched appearance of a certain ecclesiastic. ‘“ Look,” said he, “* how
the man is worn to a skeleton by his daily fastings and nightly vigils! How he
rust mortify his flesh!” Now the probabilities are that the emaciated priest was
labouring under some internal disease, which he would have been heartily glad to be
rid of, and it was not conquest of appetite, but failure in digestion which had so
reluced him; or possibly a troubled conscience, which nade him fret himself
down to the light weights. Certainly I never met with a text which mentions
prominence of bone as an evidence of grace. If so “the living skeleton”
should have been exhibited, not merely as a living curiosity, but as the standard
of virtue. Some of the biggest rogues have been as mortified in appearance as
if they had lived on locusts and wild honey. It is a very vulgar error to sup-
pose that a melancholy countenance is the index of a gracious heart. (C. H.
Spurgeon.) Sometimes hard to judge :—An ingenious device is attributed in
the Talmud to King Solomon. The Queen of Sheba, attracted by the reputation
of his wisdom, one day presented herself before him, holding in her hands
two wreaths, the one of exquisite natural flowers, the other of artificial, The
artificial wreath was arranged with so much taste and skill, the delicate form of the
flowers so perfectly imitated, and the minutest shades of colour so wonderfully
blended, that the wise king, at the distance at which they were held, was unable to
determine which was really the work of the Divine Artist. For a moment he seemed
baffled; the Jewish court looked on in melancholy astonishment; then his eyes
turned towards a window, near which a swarm of bees were hovering. He com-
manded it to be opened; the bees rushed into the court, and immediately


CHAP. vit.] | BT. JOHN.” 637


ee


alighted on one of the wreaths; whilst not a single one fixed on the other.
Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this He whom they seek to kill?
I. THE OBSTINATE BLINDNESS OF THE UNBELIEVING Jews. They defended their
denial of our Lord’s Messiahship by two assertions, both of which were wrong
(ver. 27). 1. They were wrong in saying that they knew whence He came. They
meant that He came from Nazareth; but He was born at Bethlehem, and belonged
to the tribe of Judah, and was of the lineage of David. The Jews, with their care-
fully-kept family histories, could have found this out. Their ignorance was,
therefore, without excuse, 2. They were wrong in saying that ‘‘noman was to know
whence Christ came.” This was in flat contradiction to Micah v. 2 (see Matt. ii.
5; John vii. 42), which they found it convenient not to remember (2 Pet. iii. 5).
How common is this habit to-day! ‘There are none so blind as those who will
not see.” II. THE ovER-RULING HAND oF Gop ovER ALL His mNEmiEs (ver 30).
1. Our Lord’s sufferings were undergone voluntarily. He did not go to the cross
because He could not help it. Neither Jew nor Gentile could have hurt Him,
except power had been given them from above. The passion could not begin until
the very hour which God had appointed. 2. Christ’s servants should treasure up
this doctrine. Nothing can happen to them but by Divine permission (Psa. xxx1.
15). ILI. THe miszRABLE END TO WHICH UNBELIEVERS SHALL ONE DAY COME (ver.
34). It is uncertain whether our Lord had in view individual cases of unbelief, or
the national remorse at the siege of Jerusalem. There is such a thing as finding
out truth too late (Prov. i. 28; Matt. xxv. 11). Therefore decide for Christ now.
(Bishop Ryle.) The origin of Jesus :—I. THE cOGITATIONS OF THE JERUSALEMITES.
1. Wonder. (1) The fearlessness of Christ (ver. 26) startled them, considering that
He was a marked Man (ver. 25). Being themselves destitute of moral courage
(ver. 13), they had no idea of such fortitude as innocence and truth could inspire,
and that he whom God shields is invulnerable (Isa. liv. 17) until his work is done
(Deut. xxxiii. 25) anf his hour is come (John ix. 4; Heb. ix. 27). (2) The timidity
of the rulers (ver. 26) puzzled them. They had as little. comprehension of the
essential cowardice of wickedness (Prov. xxviii. 1; Job xviii. 7-21) as of the majesty
of goodness. 2. Suspicion. Ruminating on the inaction of the authorities, they
began to whisper that something had occurred to change their tactics; that per-
haps they had ascertained that Jesus was the Messiah (ver. 26)—a conjecture that
was immediately dismissed, little guessing that truth often presents itself in such
seemingly involuntary suggestions. 3, Decision. Who Jesus was they could settle
in a moment. (1) When Messiah came, no one would be able to tell whence He
came, or His parentage (ver 27), though His birthplace would be known (ver. 42).
(2) Everybody knew Jesus’ birthplace and parentage. (3) Therefore He could not
be Messiah, but only “‘a man,” like His fellows. Good logic, it is obvious, is not
the same thing as sound Divinity. II. Tae pecnarations or Jesus, 1. A con-
cession. Their knowledge of His origin was—(1) Ostensibly complete. (2) Essen-
tially erroneous, since they had no acquaintance with His higher nature. 2. A
proclamation. (1) Concerning Himself. (a) His Divine Mission. “I am not
come of Myself.” ‘He sent Me.” (b) His Divine knowledge. ‘I know Him,”
the Sender. (c) His Divine essence. “I am from Him.” (2) Concerning them.
(a) Their ignorance of God. ‘“ Whom ye know not.” (b) As a consequence, their
non-recognition of Him. Lessons: 1. The true humanity of Jesus. 2. To know
Christ after the flesh only is to be ignorant of Him in reality, 3, No one knows
Christ who recognizes not His Divine origin and mission, 4. A knowledge of the
Father necessary to a true acquaintance with the Son (Matt. xi. 27). 5. It is not
possible for wicked men to do all they wish except God wills. (7. Whitelaw, D.D.)
Knowledge of Christ must be more than critical:—I heard two persons on the Wengem
Alp talking by the hour of the names of ferns; not a word about their characteristics,
uses, or habits, but a medley of crack-jaw titles, nothing more. They evidently
felt that they were ventilating their botany, and kept each other in countenance by
alternate volleys of nonsense. They were about as sensible as those doctrinalists
who for ever talk over the technicalities of religion, but know nothing by experience
ef its spirit and power. Are we not all too apt to amuse ourselves after the same
fashion. He who knows mere Linngan names, but has never seen a flower, is as
reliable in botany as he is in theology who can descant upon supralapsaranism,
but has never known the love of Christ in his heart. True religion is more than
doctrine ; something must be known and felt. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Howbeit we
know this Man whence He is; but when Christ cometh, no man knowevh whence
He is.—Note the ineffable self-complacency of spiritual ignorance and pride


i.


ig


638 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHaP. Vi.


Although His miracles made Him famous, yet they neither know nor desired ta
know His real nature. 1. Knowing God’s power, they would not have resisted His
Son. 2. Knowing God’s justice, they would not have rejected His warnings. 3.
Knowing God’s mercy, they would not have grieved His Spirit. 4. Knowing God’s
wisdom, they would not have trusted their folly. So far from knowing, they have
never carefully inquired into His life and birth. Indeed, they did not know that
He was born at Bethlehem. Had they known Him, they would not have felt angry
at Sabbath healing. (W.H.VanDoren,D.D.) Jewish theories about Christ’s origin
and coming :—When the wise men came, the scribes at Jerusalem averred that the
Messiah should be born “in Bethlehem of Juda,” and adduced in proof the words
of Micah. But here we find that Micah’s words were by no means universally held
as conclusive. Some held—and many famous Jewish expositors have since main-
tained—that the Messiah would come suddenly, like a bright and unexpected
meteor, as here. The popular opinion, however, agreed with the answer of the
scribes above (ver 42). Now it would be erroneous to suppose that the opinion
expressed in the text was groundless or fanciful. It rested on all those passages
in the Old Testament which refer to our Lord’s Divine origin. To us the doctrine
of the Divine and human natures in Christ is a cardinal article of faith; and,
trained in this belief, we reconcile by its aid many statements of the prophets which
externally are at variance with one another. But this twofold aspect must have
been a serious difficulty to those who had only the teaching of the prophets, without
the New Testament exposition of that teaching; nor can I see anything absurd in
the expectation that, like a second Melchisedek, He would appear suddenly, with no
human lineage, and no place of earthly birth and education. More correctly, we
may regaitl this idea as only a confused anticipation of the truth that the Messiah
was not oly David’s Son, but also ‘‘the Son of God.” This very title is more than
- once given to our Lord (John i. 49; Matt. xvi. 16; xxvi. 63). In the latter text,
Caiaphas probably put the question contemptuously, as representing what he
deemed to be the most extreme form of Messianic doctrine; but there were other
and better.men who held it devoutly as a truth. But could these noble souls make
it harmonize with the equally plain prophetic teaching that the Messiah was to be
a Man, a descendant of David, and born at Bethlehem? Many attempts were no
doubt made to harmonize this apparent discrepancy. One such we read in Justin
Martyv’s dialogue with the Jew Trypho. Trypho there affirms ‘“ that the Messiah
at His birth would remain unknown and unacquainted with His powers until Elias
appeared, who would anoint Him and proclaim Him as the Christ.” In the
Talmud the most conflicting opinions are found respecting the Messiah’s advent.
In one place it is said that He will first manifest Himself at Rome; in another,
that the place will be Babylon; in a third, that He will not appear at all unless the
Jews reform their manners. More frequently, however, it asserts that Jerusalem
would be the place of His birth, Who could read such passages as Psa. lxxxvii. 5;
Isa. ii. 3; Psa. 1. 2, and not draw from them the conclusion that the Messiah
would be born on Zion’s Holy Hill (2 Esdras xiii. 6, 35, &c.). (Dean Payne Smith.)
Then cried Jesus in the Temple.— Christ grieved by misconceptions about Himself :—
Nathanael had a technical objection (chap. i. 46); but it was swept away at once by
the moral impression produced by Jesus. These Jews had also a technical objec-
tion (‘‘ when Christ came, no one was to know whence He was”), and this served
to neutralize, for them, all the effect of the Saviour’s teaching. They were bond-
slaves to the letter; and this not the letter of Scripture, but of their own interpre-
tation of Scripture. Let us consider—I. THE arrack upon Curist, Just before
His teaching had been assailed; now His person and mission. ‘‘He cannot be
the Christ, because we know all about Him.”? Recall circumstance. The speakers
are Jerusalem Jews, who are well acquainted with the animus of the rulers
towards Him, ‘ How is it, then,” they ask, ‘‘that He is allowed to speak so fear-
lessly ? Are the rulers coming round to believe in Him? But when we think of
it, that cannot be. They are aware, as we are, that one over whose antecedents no
obscurity rests can be no Messiah.” All neutralized by a notion! This pains and
distresses Jesus, and He ‘‘cries out” loudly, with emotion, seeking to rectify the
mistake. JI, TH perunce. Jesus admits the truth of what they say, so far as it
goes; they have an outward knowledge of Him and His origin. But this is only
what appears. There is something beyond of which they are ignorant, and that is
the Divine mission. But this mission is a fact. ‘*He that sent Me is real ’—i.e.
(probably), ‘‘ really exists.” Why, then, do they not recognize the fact? Because
they, little as they think it, are ignorant of God. With this ignorance of God, Hae


Citap. vid ST. JOHN. 639


contrasts His own inward consciousness of God and His relation to Him. “I
know Him.” III. Resutt oF THE DEFENCE. The extreme irritation of the Jews
at being told that they did not know God, and their indignation at Jesus’ assump-
tion of a peculiar relationship to the Father. They consider Him to be at least
touching upon the confines of blasphemy, and “seek to take Him”; but they could
not, because His hour was not yet come. IV. For PRACTICAL INFERENCES, let us—
1. Recur to the thought that Christ is pained by misconception of His person and
work, because He knows how ruinous such misconsceptions are to mankind. 2.
That He speaks severely, because it is necessary to do so. In no other way could
He hope to obtain for the truth admission into the hearts of His hearers. (G. Cal-
throp, M.A.) Then they sought to take Him; but no man laid hands on Him,
because His hour was not yet come.—The hour of destiny :—I. Cunrist’s HOUR was
DrIvINELY PREDESTINATED. This is proved by—1. The numerous predictions of
Scripture. 2. The long suffering of God in the preservation of the human race.
8. The influences which this hour has exerted on the condition of the world. II.
CHRIST’S HOUR WAS ABOVE ALL CONTINGENCY AND HUMAN INTERFERENCES. This fact
shows—l. The universality of Divine providence. 2. The futility of human
opposition to the ways of God. 3. The steadfastness of the Divine plan. III. His
HOUR DID NOT. AFFECT THE MORAL FREEDOM oF His conpuct.. 1. He chose the hour.
2. This choice proves His infinite love for us. 3. The manner in which He sub-
mitted to His destiny is a sublime model for us. (P. L, Davies, 4.M.)


Vers. 31-36. And many of the people believed on Him. The favourably disposed,
and the malignantly opposed to Christ :—I. THOSE WHO WERE FAVOURABLY DISPOSED
(ver. 31). The commonalty, who were.more or less unsophisticated and free from
religious prejudices. These ‘‘ heard Christgladly.” This favourable disposition
—1. Was founded on facts. There does not seem to be any question, even among
His opponents, as to the reality of His miracles. 2. Intensified the opposition of
His enemies (ver. 32). They felt that if the people believed in Him their influence,
honour, &c., would vanish ; and so they were inflamed. Through all Christendom
there has always been a large class favourably disposed towards Christ; and this
upon a basis of facts. This class still intensifies the opposition of enemies when
the atheist, the worldling, &c., mark this disposition they, too, become the more
anxious to banish Him from the world. But popular sentiment is our bulwark
against infidelity. II. Tose wHO WERE MALIGNANTLY C2POSED. Pharisees and
chief priests. 1. They were to be deprived of the fellowship of Christ (ver. 33).
But six months after this Christ returned to the bosom of the Father. It was only
‘a little while ” He was in their midst, it would have been well had they availed
themselves of it. The period of redemptive mercy with all men is but ‘‘a little
while.” 2. They would vainly seek the help of Christ (ver. 34). The hour was ap-
proaching for the fall of Jerusalem, and when the Romans were at the gates they
would look for deliverance and not find it. There is a time to seek ** the Lord, while
He may be found”; and there is a time when He will be sought and not found.
‘‘ Many shall say to Me in that day, Lord, Lord!” &. 8. They misunderstood
the meaning of Christ (vers. 35-36). (1) They started from His words an ungene-
rous conjecture, ‘‘ Will He go” &c., «e., amongst the Jews scattered among the
Gentiles, or to the Gentiles. In either case He will go to a contemptible class, and
leave our glorious country. (2) They failed to attach to His words the true idea,
«“ What manner of saying is this.” They were carnal and judged after the flesh.
Thus is it ever with this class. They are deprived of His fellowship. By their
corrupt natures they are excluded from the sublime region of purity and benevolence
in which He lives. They must all seek His help when too late. They all mis-
understand Him. ‘They have ears but hear not.” Conclusion: To which class
do you belong? 1. Probably to the former. But to be favourably disposed is not
enough; there must be decision, consecration, vital affinity. 2. If to the latter,
ponder your condition ere it be too late. (D. Thomas, D.D.) The coming of the
bailiffs :—I. A HosTILE EmBassy. 1. Its occasion—the favourable impression made
on the multitude. 2. Its promoters. The chief priests and the Pharisees, who
resolved to take a forward step by dispatching their constables to the Temple (ver.
32). 3. Its object. To mingle with the crowd, show as much favour as possible,
so as to throw them and Christ off their guard, and then embrace the first oppor-
tunity of detaching them from Him, or Him from them, and took Him prisoner to
the council chamber. II. AN UNEXPECTED GREETING. Having observed the officers
and their intention, our Lord replied to this forward movement by announcing His


640 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. vit,


departure. 1. It,would be soon, “‘a little while.” The increasing hostility of the
rulers, and the fickle character of the populace, made it apparent that the final
collision could not be long delayed. 2. It would be voluntary. The designs of the
rulers would in the providence of God lead to His departure but would not be its
cause (chap. x. 18). “I go.” 3. It would be a homegoing (ver. 33; chap. vi. 62), like
an ambassador to report about His mission, or like a Son to the presence of His
Father (chap. xiv. 2). 4. It would terminate their day of grace. His appearance
had been a day of salvation (Luke xix. 42), which at His departure would be over
(ver. 34; Luke xvii. 22). 5. It would place an impassable gulf between Him and
them (ver. 34), Without foreclosing heaven’s gate upon the crowd, many of whom
were probably afterwards converted (Acts ii. 41), or upon individual members of the
Sanhedrim (chap. xix. 38, 39; Acts vi. 7), the words announced that when Christ
departed their day of grace as a nation would be over for impenitent individuals.
III. A MELANCHOLY RESULT. 1. Perplexity. They failed to understand the Saviour’s
meaning, or pretended to do so (ver. 36); as the apostles did an analogous expres-
sion (chap. xvi. 17). Yet Christ’s language was plain. But they did not wish
Christ’s words to have the sense they conveyed, and so pronounced them nonsen-
sical. 2. Ridicule. They endeavoured to sport with Him and His words. To-
morrow they will ask Him if He purposes to commit suicide (chap. viii. 12), to-day
they inquire if He contemplates playing at Messiah among the Greeks (ver. 35). 3.
Rejection. The true reason why they could not understand Him was, that already
in their hearts they had rejected Him and them, Lessons: 1. The day of grace to
all is of limited duration. 2. Those who improve that day so as to find Christ will
ultimately be with Him. 3. To such as find Christ, death will be going home. 4.
Those who reject Christ here will not be able to accept Him hereafter. 5. Christ’s
sayings are enigmas to those who do not wish to understand Him. 6. Scoffing at
good men marks the last stage of depravity. (T. Whitelaw, D.D.) The boldness
of Christ :—The officers were after our Lord, and He knew it. He could spy them
out in the crowd, but He was not therefore in the least afraid or disconcerted. He
reminds me of that minister who, when he was about to preach, was stopped by a
soldier, who held a pistol at his head, and threatened that if he spake he would kill
him, “Soldier,” said he, ‘do your duty; Ishall do mine’’; and he went on with
his preaching. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Then said Jesus unto them, yet a little while
am I with you.—One saying with two meanings (text and chap. xiii. 33):—1. No
greater contrast can be conceived than between these two groups. The oneconsists of
the officers sent to seize Christ, but were restrained by an awe, inexplicable even ta
themselves. The other consists of the little company of His faithful, though slow
scholars. Hatred animated the one, love the other. 2. Christ speaks to them both
nearly the same words, but with what a different tone, meaning, and application. To
the officers they exhibit the triumphant confidence that their Maker is omnipotent.
When He wills He will go, not be dragged, to a safe asylum, where foes cannot
follow Him. The officers do not understand. They think, that bad Jew as they
have always believed Him to be, He may consummate His apostasy by going over
to the Gentiles altogether; but at any rate they feel that He is going to escape their
hands. The disciples understand little more, and though the upper side of the
saying seems to be full of separation, there is an underside that suggests reunion,
3. The words are nearly the same, but they are not quite identical. I. Tae two
SEEKINGS. 1. The enemies are told they will never find Him. (1) No man with
hostile intent seeking for Christ can ever find Him. All the antagonism that has
stormed against Him and His cause has been impotent and vain. The pursuers
are like dogs chasing a bird which all the while carols in the sky, As in the days
of His flesh His foes could not touch His person till He chose, so ever since no
weapon that is formed against His cause or His friends shall prosper. All Chris-
tian service is a prolongation of Christ’s, and both are immortal and safe. (4) But
it is not only hostile seeking that is vain. When the dark days came over Israel,
and amidst the agonies of that last seige, do you not think that many of these
people said, ‘‘ Ah! if we had only Jesus back for a day or two.” They sought Him
not in anger any more, nor in penitence, or they would have found Him, but simply
in distress, and wishing that they could have back again what they had cared so
little for when they had it, And are there none to whom the words apply, ‘‘He
that will not when he may, when he will it shall be nay.’ (3) There is another
kind of vain seeking—intellectual, without the preparation of the heart. Many a
man goes in quest for religious certainty and looks at, if not for Jesus, and is not
capable of discerning Him when He sees Him because His eye is not single, or bis


a “4


CHAP. VII.] ST. JOHN. 641


heart is full of worldliness and indifference, or he begins with a forczone conclusion.
He will never find Him. 2. The seeking that is not vain. “ Ye shall seek Me,” to
any heart that loves Christ is not a sentence of separation, but the blessed law of
Christian life. (1) That life is one great seeking after Christ. Love seeks the
absent, if we care anything for Him at all our hearts will turn to Him as natur-
ally as when the winter begins to pinch, the birds seek the sunny south. The
same law which sends loving thoughts across the globe to seek husband, child, or
friend, sets the Christian heart seeking for Christ. (2) Andif you do notseek Him
you will lose Him, for there is no way of keeping a person who is not before our
eyes near us except by diligent effort—thought meditating, love going out towards
Him, will submitting. Unless there be this effort you will lose your Master like
the child in a crowd loses his nurse if his hand slips from the protecting hand. (3)
And that seeking in this threefold form is neither a seeking which starts from a
sense of non-possession, nor one which ends in disappointment. We seek Him
because we possess Him, and that we may have Him more abundantly, and it is as
impossible that such a search shall be vain as that lungs dilated shall not fill with
air. A mother will sometimes hide that the child’s delight may be the greater
in searching and finding ; and so Christ has gone away for one thing that He may
stimulate our desires after Him, II. Tae two cannots. ‘“‘ Whither I go ye cannot
come,” says He to His enemies, with no limitation or condition. To His friends He
only says, ‘‘ now,” and ‘‘thou shalt follow Me afterwards.” So then Christ is
somewhere, He has gone into a place as well as a state, and there friend and enemy
alike cannot enter while compassed with ‘the earthly house.” But the incapacity
goes deeper, no sinful man can pass within. Heaven is a prepared place for pre-
pared people. Our power to enter there depends on our union with Christ by faith,
and that will effect the preparation. (A. Maclaren, D.D.) I go.—Three Greek
words are thus translated in St. John, and two of them in similar connections.
Each expresses a distinct aspect of departure, and its special force must be taken
into account in the interpretation of the passage in which itis found. 1. imdyw,
which is used here, emphasizes the personal act of going in itself, as a with-
drawal (chap. viii. 14, 21; xiii. 3, 33, 36; xiv. 4, 28; xvi. 5,10, 16). 2. oped-
oat marks the going as connected with a purpose, a mission, an end to be gained
(ver. 35; xiv. 3, 12, 28; xvi. 7,28). 3. dméoyouac expresses simple separation, the
point left (vi. 68; xvi. 7, “go away’). The differences are very clearly seen in
a comparison of chap. xvi. 10 (srdyw) with chap. xiv. 28 (zopevopuat) and the suc-
cession of words in chap. xvi. 7-10. (Bp. Westcott.) While Christ is near we must
cry to Him for pardon :—A few years ago, when Pennsylvania had a Christian
governor, there was a young man down in one of the counties who was arrested for
murder. He was brought before the Court, tried, found guilty, and sentenced to
death. His friends thought there would be no trouble in getting a reprieve or pardon.
Because the governor was a Christian man they thought he would not sign the death
warrant. Buthe signed it. They called on the governor and begged of him to
pardon the young man. But the governor said “ No; the law must take its course,
and the man must die.” I think the mother of the young man called on the
governor and pleaded with him ; but the governor stood firm and said, “‘ No; the
man must die.” A few days before the man was executed, the governor took the
train to the county where the man was imprisoned. He went to the sheriff of the
county and said to him, “‘I wish you to take me to that man’s cell, and leave me
alone with him for a little while; and do not tell him who I am until I am gone.”
The governor went to the prison and talked to the young man about his soul, and told
him that, although he was condemned by man to be executed, God would have mercy
upon him and save him, if he would accept pardon from God. He preached Christ,
and told him how Christ came to seek and to save sinners; and, having explained as
he best knew how the plan of salvation, he got down and prayed, and after praying
he shook hands with him and bade him farewell. Some time after the sheriff passed
by the condemned man’s cell, and he called him to the door of the cell and said,
‘©’ Who was that man who talked and prayed with meso kindly?” The sheriff said,
¢‘ That was Governor Pollock.’? The man turned deathly pale, and he threw up both
his hands and said, ‘ Was that Governor Pollock? was that kind-hearted man the
governor? Oh, sheriff, why did not you tell me? If I had known that was the
governor I would have fell at his feet and asked for pardon; I would have pleaded for
pardon and for my life. Oh, sir, the governor has been here, and I did not know
it,” Sinner, I have got good news to tell you. There is one greater than the
governor here to-night, and He wants to pardon every one. (Moody) Seeking


a;
So


642 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. VI.
eee
in vain :—A young policeman was in the Edinburgh infirmary with an injured leg.
There was a man lying on the next bed to him exceedingly ill, and his life despaired
of by the physicians, but who would not allow any one to speak to him on religious
subjects, or pray either for his recovery, or for the salvation of his soul. At first
he himsclf had no idea that death was so near him; but when its ghastly presence
could no longer be denied, then this bold impenitent sinner became a victim of
despair. Again and again did he cry out for the chaplain to pray for his soul. Of
course there were many prayers offered for him, but his day of grace was over, and
he continued to shriek aloud for mercy, until finally his voice became too weak
for utterance, and full of dreadful apprehensions of ‘the wrath to come,” he
expired. (Z'. Mahon.) Resisting the light will prove our undoing :—It is re-
lated of Jeine, the chief of one of the South Sea Islands, who had offered no small
amount of opposition to the introduction of Christianity, that, during a sickness
which terminated in his death, he manifested more mental distress than is usually
seen ina heathen. He often expressed a wish that ‘‘ he had died ten years before.”
And why? ‘The light of life and love had been shining around him, but he had
opposed its entrance into his heart, and its power over his people. And now, having
loved darkness, in darkness of soul, stung by an upbraiding of conscience, he must
die. (Biblical Museum.) Those who refuse Christ when offered may soon seek
Him in vain :—I was once called upon to visit a dying man in Bristol, under
the following circumstances: He had not entered the church for many years.
At last he made up his mind to go, and on the morning of the Sabbath he
and his wife went. But the door was closed, the church being under repair.
They returned home disappointed. In the evening they went to another church.
But it was so crowded that they could get no farther than the doorway, and
were unable to hear a word. On the following Sunday he resolved to make
another effort; but while he was dressing he fell down in an apoplectic fit, and
never spoke again! He knew me when I entered his chamber. I preached the
gospel in his dying ear, but he was speechless, and I could not learn the state
of his mind. This case illustrates some parts of the first chapter of Proverbs:
‘‘Then shall they call upon Me, but I will not answer; they shall seek Me early,
but they shall not find Me.” The procrastinating sinner may say, ‘‘I will serve
God by and by. He shall have the services of my age:”? and God may say, “No;
thou shalt not have old age to offer Me.” (J. East.) The imperilled condition
of the impenitent sinner :—Two friends were in the Highlands recently, shooting,
and one of them observed an animal on a jutting rock. He inquired, ‘“‘Is that
a sheep?” and looking through his field-glass he saw that it was. In search
of herbage the sheep had descended from one grass-covered ledge to another, and
found it impossible to return. No shepherd in Scotland dare risk his life by going
down the declivity. The sheep must remain there till an eagle observed it, when
in eddying circles it would hover over the poor animal, drawing nearer and nearer
until at last the affrighted sheep would take a dreadful leap into space, to be dashed
to pieces on the rocks below, and then become the eagle’s prey. (W. Hay Aitken.)
The dispersed among the Gentiles, or simply the Dispersion was the general title
applied to those Jews who remained settled in foreign countries after the return
from Babylon, and during the period of the second Temple. The Hebrew word
applied to these foreign settlers (see Jer, xxiv. 5; xxviii. 4; Ezra vi. 16) conyeys
the notion of spoliation and bereavement, as of men removed from the Temple and
home of their fathers; but in the LXX. the ideas of “sojourning,” and of a
‘‘colony,’’ were combined with that of a “ captivity,” while the term “ dispersion ”
(Deut. xxviii, 25; ef. Jer. xxxiv. 17), which finally prevailed, seemed to imply that
the people thus scattered (Deut. xxx. 4) in bondage (Mace, i. 27), and shut out from
the privileges of the human race (text), should yet be as a seed sown for a future
harvest (cf. Isa. xlix. 6, Heb.) in the strange lands where they found a temporary
resting-place (1 Pet.i. 1). The schism which had divided the first kingdom was
forgotten in the results of the general calamity. The Dispersion was not limited to
the exiles of Judah, but included “the twelve tribes” (Jamesi. 1), which expressed
the completeness of the whole Jewish nation eke xxvi. 7), The Dispersion really
dates from the Babylonish exile. Uncertain legends point to earlier settlements in
Arabia, Ethiopia, and Abyssinia, but these must have been isolated and casual
while the Dispersion was the outward proof that a faith had succeeded toa kingdom.
Apart from the necessary influence which Jewish communities, bound by common
laws, ennobled by the possession of the same truths, and animated by kindred hopes
must have exercised on the nations among whom they were scattered, the difficulties


CHAP. VII. ] ST. JOHN. 643


which set aside the literal observance of the Mosaic ritual led to a wider view of the
scope of the law, and a stronger sense of its spiritual significance. Outwardly and
inwardly, by its effects, both on the Gentiles and on Israel, the Dispersion was the
clearest providential preparation for Christianity. But while the fact of a recog-
nized Dispersion must have weakened the local and ceremonial influences which
were essential to the first training of the people of God, the Dispersion was still
bound together in itself and to its mother country by religious ties. The Temple
was the acknowledged centre of Judaism, and the faithful Jew everywhere con-
tributed the half-shekel towards its maintenance (Matt. xvii. 24; Jos, Ant. xvi. 6).
The tribute was indeed the simplest and most striking outward proof cf the religious
unity of the nation. Treasuries were established to receive the payments of
different districts, and the collected sums were forwarded to Jerusalem, as in later
times the Mohammedan offerings were sent to Mecca. At the beginning of the
Christian era the Dispersion was divided into three great sections, the Babylonian,
the Syrian, and the Egyptian. Precedence was yielded to the first. The jealousy
which had originally existed between the poor who remained in Jerusalem and their
wealthier countrymen at Babylon had passed away. From Babylon the Jews
spread throughout Persia, Media, and Parthia; but the settlements in China belong
to a modern date. The Greek conquests in Asia extended the limits of the Disper-
sion. Selencus Nicator transplanted large bodies of Jewish colonists from Baby-
lonia to the capitals of his western provinces. His policy was followed by his
successor, Antiochus the Great, and the persecutions of Antiochus Epiphanes only
served to push forward the J ewish emigration to the remoter districts of the empire.
In Armenia the Jews arrived at the greatest dignities, and Nisibis became a new
centre of colonization. The Jews of Cappadocia (1 Pet. i. 1) are mentioned in the
Mishna; anda prince and princess of Adiabene adopted the Jewish faith only
thirty years before the destruction of the Temple. Large settlements were estab-
lished in Cyprus, in the islands of the Aigean, and on the western coast of Asia
Minor. The Romans confirmed to them the privileges obtained from the Syrian
kings; and though they were exposed to sudden outbursts of popular violence, the
Jews of the Syrian provinces gradually formed a closer connection with their new
homes, and, together with the Greek language, adopted in many respects Greek ideas.
This Hellenizing tendency, however, found its most free development at Alexandria,
The Jewish settlements established there by Alexander and Ptolemy I. became the
source of the African Dispersion, which spread over the north coast of Africa, and
perhaps inland to Abyssinia. At Cyrene and Berenice (Tripoli) the Jewish in-
habitants formed a considerable portion of the population. But the distinction in
language led to wider differences, which were averted in Babylon by the currency
of an Aramaic dialect. The Scriptures were no longer read on the Sabbath, and no
fire signals conveyed the dates of the new moons to Egypt. Still, the spirit of the
African Jews was not destroyed. After the destruction of the Temple the zealots
found a reception in Cyrene, and in A.D. 115 the Jewish population in Africa rose
with terrible ferocity, and were put down by a war of extermination, and the rem-
nant who escaped established themsclves on the opposite coast of Europe, as the
beginning of a new Dispersion. The Jewish settlements in Rome were consequent
on the occupation of Jerusalem by Pompey B.c. 63. The captives and emigrants
whom he brought with him were located in the Trans-Tiberine quarter, and by
degrees rose in station and importance. They were favoured by Augustus and
Tiberius after the fall of Sejanus, and a Jewish school wes founded at Rome. In
the reign of Claudius the Jews became objects of suspicion from their immense
numbers; and the internal disputes, consequent, perhaps, upon the preaching of
Christianity, led to their banishment from the city (Acts xviii. 2). But this was
only temporary, for in a few years the Jews at Rome were numerous (Acts xxviii.
17), and continued to be sufficiently conspicuous to attract the attention of the
jatirists. The influence of the Dispersion on the rapid growth of Christianity can
searcely be overrated. The course of apostolic preaching followed in a regular pro-
gress the line of Jewish settlements. The mixed assembly from which the first
converts were gathered on the day of Pentecost represented each division of the
Dispersion, and these converts naturally prepared the way for the apostles. The
names of the seven deacons are all Greek, and one was a proselyte. The Church
at Antioch, by which St. Paul was entrusted with his great work among the heathen
(Acts xiii. 1), included Barnabus of Cyprus, Lucius of Cyrene, and Simeon, sur-
named Niger; and among his fellow labourers at a later time are found Apollos of
Alexandria, Urbanus, and Clement, whose names, at least, are Roman, Antioch


Se |
644 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [omar. vit.


5 oe ee .
itself became a centre of the Christian Church, as it had been of the Jewish Disper-
sion; and throughout the apostolic journeys the Jews were the class to whom “it
was necessary that the Word of God should be first spoken” (Acts xiii. 46), and
they in turn were united with the mass of the population by the intermediate body
of “the devout” who had recognized in various degrees ‘the faith of the God of
Isracl.” (Bp. Westcott.)


Vers. 37-52. On the last day, that great day of the feast.—Jesus the Christ :—
I. Prorrenine BLEssiNas. 1. Water for the thirsty (ver. 37; Exod. xvii. 6;
Num. xx. 11; Psa. lxxviii. 15, 20; cv. 41; Matt. v. 6). 2. Usefulness for the be-
lieving (ver. 38; Prov. iv. 23; xviii, 4; Acts iv. 20; Rom. xiv. 7; 1 Cor. vi. 20;
Jas. ili. 10). 8. Divine aid for men (ver. 39; Isa. xliv. 3; Joel ii. 28; Zech. xii.
10; John xvi. 7; Acts ii. 33; Phil. ii, 13). II. Awaxenine THoucur. 1. The
prophet (ver. 40; Deut. xviii. 15, 18; John i, 21; vi. 14; Acts iii. 23; vii.
37). 2. The Christ (ver. 41; Matt. xvi. 16; Mark xiv. 61; Luke iv. 41; xxii. 67;
John i. 41; iv. 29). 3. The seed of David (ver. 42; Isa. xi. 1; Jer. xxxiii. 22;
Luke i. 69; Rom.1. 3; 2 Tim. ii. 8; Rev. v. 5), IL. Barriine rors. 1. Bitter
enemies (ver. 44; Matt. xxi. 46; Mark xi. 18; Luke xix. 47; xx. 19; John
vii. 19, 30). 2. Perplexed officials (ver. 46; Matt. vii. 28; xxvii. 22,24; Mark
xv. 14; Luke xxiii, 22; Acts xxiii. 9). 3. Raging Pharisees (ver. 47; Luke v. 30;
vi. 7; vii. 30; John vii. 82; xi. 47; Acts xxiii. 9). (S. S. Times.) Jesus the
Christ :—I. Jusus’ cuatm To Divine FrULNEss (vers. 37-39). 1. It was tabernacles.
The last day had come. It was Sabbath. All hearts overflowed with joy. With
water from Siloah the priest came, pouring it upon the altar in the presence of all
the people. That water was a symbol of salvation (Isa. xii. 3). Seeing it, Jesus
makes, regarding Himself, this proclamation: “If any man thirst, let Him come
unto Me and drink.” How emphatic the word “thirst!’? It means all the needs of
the soul and the deep cravings of mankind. The word “drink” is equally strong.
Jesus here offers Himself as a complete satisfaction to man. The claim here set
forth is one and the same thing with Isaiahlvy.1. The same person speaks in both
places. Jesus thus declares Himself to be God, ¢.e., the Christ. 2. The same
thing is claimed in ver. 38. The believer, having received Jesus, becomes himself
a fountain of eternal life—rather is he a channel through which the grace of God
flows to bless other hearts. This is the effect of the regenerating and sanctifying
work of the Holy Spirit. This Spirit is secured for the sinful world by the atone-
ment of Jesus Christ. The cross has two sides—one turned towards God the
Father, reconciling Him to man a sinner; the other turned towards man, securing
for him the Holy Ghost. Under these two aspects Christ’s sacrifice is always pre-
sented in the Bible. It is to the last of these that vers. 38, 39 refer. Hence Jesus
declares Himself the Christ. Il. Tue rropie ciarm Jesus as Curist (vers. 40-44)
1, Some declared that He was ‘‘ The Prophet ” (Deut. xviii. 15). The person here
spoken of was held by the Jews to be the coming Messiah (Acts iii. 22, 23). 2.
Others bolder, pronouncing His name: ‘ This is the Christ” (ver. 41). 3. A third
party, while they seemingly rejected Him, bore a testimony to His being the true
Messiah (vers. 41,42). He had both the lineage and birthplace which they required
to convince them. Only their own ignorance stood in the way. Observe: (1) It
was Christ’s strong claim regarding Himself that won Him confessors. So in
teaching, we must present the truth in strong terms, leaving results with the truth
itself. (2) A little ignorance often prevents men from receiving the gospel (ver. 42)
(3) Anything for an excuse is the motto of some persons. The cry now is, ‘‘ He is
a Galilean!” If not this, then something else, equally untrue, (4) The plain
teaching of the Word is apt to attract the attention of all and cause divisions
among the people (ver. 43). Nothing is talked about so much as Christianity (5)
No one can damage the truth, except so far as God gives him permission and then
it is for a wise purpose, as the future will show (vers. 32, 44). His hour did come,
Then He was crucified. The greatest crime secured the world the greatest blessing!
III. THE OFFICERS CLAIM JESUS aS CuRisT (vers. 45-49). Their testimony in His
behalf is contained in ver. 46. It was the same as saying: ‘His speaking is that
of a Divine person.” Those hard men, that went to arrest Him, were overcome b
the love shown in His speech ; by the truth which impressed them; by the aera
sion His words carried with them and by His authority as a teacher. These all
were so marked that, returning, His enemies had to declare: ‘* Never man go spake”
—none, save God, could show such love, truth, persuasion and authority. 1. These
are all divine qualities, man having them in proportion as he is ““endued with


—


iS


OwaP. vit.] ST, JOHN. 645


power from on high.” 2. The gospel has these four great elements—Love, Truth,
Persuasion, and Authority. 38. Those who will not receive the gospel pronounce


such testimony as this “ deception ” (ver.,47). The belief of the humble-hearted


is foolishness unto the intellectual-proud (ver. 48,49). IV. Nicopzmus crams Him
to BE Curist (vers. 50-53). The charge against Jesus by the Pharisees was that
He claimed to be from God, the true Messiah. Nicodemus virtually said this:
‘You have not disproved this claim; nothing has been done to prove the falsity of
Jesus’ words ’’ (ver. 51). He might have made His testimony stronger. We must
remember that a secret disciple is not bold in word or deed. The reply of the
Pharisees was weak, showing that their cause was based on ignorance and prejudice
(ver. 52). Such is the cause of unbelief to-day. (4. H. Moment, D.D.) If any
man thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink.—The thirst of humanity anticipated
and met :—On the last day of the feast of tabernacles the priests stood near the
altar and poured water over it copiously from large capacious vessels. Perhaps the
day took its name “ the great day” from that circumstance. It was a sym-
bolical act intended to connect itself with the predictions that in the days of the
Messiah God would pour out His Spirit, and was something like a prayer that they
might live to see those days and share that blessing. It was our Lord’s custom to
connect His teaching with occurrences before Him, and so, perhaps pointing to that
act, He said, “If any man,” &., proclaiming His Messiahship. IL Humanrry 1s
THE ,SUBJECT OF INTENSE SPIRITUAL DESIRES. We know how intense the animal
appetite of ‘‘ thirst” may become. How terrible it has been in the burning desert
or the besieged city! That is here taken to indicate the character of spiritual
desire, and is an ordinary rhetorical figure used by our poets and philosophers
when they speak of the thirst of gold, ambition, &c. But Christ offers no drink
for the appetites or passions. 1, There is the thirst of the intellect—the desire for
truth. It is very wonderful how soon the mind of a child will begin to speculate
about the mystery of life, of death, of God, and the soul. 2. There is the thirst
of conscience in two forms, (1) There is the consciousness of moral weakness.
A man feels the moral obligation he is under, sees the beauty of duty, has a con-
viction of right, but a sense of infirmity of purpose—makes his strong resolutions
and scatters them the next day. And so the moral nature thirsts for strength to
perform. (2) The conscience is burdened by a sense of sin, and yearns for its
forgiveness and removal. This has given rise to priests, The people create the
priests. No priesthood ever yet originated itself for the purpose of trampling on the
people. 3. There is the thirst of the heart: not merely a desire for happiness.
You are made for something greater than that. There is a thirst in looking at the
dislocation of things around us, What tears of soul bereavement and pain let out
the waters of bitterness in times of darkness! So the soul wants something to rest
upon, to feel that we are not ina neglected and fatherless world. II. Jzsus Curist
IN THE GOSPEL MEETS THESE DIVERSIFIED wants. 1. Christianity professes to be
a revelation of spiritual truth. It interprets nature and adds communications of
its own about all that it is necessary for us to know. 2, Christianity meets the
thirst of conscience in a special way. (1) By the revelation of the Person of Christ.
The gospel does not come as a system of thought, nor are its preachers philosophers ;
it presents a Saviour, through whom we may obtain forgiveness of sins. (2) Con-
nected with this is the mission of the Spirit to renew, to strengthen the will, to
purify the affections, to make duty a delight, and bring the whole man into harmony
with duty and God (Rom. viii. 3-4). 3, Christianity meets the thirst of the heart
by providing a large measure of rational and manly happiness, and that in two
ways, (1) By the life of faith—faith as a daily habit, looking to God in all things ;
and along with that it gives spiritual consolation and grace. (2) By the character
it creates and sustains, delivering us from the torments which attend passion, sin,
disharmony with God. III. Curist NoT ONLY MEETS THE THIRST OF HUMANITY, BUT
18 URGENT TO MEET IT. ‘Let Himcome.” Do not mystify yourselves with the
metaphysics of the Divine decrees. Take Christ in His plain utterances and
remember that secret things belong unto God. He says, ‘‘if any man will, let Him
come ”—believe in His honesty of purpose, and that He means what He says, ‘It
is not the will of my Father that one of these little ones should perish.” ‘You
may perish, but that will be from your own acts, not God’s.” IV, CHRISTIN MEETING
THIS THIRST DOES OF SET PURPOSE MAKE US A BLESSING TO OTHERS. ‘Out of Him
shall flow,” &c. (7. Binney.) Thirst relieved :—‘ A word spoken in season how
good it is!” Much of the force of an observation depends upon its being well-timed.
The orators of Greece and Rome attended to this. But there was One who “spake


~~~


646 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. vit.
ee

3 never man spake,” who seized all occasions. Here is an instance of it. I. Tum
ae ecient "1, Let us account for it, When man proceeded from the hand
of God he was a stranger to thirst. He was formed for the enjoyment of God, and
God became the source of his enjoyment. Then he was in his element. But sin
has removed man from the fountain, and he now wanders through a parched
wilderness. ‘My people have committed two evils,” &c. 2. Its nature. _It in-
cludes—(1) Want and emptiness. The mind has an aching void. We might as
well expect light in a beam cut off from the sun, the source of all radiance, as
expect satisfaction of mind without God. (2) Restlessness—the fever of the mind.
Hence the anxiety of change, “seeking rest and finding none. ” (3) Misery.
Disappointed in the objects of pursuit men turn away in disgust, saying, “ miserable
comforters are ye all.” Hence despondency and suicide. 3. Its universal preva-
lence. It is felt more or less intensely, but none are strangers to it. (1) The
inquiries of men prove this. ‘ Who will show us any good.” (2) The pursuits of
men prove this. The toils of the studious, the slumbers of the voluptuary, the
cell of the hermit, the hoards of the miser, all say, ‘I thirst.” (3) The regrets of
men prove this. ‘Vanity of vanities,” &c. II. THe saTIsFACTION PREPARED. 1.
The person who offers the refreshment. The eternal Son of God who became man,
to die for sin and rise and ascend into heaven to “ receive gifts for men,” even the
Holy Spirit. The “living water.” Christ has the Spirit without measure for the
enlightenment and salvation of men. Here is all that can satisfy the thirsty-soul
—pardon for the guilty, liberty for the enslaved, peace for the distracted, and
finally heaven. 2. The means of getting the livingwater. Note—(1) the approach of
faith, “let himcome.’? (2) The application of faith, “ drink.’? III. Tue ExTrENtT oF
THEINVITATION. ‘“‘Ifany man.” 1. Astocharacter. There isno description of the
persons invited. ‘If any man,” be he who he may, whatever his age, country,
condition. This is better than any-specification of name, for others might bear the
same. 2. As to the simplicity of the qualification. All men thirst. Don’t say I
am not thirsty enough. If you thirst at all you are meant. 3. As to the sincerity
of the Inviter. Can we doubt this? Is He not able, and willing to relieve us.
Conclusion: 1. Learn why Christ is imperfectly appreciated—because men do not
realize their moral condition. 2. If this is not assuaged here it never will be in
eternity. Read the parable of the rich man. (G. Clayton.) Rivers of living
water:—1. These words were spoken on the last day of the feast—therefore on the
last opportunity for doing good to that multitude. The dispersion of a mighty
crowd is always affecting, as we forecast that it is a final parting with some, and
see in it a foreshadowing of that last separation. Our Lord was sensitive to such
feelings, and could not suffer the vast assemblage to break up without giving them
something which might reveal itself in their hearts when far from the excitement
of the city. 2. It was the great day, when, after the solemnities of the previous
week and their august associations and suggestions, all susceptible souls would be
open to elevated thoughts. So Jesus, seizing the moment when the metal was
molten to give His own impress to it, cried, ‘If any man,” &c. 3. Christ’s gift is
living waters. He speaks to us as subject to desires for which nature has made no
provision, and offers Himself as a fountain of relief and eternal satisfaction.
His words sweep the entire circle of humanity, for every man thirsts. The only
question is, Can His religion do what everything else confessedly fails to do?
“Yes,” said Jesus. The Holy Spirit as given by Him is as rivers of living water,
because—I. Tue Spirit Is THE CHANNEL oF Gop'’s LovE To souts. 1. Man
thirsts for love. It is the nobleness of our nature that food and raiment
and gross pleasures do not satisfy it. What makes childhood’s blessedness, but
that its whole atmosphere is love? Yet how far all human love comes short of
satisfying our craving all know. But let a man be thoroughly certified that God
loves him to save him, and that every moment he has access to God to tell Him all
his griefs, what a river of refreshment must this love prove in his heart. 2. God’s
love to us is His love in Christ—love, the most ample in its measure, the most
intense in its power, the most complete in its adjustments to our condition. But
it is not this love in a book that will give us relief. The testimony of the Book
must be transferred to the heart to become a living reality there. The Spirit adds
nothing to its dimensions, but makes it approved and accepted to the soul. Divine
love is the sovereign element of all blessedness : Christ is the Divine Vessel holding
that-love which flows over with sweet waters, butit is the Spirit which witnesses of
this to the soul. JI. Tue Srrerr is THE CREATOR OF BLESSED AFFECTIONS IN THE
souL, ‘Shall bein Him.” Man thirsts for an inward blessedness. Not in his


omar. vit] . ST. JOHN. 647


circumstances but in his heart, in noble views, pure affections, generous aspirations,
lies the true well-being of man. He may have millions and yet be haunted with
fears of starvation. He may allow himself every luxury, and yet his soul be a level
of monotonous wretchedness. Malignant self-centred passions are the fever of the
goul, Place a» man amidst the splendours of royalty, and a jealous spirit will
make him miserable. It is from a right state of the heart that its blessedness must
flow; therefore the true salvation of man is not outward but inward. It has its
outward elements in an alteration of man’s relation to God; but what were it
worth for the outcast to be delivered from his rags and poverty, and be received
back if he retained all the evil passions which ruined him? He must become an
altered man to become blessed. All experience and Scripture bear witness that
this is a work not for man but for the Spirit of God. It is the almighty spirit of
love, whose living waters flowing into the heart destroy its bitterness and impurity,
and make it a fountain of brightness. III. Tae Sprrir 1s THE POWER OF SPIRITUAL
communication. 1. As the waters of a fountain gush forth by their own pleasure,
so do the living waters of spiritual life impart themselves to all around. Every
refreshed soul is constituted a well of refreshment, like a fertile spot in the wilder-
ness. How is this done? By the gifts and service which it prompts. Whenever
He is in the heart, our families, neighbourhoods, churches will be refreshed.
Stagnant waters which have no outlet become corrupt and bitter like the Dead Sea.
2. Man thirsts for successful, useful action. You are not content with the result
which your daily calling gives you. Without despising common duties, you feel
that you were made for nobler things, Well, the noblest course is open to all.
You need not acquire rank or money. If renewed by the Spirit, you can make your
course as a shining river. No other life is worth living: all other is vanity and
vexation. 3. This blessedness and usefulness must be habitual, a river not a brook.
Nothing can be more remote from the true idea of the Holy Spirit than transcient
excitement. Conclusion: 1. This gift of the Spirit is acquired by faith. ‘‘ Coming”
is “ believing.” 2. This gift assumes different forms in different believers, 3. This
gift every believer is bound touse. (J. Riddell, M.A.) The incident :—While
the morning sacrifice was being prepared, a priest, accompanied by a joyous
procession with music, went down to the pool of Siloam, whence he drew water into
a golden pitcher capable of holding three log (rather more than two pints), But
on the Sabbath they fetched the water from a golden vessel in the Temple itself,
into which it had been carried from Siloam on the preceding day. At the same
time that the procession started for Siloam, another went to a place in the Kedron
valley, close by, called Motza, whence they brought willow branches, which, amid the
blasts of the priests’ trumpets, they stuck on either side of the altar of burnt offer-
ing, bending them over toward it so as to form a kind of leafy canopy. Then the
ordinary sacrifice proceeded, the priest who had gone to Siloam so timing it that
he returned just as his brethren carried up the pieces of the sacrifice to lay them
on the altar. As he entered by the ‘‘ water-gate,’’ which obtained its name from
this ceremony, he was received by a threefold blast from the priests’ trumpets. The
priests then went up the rise of the altar and turned to the left, where there were
two silver basins with narrow holes—the eastern, a little wider, for the wine; and
the western, a little narrower, for the water. Into these the wine of the drink
offering was poured, and at the same time the water from Siloam, the people
shouting to the priest, “‘ Raise thy hand,” to show that he really poured the water
into the basin which led to the base of the altar... . As soon as the wine and
water were poured out, the Temple music began, and the Hallel (Psa, cxiii.—cxviii.)
was sung. ... Salvation in connection with the Son of David was symbolized by
the pouring out of water... . Thus the Talmud says distinctly, ‘‘ Why is the
name of it called the drawing out of water? Because of the pouring out of the
Holy Spirit, according to what is said: ‘ With joy shall ye draw water out of the
wells of salvation.” . .. We can now in some measure realize the evont. The
festivities of the week of tabernacles were drawing to a close. ‘‘It was the last
day, that great day of the feast.” ... It was on that day after the priest had
returned from Siloam with his golden pitcher, and for the last time poured its
contents to the base of the altar; after the Hallel had been sung to the sound of
the flute, the people shouting and worshipping as the priests three times drew the
threefold blasts from their silver trumpets—just when the interest of the people
had been raised to its highest pitch, that from the mass of the worshippers, who
were waving towards the altar quite a forest of leafy branches as the last words of
Psalm cxviii, were chanted—a voice was raised which resounded through the


648 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cuar. vit.


f


Temple, startled the multitude, and carried fear and hatred to the hearts of their —


leaders. It was Jesus who ‘‘stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him
come unto Me, and drink.” Then by faith in Him should each one truly become
like the pool of Siloam, and from his inmost being “ rivers of water flow.” “ This
spake He of the Spirit, which they that believe on Him should receive.” Thus the
significance of the rite, in which they had just taken part, was not only fully
explained, but the mode of its fulfilment pointed out. (A. Edersheim, D.D.) The
significance of the incident and Christ’s use of it :—In the latter days of Jerusalem,
as we learn from the history of the period, a ceremony was added to those of the
ordained feasts of booths, intended, evidently, to commemorate the thirst in the


wilderness, and the supply that was provided from the rock in Horeb. On the last


day of the feast, towards evaning, the priests formed a procession, and, having
drawn water from the pool of Siloam, bore it to the Temple, and poured it on the
ground, so that it should flow down to the lower streets of the city. This symbol
pointed, probably, to Ezekiel’s grand vision of waters issuing from the Temple,
small at first, but rapidly increasing, until they became a river that could not be
passed over—a river to swimin. The procession of priests has gone to Siloam and
returned to the Temple. They have poured the water from the golden vessel, and
a rivulet is making its way along the unwonted channel, forth from the hallowed
courts towards the city. The assembled crowds are ranged on either side, watching
the progress of the mimic stream. The beams of the setting sun strike the water,
where in a hollow it spreads into a pool, and golden glory flashes for a moment
from the spot that had been dull dry earth before. The multitude gaze in ignorant
superstition ; but some of the Lord’s hidden ones are there, waiting for the conso-
lation of Israel, and spelling painfully out of these dead letters the name of their
living Redeemer. Jesus looked on the crowd as they gazed wistfully on the
symbolic water. His heart was yearning for them. He knew what was in man:
He knew that the Jews made idols of these significant signs, as they made idols
ofthe scriptures which were printed on their clothing. He saw them drinking that
which cannot quench the thirst of a soul. He pitied them, and came to the rescue,
(W. Arnot, D.D.) The Preacher’s last sermon for the season:—I. THE INQUIRY
FOR THE THIRSTY. 1. It is very wide. ‘Any man” of all that heterogeneous
mass. 2, It is anxiously narrowed down. ‘‘If”—asif He had said the mass of
you do not thirst; do any of you thirst? He reads their general indifference only
too well. Alas! the thirsty are few: self-content possesses the minds of many, and
world content steals over others. They are in a desert; no drop of dew falls
about them, and the water-bottle has long since been dry; but they are mocked by
the mirage, and they put aside their thirst with the fond idea that they can drink
to the full, 3. It is painfully clear. The thirsty know what thirst is. It is a self-
‘explaining pain. 4. It is being continually repeated. It is as urgent to day as

then, 5, What is this thirst? Nothing actual or substantive; it is a lack crying
out of its emptiness. When our system needs drink, a merciful providence creates
a pang which drives us toa supply. Thirst rings the alarm bell, and mind and
body set to work to supply the demand. It were a dreadful thing if the system
needed water and yet did not thirst ; for we might be fatally injured before we knew
that any harm was happening to us. So with spiritual thirst. II. Tae one prrac-
TION FOR THE RELIEF OF ALL SUCH THIRSTY ONES. ‘‘ Let him come,” &c. 1. Christ
who gives the water which quenches spiritual thirst, invites us to Himself person-
ally. What creed you are to believe will do by and by, just now your duty is to
come to Christ. At this time Christ had not been crucified, risen, &., but the text
was spoken with a foresight of all that should transpire up to His glorification.
Come directly to Him, who by all this has become a fountain of living water—not
to creeds, ceremonies, sacraments, priests, services, doings, or feelings. Salvation
lies in Him only. 2. All that a sinner wants is to be found in abundance in Him,
an all that every sinner wants, 3. In Jesus is a varied supply. The thirst of
the soul is not like the thirst of the body which is quenched with one liquid; the
soul thirsts for many things—peace in distraction, pardon of sin, purity from
pollution, progress in grace, power in prayer, perseverance; and all this is in Christ.
4. We must come to Christ and bring nothing of our own except our thirst, and
that coming is believing. 5. Having come we must drink—the first action of the
infant, the easiest act of the man. III. THe permission HERE GIVEN FOR THEIR
PARTICIPATION. 1. There is no limit as to what thou has formerly done, in the way
of sin, unbelief, hardness, denial. 2. There is no limit put as to where thou hast
been before. A man went to a merchant to ask the price of a certain article. He


:
{
;


se


'


ie ee


char. vir.) ST. JOHN. 649


ie


then went to others and tried to buy at a cheaper rate, but found that the first had
quoted the lowest price. So he went back, but the merchant refused to serve him,
not caring for such customers. But if you have been to Moses, to Rome, yea, even
to the devil, Christ still says, ‘Come unto Me.” 3..There is no limit because of
any kind of lack. Some think themselves deficient in tenderness, or penitence, or
disqualified by age, poverty, illiterateness. Some are locking the door with the
very key that was meant to open it. ‘Iam afraid I do not thirst ;” ‘“* I have not
the sense of need I ought to have;” but this means that you are sensible that
you are more needy than you think you are. The fact that you need a sense of
need proves how horrible is your need. Would you come if you did thirst?
Then come and you shall thirst. The more unfit the more you are invited ; your
very unfitness is your fitness. 4, When Christ says ‘“*Come” nobody else can
say “Nay.” IV. THe ENTREATY FOR THEIR ComING. “ Jesus stood and cried.”
It was the last opportunity, hence the urgency. Surely we ought to entreat Him
to let us come. Instead of that we are callous. When a man has charity to give
does he entreat people to accept it? How strange that you should be so unwilling
and Christ so anxious! (C. H. Spurgeon.) The great invitation :—I. WHo
THEY ARE WHO ARE INVITED. The thirsty. 1. In all thirst there is—(1) A sense
of want. Every man is sensible that he is not self-sufficient. (2) Desire of
supply. The soul of man is ever desiring. 2. The object of thi8 thirsting—(1) The
end where the soul may rest, and that is happiness. For this every man thirsts.
(2) The means leading to the end. He that desires refreshment, desires also to
drink, though he may by ignorance take a cup of poison. 3. There is a two-fold
thirst—(1) Natural and common to all men. It is as natural for a man to desire
happiness as it is for him to breathe. But men miss the way and seek it in the
world, and hence, disappointed, say, ‘« Who will show us any good?” (2) Super-
natural, experienced by those only whose heart God hath touched. ‘ My soul
thirsteth for the living God.” There is no happiness unless this is satisfied.
Il. To wHAT THEY ARE INVITED. 1. To come to Christ, i.e., to believe on Him
(ver. 33). Unbelief is a departing from the living God: faith is coming back.
2. To drink, i.e., to actually make use of Christ for the supply of this need. This
points out three things in Christ. (1) The fulness of Christ for needy sinners.
(2) In Him there is a fulness of merit to take off the fulness of our guilt. (b) A
fulness of the Spirit to take away the power of sin, and to actuate us in all good.
(c) A fulness of grace. (2) The suitableness of Christ. In Him there is a remedy
for every disorder. (3) His satisfactoriness. This drinking also implies three
things in us. (a) The soul going out fora supply of its particular wants, renouncing
all confidence in itself or any creature (Jer. xvii. 5). (b) The soul’s going out in
desire after supply from Christ upon His invitation. (c) Believing application of
Christ to the soul in—(i) catching hold of the promise suited to our case.
(ii) Venturing our case upon the promise and proposed supply. (iii) Confidence in
Christ answering our necessities, III. Morivzs FoR ACCEPTING THE INVITATION.
1, The supply of the needs of sinners is the great end of the mystery of Christ.
2. He is able to supply all needs however great they may be. Christ is a fountain
that is never dry. The creatures are broken cisterns and soon exhausted. 3. Con-
sider your need of Him. 4. If you come now you will drink of the rivers of God’s
pleasures for evermore, (T. Boston, D.D.) We must drink in the gospel:—
‘A celebrated minister was once taken ill, and his wife requested him to go and
consult an eminent physician. He went to this physican, who welcomed. him
very heartily. The minister stated hiscase. The doctor said: ‘Oh it is a very simple
matter, you have only to take such and such a drug and you will be right.” The
patient was about to go, but the physician pressed him to stay, and they entered
into pleasant conversation. The minister went home to his wife and told her what
a delightful man the doctor had proved to be. He said, “I do not know that I ever
had a more delightful talk. The good man is eloquent, and witty, and gracious.”
The wife replied, ‘But what remedy did he prescribe?” “ Dear!” said the
minister, “I quite forgot what he told me on that point.” “ What?” said she,
“ did you go to a physician for advice, and came away without the remedy?” ‘ct
quite slipped my mind” he said, ‘the doctor talked so pleasantly that his prescrip-
tion has quite gone out of my head.” You must receive Christ by faith. (C. H.
Spurgeon.) Christ a Divine Fountain :—‘“ If any man thirst, let him come unto
Me and drink.” What man would dare to say of merely physical things, “If any
man lacks knowledge, let him come unto me.” Neither Humbolt, nor Liebig, nor
Agassiz would dare to say this, even of the departments in which they are pre-em1-


hs


~


650 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (cHar. viz.
we ete ee en

nent, how much less of the whole range of learning! yet Christ, disdaining physical
things, appeals at once to the soul with all its yearnings, its depths of despair, its
claspings—like a mother feeling at midnight for the child whom death has taken—
its infinite outreachings, its longings for love, and peace, and joy, which nothing
can satisfy this side of the bosom of God, and says, “If any man thirst, let him
come unto Me and drink.” He stands over against whatever want there is in the
human bosom, whatever hunger there is in the moral faculties, whatever need there is
in the imagination, and says, ‘‘ He that cometh to Me shall never hunger, and he that
believeth on Me shall never thirst.” (H. W. Beecher.) The gospel a general
offer of grace :—I was travelling some time ago, and I hada little child with me,
and I was not acquainted with the law of the railroad respecting children, but I
happened to see this announcement, ‘All children under five years of age free.”
I did not ask any questions. My child was under five. Neither did I buy a ticket.
I took the announcement to mean what it said, and did not pay a halfpenny.
(D. L. Moody.) We must feel our need of Christ before we come to Him:—
Suppose a man were to call upon the physician and say, ‘“ Well, sir, I want your
services.” ‘Are you sick?” says the physician. ‘No; not that I know of.”
“What, then, do you want of me?” ‘Oh! I want your services.” ‘* But what
for?”? The man makes no reply. ‘Are youinpain?’” ‘‘No.” “Is your head
out of order?” “No.” ‘Nor your stomach?” ‘*No; I believe not. I feel
perfectly well; but still I thought I should like a little of your help.” What
would a doctor think of such a case as this? What must Christ think of
those that ask His help, not feeling that they really need it? (H. W.
Beecher.) The thirsty should drink:—During a revival in a town in Ohio,
a man who had been very worldly minded was awakened, but for some time
concealed his feelings, even from his wife, who was a praying woman. She left
him one evening in charge of his little girl of three years of age. After her
departure his anxiety of mind became so great that he walked the room in his
agony. ‘The little girl noticed his agitation, and inquired, ‘“‘ What ails you, pa?”
He replied, ‘‘ Nothing,” and endeavoured to quiet his feelings, but allin vain. The
child looked up sympathizingly in his face, and inquired, with all the artlessness
and simplicity of childhood, ‘‘ Pa, if you were dry, wouldn’t you go and get a drink
of water?’ The father started as if a voice from heaven had fallen on his ear.
He thought of his thirsty soul famishing for the waters of life; he thought of
that living Fountain opened in the gospel; he believed, and straightway fell at the
Saviour’s feet. From that hour he dates the dawning of a new light, and the
beginning of a new life. The patience of Christ:—It was the last day of the
feast of tabernacles. It was the eighth day which was spent as a Sabbath, but
the Saviour did not cease to preach because the festival was almost over. Till
the last day He continued to instruct, to invite, to entreat. It is but one instance
out of many of the Saviour’s pertinacity of lovingkindness. (C. H. Spurgeon.)
Faith is easy :—Drink! That is nota difficult action. Any fool can drink; in fact,
many are great fools because they drink too much of poisonous liquors. Drink!
Thou canst surely do that. Thou hast only to be as a spunge that sucks up all
that comes near it. Put thy mouth down and suck up that which flows to thee in
the river of Christ’s love, open wide thy soul and drink in Christ, as the great
northern whirlpool sucks in the sea. If any man thirst let him receive Christ.
(Ibid. ) The spirit dwelling in, and flowing from, the Christian man:—Now was the
time of the autumn heats. The effects of the harvest rains had long passed. The
crops were just removed from the face of the ground. Above was the burning Syrian
sun. Beneath—as with us, now —was the scorched and arid soil, All was dust, an@
weariness, and heat. It was the time of a great festival—the great autumnal feast
of tabernacles, commemorative of the fruits of the earth now gathered in. I. Here
you may observe we have an InviTaTion—‘‘ Jesus stood, and cried, saying, If any
man thirst, let Him come unto Me, and drink.”’ 1. There seems to me something
emphatic in that word, ‘‘stood.” It expresses in a teacher the attitude of pro-
minence, energy, aggression. It was well suited to Him, who, as He was there
placed amidst that perishing throng, came ‘‘to seek, and to save that which was
lost.” 2. And the voice is still more marked than the attitude. ‘Jesus stood and
cried.” ‘This term is applied to those who are labouring under some strong passion
or affection of the mind, whether of grief, fear, desire, or other. Here it
expresses earnestness and energy. At least, let ministers show by their manner
that they have a deep interest in the salvation of those they address, 3. But
from the attitude, and the voice, turn we to the words themselves, to the gracious


——


OmAP, vit.] ST. JOHN. 651


invitation of the Lord. Whom does He address? Those who thirst. A large
class, as many will testify. For they who thirst include all who are not satisfied.
(1) There, for example, are they who are disappointed. On them life opened
fairly and brightly, but its horizon became overcast. Full of joyous anticipation
they sprang forward with alacrity in the race of life. But unlooked for difficulties
arose, They experienced treachery and falsehood. Life to them lost its charm.
They found not what they sought. They thirsted, but were not satisfied. (2)
Then there are the prosperous who caanot be satiated with prosperity. In their
fulness they are empty; in their joyfulness they are sad; pleasure pleases not;
slumber soothes not. (3) And there are those, too, who, having tried to slake the
thirst of their undying souls with dying things, and discovering their error, are now
seeking in things heavenly, unfailing sources, and perennial fountains. These do
not, now, thirst for the creature. They have found out their error, and plainly see
that the creature cannot satisfy. Now to these, and to all others, unsatisfied,
anxious, craving, desiring, thirsting, Jesus cries, ‘‘Come unto Me, and drink.”
And it is thus that Jesus meets the cravings of our humanity; His providence
supplies our bodily wants. ‘As thy day, so shall thy strength be.” In the same
way man’s intellect meets in his God, that on which it can repose. Who should
satisfy mind but He who made mind! But, oh! the storms and tempests of
thought! Then there is the way in which the Saviour meets man’s spirit. The
heart of man must have something whereon to repose, something to love, something
wherewith to sympathize. The Saviour in His humanity here meets the heart of
man. II. Nor must we omit to notice THE EXTENT oF THE Lorp’s INVITATION—
‘Any man.” ‘If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink.” III.
Having thus spoken of this invitation of our Lord, we have now to notice His
PROMISE, WITH JOHN’S COMMENT THEREON. 1. ‘* Water.” Refreshment and purifi-
cation are presented to us in this figure. 2. *‘ Living water.” Not stagnant, much
less putrescent. Life belongs to the Christian; and this life he must seek to impart
to others. 3. “Rivers of living water.” Here are presented to us ideas of depth,
copiousness, perpetuity. Eternal life in believers is not to be scant, or shallow.
A joyous and abounding river, it is to flow with waters exuberant and vivifying to
ali around. 4. They are ‘flowing waters.” ‘Out of Him shall flow rivers.”” The
Spirit which God has given is not to be restrained. IV. But in WHAT MANNER may
this water of the Spirit in a man be said to flow out of him? 1. One main method
of the manifestation of the Spirit has already been alluded to—by the words of our
mouth. But we would not restrain the symbol of these flowing waters only toa
man’s words. 2. His actions also may be included. The Christian’s life should
be a continual call to turn from the path of death. 3. Influence we would also
name as another most effective mode of making these waters flow to the benefit of
our fellow-men. Influence! Influence voluntary, and involuntary! How wide
its extent, and how incalculable its power! V. We have expounded and illustrated
the text. Let us conclude by some insTRUCTIoNs drawn from it. 1. See the diffu-
sive character of the dispensation of the gospel! A man is not made partaker of
the Spirit of God for His own mere individual salvation, but for the salvation of
others also. 2. But let us be careful to avoid a common error. The water of life
must be put in us for our own salvation before it can flow out of us for others’ good.
It is not like the spider’s web which she spins out of herself. 3. But how en-
couraging the promise, ‘“ He that believeth on Me, out of him shall flow rivers of
living water.” Christ here expressly declares that if we believe on Him we shall be
made partakers of His Spirit. 4. How gracious the invitation! ‘If any man
thirst let him come unto Me, and drink.” If our lips are to feed others, those lips
shall themselves be first fed. 5. Contrast here these living waters of the soul with
that perishing water of Shiloah of the ceremonial before alluded to. Here is the
contrast between religion spiritual and religion ceremonial—between sacraments
(or signs) and the things by them signified. The Jewish populace saw nothing
but the water—heeded for the most part nothing but the ceremony. (M. Brock,
M.A.) The affinity between God and man in regard of man’s wants and
God’s fulness:—1. This saying of our Lord’s produced among some the convic-
tion that He was the Christ (vers 40, 41). We gather from hence that it met some
instinct of the human heart, He struck a note which vibrated in their inmost souls.
What was the secret of this effect. It was no doubt that many of the audience felt
that they were spiritually athirst, that there was a craving in them after light, truth,
love which nothing on earth met. They felt that He was making an offer of which
hey had need to avail themselves. They are convinced of His claims by offering


652 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [ouar. vit.


them exactly what they had felt the want of. 2. In order to the existence of love
between two parties, there must be a secret affinity between them in virtue of
which one supplies what the other needs. Take the case of friendship between the
sexes. The man needs sympathy and confidence, which the woman supplies; the
woman needs support, protection, counsel, which it is the man’s part to furnish.
This principle lies also at the foundation of commercial intercourse. A. produces
what B. wants, and B. what A. wants; and this mutual want draws both together.
The same mutual interdependence is observable in nature. Plants are fed by the
light and air of heaven, and return the perfumes which some of them exhale, It
is so with man and God. I. Man HAS AN URGENT NEED oF Gop. When this makes
itself felt he cries, “‘ My soul is athirst for God,” and then he is arrested by the
offer of the Son of God, “If any man thirst,” &. Of course all things need God
for their continuance, but man has needs which distinguish him from the inferior
creation. 1. His understanding is never satisfied with the truth it contrives to
reach. (1) There is nothing more interesting than discovery. It is as if God had
proposed to us in nature and life certain enigmas, and had challenged human
ingenuity to the solution of them. But observe how, upon a discovery being made,
it loses its interest, and we immediately go in quest of fresh truth. Just as the
pleasure of hunting is not derived from the game which is caught, but from the ex-
citement of the pursuit, so with the quest of truth. Yousee this restlessness in the
pursuit of religious as well as scientific truth. The inbred curiosity of the mind,
which desires above all to know where it is precluded from knowledge, is the
fruitful source of heresies and fantastic speculations. (2) But is there nothing
corresponding to this restless thirst? Is the mind to fret itself for ever and never
reach the goal? Is there no highest truth in which the understanding may at
length acquiesce? Not so. The Scriptures say that God is Light, and that in
Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. When, therefore, man
displays an insatiable desire to know, he should remind himself that God is its only
satisfaction, and this Light is to be enjoyed, not by any painful straining of reason,
but by entire submission of the will to God’s will. 2. Man craves after Infinite
Good. (1) This is attested—(a) By the mischievous excesses of intemperance. The
instinct that prompts man to this is peculiar to him. There is nothing of it among
the lower creatures. The real account of it is that by the constitution of his mind
man thirsts after a good he finds in no created object. The instinct misdirected by
the Fall, goes astray. Having a hungry spirit, he makes a desperate effort to
extract from bodily enjoyments what may appease its cravings, but the body, like a
people, is impoverished and enfeebled by excessive taxation. (b) But there are
more refined ways in which men endeavour to satisfy this craving. They seek pre-
eminence of ability or position or wealth ; the flattering speeches which are a sort
of homage to superiority—how dear are these things to the soul! Not that the soul
rests on them; having tasted them it immediately craves for new enjoyments, a
wider reputation, a higher pre-eminence. (c) The best of earthly good with which
the spirit seeks to satisfy its thirst is human sympathy. It plants for itself a
domestic and social paradise, but the trees, alas! like Jonah’s gourd, are apt tobe
smitten. And, independently of this, no mere natural affection can satisfy the craving
for love. (2) But the Creator can satisfy every craving. Do we long after a joyous
exhilaration of the Spirit which shall tide us over our difficulties? ‘‘ Be not drunk
with wine .. . but be filled with the Spirit.”” Do we thirst after esteem? Human
esteem is but a taper; the real sunlight of the soul is the smile of God’s approba-
tion. Is pre-eminence our aim? He is the Fountain of Honour. Do we long for
sympathy? Heis Love. II. Dozs Gop pEPEND on MAN? Yes, as a field of display
for the Divine perfections. God longs to surround Himself with intelligent and
joyous creatures to lavish on them the resources of His infinite goodness. Here we
may catch a glimpse of the reason why evil was permitted. To be bounteous to
creatures retaining their integrity is a very inadequate effect of God’s goodness.
Mercy could never have poured itself forth, had there not been vessels of mercy to
receive it, And vessels of mercy could never have existed had there been no trans-
gression. We may therefore recognize between God and man a natural reciprocity.
He is the only Being who can satisfy the deep wants of the soul. And from His
intrinsic goodness He longs to satisfy them. (Dean Goulburn.) Christ our
fountain head :—I. CuristT THE CLOVEN ROCK. 1. The smitten rock. Moses smote
and Christ was smitten to save a perishing people. 2. The spring of life flowing
therefrom. 3. Its inexhaustible fulness (chap. iv. 14). The spring in the desert is
now dry. - 4. Its wonderful adaptability. Tropical suns cannot evaporate it, nor


E
:
.
|


=m


ee Ta


cuAP. VIL] ST. JOHN. 653


Polar breezes freeze it. It is adapted to every climate, and wise and foolish, rich
and poor, must drink and cleanse themselves here. II. Tom sINNER AND THE
FounTAIN. 1. The sinner thirsts, Life is a desert, provoking craving for satisfac-
tion. 2. His consciousness of it. Desire for higher, purer experiences will awake
in eyery rational soul. Then do what he will he cannot reason it away. 3. Its
evidences. Man’s endeavour to find rest somewhere; unnatural activity of mind
and body ; oft a desperate effort to drown the voice of God. 4. False waters. (1)
Wilful blindness. (2) So-called innocent pleasures. (3) Sinful indulgence—Marahs,
or Dead Seas. 5. The thirst assuaged. (1) By recognizing the terrible malady of
sin. (2) By confessing guilt. (3) By coming to the fountain. The first draught
allays the burning fever of the soul. III. Tue BELiuvER AND THE FOUNTAIN. 1.
The disciple’s thirst. Every draught creates a new longing. He thirsts for a
sanctified life, for Christian work, for victory over sin, for conformity to Christ.
2. His need for the fountain. Only near the fountain can he live and grow. 3. Its
reflecting power. Here he learns to know himself; what he ought to be and what
heis. 4. Its purifying power. 5. The visits to that fountain the thermometer of
the Christian’s inner life. (H. Dosker.) Come and drink :—I. Tus trmz, The
last and great day of the feast when Israel’s joy, in appearance, was at the fullest,
and when there seemed least need of any other joy. IL. Tue pracr. Jerusalem—
the Temple. What need of anything else than what the Temple afforded : particu-
larly through the teachings of this feast. III. Tue Giver. The Son of God, and
not merely a prophet, who knew what they needed, and what He had to give;
Himself God’s own gift. To Himself He, as ever, turns their eye. ‘‘Come unto
Me.” Feasts, altars, sacrifices, doctrines, ceremonies, were all vain. IV. Tue
ert. Living water; the Holy Spirit; a gift sufficient to fill the soul of the
emptiest, and to quench the thirst of the thirstiest, and then to overflow upon
others. There are two gifts of God which stand alone in their priceless greatness
—the gift of His Son and the gift of His Spirit. V. TH Persons. Not heathen
and irreligious, but religious Jews, engaged in Vivine worship. Before it was to
the Samaritan that He presented the living water. In Rev. xxii. it is to Jew and
Gentile alike. SoalsoinIsa.lv. But here the thirsty one is the Jew. His rites
and feasts cannot quench his thirst, which calls for something more spiritual and
Divine. So to those who frequent the sanctuary—who pray and praise outwardly—
the Lord now speaks. External religiousness may help to pacify conscience, but
it does not confer happiness. Only Christ can do that. VI. Tux ove. It is all
love from first to last. In love Christ presents the full vessel of living water, and
presses to their parched lips. (H. Bonar, D.D.) Christ’s call to thirsty souls :—
1. These are bold words, and they would be as false as bold if He who speaks them
were no more than man. Shall a mere man presume to invite, not a small number
for knowledge and sympathy—that we might understand—but the whole race for
the satisfaction of their most vehement and spiritual ideas. The presumption
would be as blasphemous as absurd. But He who thus speaks has a right to speak,
and is conscious of it. 2. All human desire and need is expressed in the one word
“thirst.” Consider the different kinds of thirst, and see how coming to Christ
will satisfy them. I. The lowest and commonest of all, the thirst for HAPPINESS.
1, A man may come with a desire which is not gracious, but simply natural, since
every creature desires to be happy, and which is universal, since no man is perfectly
satisfied, and drink the cooling waters of the gospel. Those who limit the invita-
tion to the graciously thirsty undo the grace they seek to magnify, and take all
the freeness from the gospel. The words ‘‘any man” shatter such a fancy in
pieces. Let him come with the feeling he has. It may be inward disturbance,
brooding fear, gnawing heart pain, weariness of disappointment, inner longing—
whatever it be he is welcome. 2. If he does not see how Christ can be of any service
let him trust Him as he would a man who has the credit of being trustworthy, so
far as to try His specific. Two men once followed Jesus because they heard another
speak well of Him. They did not know very well what they wanted, so they asked
Him about His home. He gave an answer He is giving to all the thirsty, ‘‘ Come
and see.” They went, and never left Him more. 3. But coming so, a man soon
begins to be conscious of higher desires. Il. Thirst for nicgHTEousNEsS. If the
desire for happiness is to be fruitful it will and must take this form, 1. A moral
creature can never be happy without rectitude. If a man has the feeling “let me
be happy, but let me enjoy the pleasures of sin,” he either does not come or coming
does not drink. The thirst therefore continues, and becomes a pain. 2. But to
come to the righteous one is to see righteousness and to become conscious of un:


i,


654 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR, [cHaP. VIL.
a a
righteousness. 3. Can I beright, and How? How can these stains be cleansed?
Christ alone can answer these questions, and satisfy this great desire. His blood
cleanses. His righteousness avails. It is to be in them as a principle as well as
on them asa garment. III. The thirst for tove—the love that shall love us, and
the love that shall go out to those who love us. When this desire is fully aroused
it will not rest until it finds Jesus Christ. It is but a little way when you can say,
‘‘ He or she loves me,” ‘I am loved of husband, wife, parents, friends.” This will
never satisfy an immortal nature. Take the earthiy love that is good and pure. It
is the gift of God. But that you may have that faculty fully developed take first
the love that passest knowledge. IV. There is a thirst profounder and vaster which
Christ alone can satisfy—the thirst for nurs. The others may be traced back to
this. It is the deep organic desire which has been implanted by its Author for its
perpetuation. Every man has it. The shrinking from annihilation is instinctive.
Out towards the realm of life it stretches imploring hands. But where? Reason
cannot demonstrate its existence ; imagination cannot find it in her loftiest flight.
Philosophy says, ‘‘ You give me no data, and I can give you no conclusion.” Ah,
yes! no data; for the departed never return. And yet we thirst for them; and, if
we are Christians, we are sure we shall see them again. But how? By His word
who is the Life, and drinking of Him we live indeed. ‘‘Anyman.” ‘That is you.
(A. Raleigh, D.D.) The soul’s thirst satisfied in Jesus:—I. Man As A THIRSTY
CREATURE. Every man thirsts. 1. Constitutionally. Not as accidentally excited,
but as made by God to thirst. It is in our nature to thirst. (1) For life. In deep
sorrow we may cry, ‘“*O that Thou wouldst hide me in the grave!” In unrest we
may say, ‘“‘ I would not live alway.” With heaven opened, we may desire to depart
and be with Christ. But Satan spake truly, ‘‘ All that a man hath will he give for
his life.” (2) For pleasure; according to our idea of felicity and our capacity for
bliss. Man is not naturally a lover of misery. (3) For activity. Men are not
naturally lazy. (4) For society. The results of the solitary system in our prisons
show that ‘the desire for association is constitutional. (5) For knowledge. The
subjects upon which we seek information vary; but all men desire to know. (6)
For power, from the moment in which we seize an¢ shake the rattle to the hour in
which we dispose of our property. (7) For the esteem and love of others. (8) For
the possession of objects of beauty. (9) For God. That this thirst is natural is
proved by the fact that religion of some kind is universal. There is not a nation
of Atheists. 2. There are derived thirsts, dependent upon the particular condition
of the individual, and grafted on the natural thirst, Thus a desire for wealth may
arise from a thirst for enjoyment, or power, or honour, or social connections. A
thirst for freedom may arise from desire for activity, and for religious unity by
desire for religious enjoyment. Any natural thirst creates others. 8. The natural,
and many of the artificial, thirsts would have existed had man kept his first estate ;
but the entrance of sin has produced depraved thirsts. Sin itself is a morbid thirst,
and actual sin is the offspring of such thirst (James i. 14,15). Covetousness, envy,
&c., are depraved thirsts. 4. The return of man to God and his salvation by Christ
involve new thirsts. There is the thirst—(1) Of the quickened spirit for particular
religious knowledge. (2) Of the penitent for pardon. (3) Of the new born for
righteousness. (4) Of the child of God for being filled with all the fulness of God.
5. There are a few facts connected with these thirsts that we may not overlook.
(1) Those thirsts which are natural cannot be evil in themselves; and those which,
being artificial, are lawful expansions of the natural are equally good. (2) The
influence of our thirsts is most extensive and important. In some cases our thirst
is a ruling passion ; but in all cases they govern thought, prompt the imagination

affect the judgment, awaken or quiet the emotions, guide the will, lead to action,
and form our characters. (3) Most potent, therefore, are they. A man is raised
or cast down, destroyed or built up by his thirsts. (4) When a man is sick, he
needs not medicine irrespective of its nature, but the specific for his particular
disease. Poisoned food is more dangerous than continued hunger. He is blessed

not whose thirsts are for the moment slaked, but whose thirsts are slaked at Divine
fountains. II. Jesus CHrist as THE FOUNTAIN oF suPPLY. Take the invitation in
connection—l, With our lawful natural thirsts. We thirst—(1) For continued
life, and Jesus says, ‘Come unto Me and drink” (1 Cor. xv. 21-22; John xi. 25

26). (2) For activity, and Jesus says, “‘ Come,” &c, (John xiv.12). (3) For enjoy-
ment, and Christ gives joy in every gift, and promises it in every promise, and
makes every duty its instrument (Matt. v. 1-8; John xvi. 24; 1 Pet. i. 8). (4) For
power, and Jesus makes His disciples the salt of the earth, the light of the world,


CBA. VII.] ST. JOHN. 655


and kings and priests unto God. (5) For society, and Christ satisfies it (Heb. xii.
22, 23). (6) For the love of others, and Christ directs streams of kindness to every
one who comes to Him by means of His new commandment (John xiii. 34, 35).
(7) For knowledge, and Jesus is Himself the Truth, in the knowledge of whom
standeth our eternal life (John xvii. 3). (8) For God, and He manifests God’s
name to us, and shows us the Father. 2%. If we here speak of depraved tastes, it
must be to say that they who thirst morbidly cannot come to Christ and drink ; but
they may come to Him and be cured of their evil craving. As the thirst of a fever
may be removed by a physician, so sinful thirsts may be removed by our Saviour.
8. The thirsts of the returning prodigal and repentant sinner are specially recognized
in these words (Psa. li. 1, 8, 9; Luke xviii. 18; Mark ii. 5, v. 84; John viii. 11).
4, All the thirsts of the God-born spirit are here recognized. Conclusion: From
these words—1. We might preach humanity, and show what isin man. We might
exhibit him as a dependent, receptive, desiring being; that he is not like his Maker,
self-sufficient. 2. But we will rather preach Christ. Here we see—(1) The know-
ledge which He had of human nature. He knew the thirsts of the multitude in
whose midst He spake. (2) His recognition of all that pertains to man. His words
and works meet most entirely all human needs. They are not like flowers given to
the starving,-or gauze raiment to the naked in winter; but like bread to the hungry
and clothes to the beggar. (3) But what must be the resources of one who is
justified in speaking thus? Can any individual be a fountain of supply to every
man? There is One continually named by the sacred writers who is a Sun, Fire,
Door, Rock, Bread, Fountain. To Him, who can be represented by these figures,
any man may surely come and drink. No creature imparts all, or even many, kinds
of good; but God is the spring of all that is beneficial, and Christ is the manifested
God. ‘To how few of our thirsty fellows can any of 3s say, ‘‘Come to me and
drink”? But Jesus says that, and standing in the centre of all time, as in the
midst of all men. Did we need proof of the Deity of Jesus Christ we have it here.
(4) But what shall we say of His love? “ Any man.” The man may be Atheist
or idolater, broken-hearted because all his cisterns are broken, be conscious that
he deserves only to die with thirst; yet Jesus means him. (5) But the thirsty
have to come. The sole condition is coming, and the only limit to the ministrations
of the Saviour is our receptivity. (S. Martin.) Man’s thirst quenched by Christ:
—1, Anartist once painted a famous picture for an altar-piece, and called it the
Fountain of Life. It represents the Sacrificed Redeemer stretched in His mother’s
arms. From the rock beneath their feet flow the abundant waters of salvation,
which are received into a great cistern. Saints, martyrs, apostles, evangelists, are
drinking of the water, or filling their vases and handing them to each other. From
the cistern flows a stream into a lower place, where a family of poor, humble people
are drinking with grateful looks, Then the stream flows away among meadows,
where the little children can reach it, and they are taking up the precious water in
their tiny hands, and drinking it with smiling lips. We can all see the meaning of
that picture, which tells us that the salvation of Jesus is for all who will accept it,
high and low, young and old, rich and poor. (H.J. W. Buxton.) Christ’s satis-
factions full and real :—Not like a shallow brook, that runs in winter and is dry in
summer; but a fountain that the frost never binds, and that the hot, thirsty day
never drinks dry, that is ever full and ever flowing. In the regions of the burning
desert they tell me that skeletons lie thick, not only in the paths to the fountains,
but lie ghastly white and withering, with the naked skulls looking over the banks
into the very waters. With the tongue cleaving to the roof of the mouth, they press
on, guided by the green pasture that lifts its head above the sand, and shows where
the fountain is. They drank the water in anticipation, but will they reach it?
Alas! with what horror in their eyes they gaze on the empty bed, and fight with
man and beast for some muddy drops that but exasperate their thirst! The desert
whirls around them; they stagger, they fall; hope expires, and they expire them-
selves; and by and by the sky drops, lightnings flash, thunders peal, and rain
pours down, and the water rises in that fountain, and plays in mockery with the
tresses of dead beauty, and kisses the faces of the dead. Such things happen. But
gee you yon cross standing up yonder? It marks a fountain where never man went
in vain, No dead souls lie around that cross. Calvary was once a Golgotha—a
“place of skulls.” It is so no longer. Where men once went to die, men now go
to live; and a man never went for mercy there, and for grace to help, and found
none. There is now in America a great revival; there was in my own country a
great revival. God send us all such revivals! In every church and every country


656 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP. VII.
weet ee Ba SS greg ren nie ie See er
there are times and seasons of revival, when the peace of believers is like a river in
glorious flood, rolling beneath bank and ridge ; like the sea in a storm, when it
sends its waters beyond its common bounds, and overflows the boats that lie highest
and driest on the beach. But at all times and in all seasons, I say, that if you will
search you will find fulness of mercy to pardon and “grace to help in time of need.”
The supply, in fact, is inexhaustible. I know mountains have been exhausted of
their gold, mines of their diamonds, and the depths of ocean of their pearly gems;
but the riches of mercy and of grace in Christ are inexhaustible. They are no less
to you than to those who went before you, and there will be no less for those who
come after you; and when unborn millions have come, and the world’s last man,
with a dying sun above him and a reeling earth beneath him, comes up to that
blessed Fountain, oh! he will find it as full as it is this day, in its fulness in-
viting you to wash and be clean, to drink and live, to believe and be forgiven.
(T. Guthrie, D.D.) He that believeth on Me.—I. THE work or THE SPIRIT Is
INTIMATELY CONNECTED WITH THE WORK oF CuRist. Itis a great pity when persons
preach the Holy Spirit’s work so as to obscure the work of Christ—e.g., by holding
up before the sinner’s eye the inward experience of believers, instead of lifting up
the crucified Saviour, to whom we must look and live. It is an equal pity when
Christ is so preached that the Holy Spirit is ignored, as if faith in Christ prevented
the necessity of the new birth. The two works are so joined together that—1. The
Holy Spirit was not given until Jesus was glorified. The original has it simply
“was not.” Of course this does not mean that He was non-existent, for He is
eternal; but that He was not in fellowship with man to the full extent He now
is, and could not be till the redeeming work of Christ was finished. You read
of the prophets, &c., that the Spirit of the Lord came upon them and moved
them, but He did not dwell inthem. His operations were a coming and a going.
They knew not the ‘communion of the Holy Ghost.” But since Christ’s glorifica-
tion, the Spirit is in His people, and abides with them for ever. 2. The Holy
Spirit was given after the ascension of Christ unto His glory, to make that ascension
more renowned. ‘* When He ascended on high ... He gave gifts to men.” Those
gifts were men in whom the Spirit dwelt, and who preached the gospel to the nations.
The shedding of the Spirit on the Day of Pentecost was the glorification of the
risen Christ upon earth. What grander celebration could there have been? 3.
The Holy Spirit was given as an evidence of our Divine Master’s acceptance,
the gift being a consequence of Christ’s finished work. 4. It is the Spirit’s
work to bear witness of Jesus. ‘‘He shall take of Mine.” Hence He comes
to convince of sin, to reveal the sacrifice for sin; of righteousness, that we
may see the righteousness of Christ; of judgment, that we may be prepared to
meet the Judge. He has not come, and never will, to teach a new Gospel. 5. It
is by the gospel of Jesus that the Spirit works in the hearts of men. “ Faith cometh
by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.” 6. The Spirit’s work is to conform
us to the likeness of Christ, not to this or that human ideal. 7. Evermore it is for
the glory of Jesus that the Spirit works—not for the glory of a church, or a sect, or
aman. ‘‘He shall glorify Me.’’ II. Tae Hoty Sprerr’s oPERATIONS ARE OF MARVELLOUS
PowER. They are—l. Inward. The rivers are to flow out of the midst of a man

from his heart and soul, not from his mouth; the promised power is not oratory,
talent, show. 2. Life-giving “living water.” When the man speaks, prays, acts,
there shall be going out of him emanations which are full of the life of grace and
godliness. 3. Plentiful. Not a river, but ‘‘rivers.” 4. Spontaneous. ‘Shall
flow.” No pumping is required—the man does not want exciting and stirring up.

Does the sun make a noise that men may be aware of his rising? No, he shines
and says nothing about it. So does the Christian. 5. Perpetual: not like inter-
mittent springs. ILI. THEesz OPERATIONS ARE EASILY OBTAINED, 1. By believing in
Jesus, It is faith which gives ds the first drink and causes us to live, and the more
abundant blessing of being ourselves made fountains come in thesame way. With
Christ is the residue of the Spirit. 2. By prayer. ‘If ye being evil,” &. (C. H.

Spurgeon.) Christians are not ponds, but spring-heads :—I have heard of William
Gadsby, that, travelling on a coach one day, he asked two heretical divines to tell him
how a sinner is justified in the sight of God. ‘“No,” said they, ‘* you don’t catch us
in that fashion, Whatever answer we gave you would be repeated all over Man-
chester within a week.” ‘‘ Oh,” he says, ‘‘ then I will tell you. A sinner is justified
in the sight of God by faith in the blood and righteousness of Christ. Go and tell
that all over Manchester and all over England as quickly as you like; for I believe
nothing that I am ashamed of.” (Ibid.) Believers are springs of living water :-—


‘


OHar. v11.] AE iss ST. JOHN. 657


One summer day, a few years ago, strolling for rest and pleasure near the mouth of


the Columbia river, where there is a large rise and fall of the tide, I came, at low


tide, upon a splendid spring of pure, fresh water, clear as crystal, gushing up from
between the rocks that two hours before had formed a part of the river’s bed. Twice
a day the soiled tides rise above that beautiful fountain and cover it over ; but there
it is, deep down under the salt tide, and when the tide has spent its force and gone
back again to the ocean’s depths, it sends out its pure waters fresh and clear as
before. So if the human heart be really a fountain of love to Christ it will send out
its streams of fresh, sweet waters, even into the midst of the salt tides of politics or
business. And the man who carries such a fountain into the day’s worry and
struggle, will come again at night, when the world’s tide has spent its force, with
clean hands, sweet spirit and conscience void of offence towards God and man.
(Sunday School Chronicle.) Believers have @ perennial spring within them :—The
Christian has a fons perennis within him. He is satisfied from himself. The men
of the world borrow all their joy from without. Joy wholly from without is false,
precarious, and short. Like gathered flowers, though fair and sweet for a season,
it must soon wither and become offensive. Joy from within is like smelling the rose
on the tree, it is more sweet and fair, and I must add that itis immortal. (H. G.
Salter.) As the Scripture hath said.—The reference is not to any one isolated
passage, but to the general tenor of such passages as Isa. lviii. 11; Zech. xiv. 18,
taken in connection with the original image (Exod. xvii.6; Numb. xx. 11). (Bp.
Westcott.) Out of His belly shall flow rivers of living water.— Water an emblem
of the Spirit :—Why has He called the grace of the Spirit by the name of water ?
Because by water all things subsist; because of water are herbs and animals
created; because the water of the showers comes down from heaven; because it
comes down one in form, yet manifold in its working. For one fountain watered
the whole of the garden (Gen. ii. 10), and one and the same rain comes down upon
all the world; yet it becomes white in the lily, and red in the rose, and purple in
the violets and pansies, and different and varied in each several kind; 80 it is one
in the palm tree, and another in the vine, and all in all things; being the while
one in nature, not diverse from itself; for the rain does not change, when it comes
down, first as one thing, then as another, but adapting itself to the nature of each
thing, which receives it, is becomes to each what is suitable. Thus also the Holy
Ghost being One, and of one Nature, and undivided, divides to each His grace
“according as He will,” and in the name of Christ works many excellencies. For
He employs the tongue of one man for wisdom; the soul of another He enlightens
by prophecy; to another He gives power to drive away devils; to another He gives
power to interpret the Divine Scriptures. He invigorates one man’s self-command ;
He teaches another the way to give alms; another He teaches to fast and exercise him-
self; another He teaches to despise the things of the body; another He trains for
martyrdom: diverse in different men, yet not diverse from Himself (chap. iv. 14;
y. 4; 1 Cor. xii, 11). (S. Cyril.) The abundance and vitality of the Spirit’s
operations :—Rivers, not river, to show the copious and overflowing power of grace ;
and living water, i.e., always moving; for when the grace of the Spirit has entered
into and settled in the mind, it flows freer than any fountain, and neither fails, nor
empties, nor stagnates. The wisdom of Stephen, the tongue of Peter, the strength
of Paul, are evidences of this. Nothing hindered them ; but like impetuous torrents
they went on, carrying everything along with them. (Chrysostom.) Diversity
of the Holy Spirit’s operations :—There is one Spirit, but divers operations; one
fountain, many rivers. Moses mighty in miracle, Isaiah glorious in prophecy,
apostles convincing in eloquence, Paul powerful in reasoning. A Howard for
benevolence, a Luther for reformation, a Calvin for theology, a Huss and a Jerome for
martyrs. Noplace having one believer is without a living well. (W.H.Van Doren, D.D.)
The Holy Ghost was not yet given.—The addition of the word “‘ given’’ expresses
the true form of the original, in which “ Spirit” is without the article. When the
term occurs in this form, it marks an operation or manifestation, no gift of the
Spirit, and not the personal Spirit (comp. chap. i. 33; xx. 22; Matt. i. 18, 20;
iii, 11; xii. 28; Luke i. 15, 35, 41, 67; ii. 25; iv. 1). (Bp. Westcott.) ‘Because
that Jesus was not yet glorified” (comp. chap. xvi. 7; 3x. 17). The necessary
limitations of Christ’s historical presence with the disciples excluded that realization
of His abiding presence which followed on the Resurrection. It 1 impossible not to
contrast the righteousness of this utterance with the clear teaching of St. John him-
self on the *‘unction” of believers (1 John ii. 20, &c.), which forms a commentary
gained by later experience upon the words of our Lord, (Ibid.) The fulness of


a

658 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. ({citaP. VII.
SN ge ETT OER SE
the Spirit the gift of the glorified Christ :—The Holy Ghost was not yet with men in
such fulness of influence on their minds, hearts, and understandings, as the Spirit
of adoption and revelation, as He was after our Lord ascended up into heaven, It
is as clear as daylight, from our Lord’s language about the Spirit, in John xiv. 16,
17, 26; xv. 26; xvi. 7-15, that believers were meant to receive a far more full and
complete outpouring of the Holy Spirit after His ascension than they had received
before. It isa simple matter of fact, indeed, that after the Ascension the apostles
were quite different men from what they had been before. They both saw, and
spoke, and acted like men grown up, while before the Ascension they had been like
children. It was this increased light and knowledge and decision that made them
such a blessing to the world, far more than any miraculous gifts. The possession
of the gifts of the Spirit, it is evident, in the early Church was quite compatible
with an ungodly heart. A man might speak with tongues and yet be like salt that
had lost its savour. The possession of the fulness of the graces of the Spirit, on
the contrary, was that which made any man a blessing to the world. (Bp. Ryle.)
The glorification of Christ :—This is the first distinct reference to the glorification
of our Lord. ‘he conception is characteristic of this Gospel (comp. chap. i. 14;
ii. 11), and includes in one complex whole the Passion with the triumph which
followed. Thus St. John regards Christ’s death as a victory (chap. xii. 32), follow-
ing the words of our Lord, who identified the hour of His death with the hour of
His glorification (chap. xii. 23, &c.). In accordance with the same thought, Christ
spoke of Himself as already ‘‘ glorified’? when Judas had gone forth to his work
(chap. xiii. 31); and so He had already received His glory by the faith of His
disciples before He suffered (chap. xvii. 10). In another aspect His glory followed
after His withdrawal from earth (chap. xvli. 5; xvi. 14). By the use of this phrase
the Evangelist brings out clearly the absolute Divine unity of the work of Christ in
His whole “‘ manifestation” (1 John iii. 5, 8; i. 2), which he does not (as St. Paul)
regard as distinct stages of humiliation and exaltation. (Bp. Westcott.) The
Holy Spirit must be received by us :—The sea enters into the rivers before the rivers
can enter into the sea. In like manner God comes to us before we can go to Him,
and heaven enters into our souls before we can enter into heaven. (Drelincourt.)
The Holy Spirit sustains the inward life of believers :—Grace in the saints is not
like light in the sun, that springs from itself, but like the light of a lamp that is
constantly fed with supplies of oil, otherwise the weak light will faint and die. (H.
G. Salter.) Many of the people, therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of
a truth this is the Prophet.—Christ the Prophet :—I. His Fitness as A PROPHET.
1. Foretold (Deut. xviii. 15; John i. 45). 2. Typified (Deut. xviii. 18 ; Acts iii, 22).
3. Anointed (Isa. lxi. 1; Luke iv. 17-21). 4. Competent (Matt. xi. 17; John iii. 2,
34). 5. Faithful (John viii. 26, 28; xii, 49, 50). 6. Wise (Luke ii, 40, 47, 52; Col.
ii. 3). 7. Mighty (Matt, xiii. 64; Luke iv, 32). 8. Meek (Matt. xi. ; 29 xii. 17-20).
9. Sympathetic (Heb. ii. 18; iv. 15). Il. Hrs rREarment as A Propuet. 1. Rejected
by His own people (John i, 11). 2, Rejected at His own home (Luke iv. 28-30).
3. Rejected before Pilate (John xviii. 39, 40). 4. Followed by multitudes (Matt. v.
1; John vi. 2). 5. Believed by many (John iv. 41, 42; xvii. 8). 6. Trusted by
some (Acts vil. 59; 2 Tim. i, 12). 7, Commended by some (John i. 26, 27, 45).
8. All should hear (Deut. xviii, 15,18; Heb. ii. 2,3). 9. All should trust Him
(Psa. xxxvii. 5; 1 Pet. v. 7). III. His nxessons as a4 Propuet, 1. On sinfulness
John iii. 18,19; xv. 22). 2. On salvation (John iii. 16; v. 24). 8. On judgment
Matt. xxv. 31, 32), 4, On reward (John vi. 47; Matt, xxv. 34). 5. On penalty
Matt. xxv, 41, 46). 6. On heaven (John xiv. 2,3; Matt. xxii. 30). 7. On victory
(Luke xii. 32; Matt. x. 22). This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased ;
hear ye Him (Matt. xvii. 5). (Sunday School Times.) Christ the cause of
division :—Kven when Jesus preached so sweetly His meek and loving doctrine
there was a division among the people (ver. 43). Even about Himself there was a
schism. We may not, therefore, hope to please everybody, however true our
teaching or peaceful our spirit. I, THERE WAs A DIVISION AMONG THE NEW DISCIPLEs,
We may view the parties formed in His day as symbolical of those in our own.
1. Some admitted none of His claims, 2. Others admitted a portion, but denied
the rest. 3, Certain admitted His claims, but neglected to follow out the legitimate
consequences of them. 4, A few became sincere hearers, going as far with Him as
they had yet learned of Him. Let us view persons who have thoughts about Jesus
with considerable hope. Though they blunder now, they may yet come right. Let
us not frighten away the birds with imprudent haste. Let us pray for those who
deny His claims, and resist His kingdom. Let us aid those who come a little way


LR ee CU


Otrap. vit.] eal ST. JOHN. | 659


towards the truth, and are willing to go all the way if they can but findit. Let us
arouse those who neglect holy subjects altogether. II. TuHrrz was A DIVISION OF
BELIEVERS FROM NON-BELIEVERS. ‘This is a great and wide difference, and the more
clearly the division is seen the better; for God views it as very deep and all-im-
portant. There is a great division at this present hour—1, In opinion; especially
as to the Lord Jesus. 2. In trust; many rely on self; only the godly on Jesus.
3. In love. Differing pleasures and aims prove that hearts go after different objects.
4. In obedience, character, and language. 5. In development, growth, tendency.
6. In destiny. The directions of the lines of life point at different places as the
end of the journey. This cleavage divides the dearest friends and relatives. This
is the most real and deep difference in the world. III. Yer wHeEn FAITH comEs,
UNITY IS PRODUCED. There is unity among the people because of Him, 1. Nation-
alities are blended. Calvary heals Babel. (1) Jews and Gentiles are one in Christ.
(2) The near and the far-off as to spiritual things are brought nigh in Him, who is
the one and only centre of grace and truth. (3) Believers of all nationalities become
one Church. 2. Personal peculiarities cease to divide. (1) Workers for Christ are
sure to be blended in one body by their common difficulties. (2) Position, rank,
and wealth give way before the uniting influence of grace. 3. Mental specialities
feel the touch of unity. Saints—(1) of varying creeds have an essential union in
Christ ; (2) of all the changing ages are alike in Him; (8) of all styles of education
are one in Him ; (4) in heaven will be many as the waves, but one as the sea.
Ambitions, which else would disintegrate, are overcome, and laid at Jesus’ feet.
Let us divide, if there be a division. Let us closely unite, if there be real union in
Christ. (C. H. Spurgeon.) Division of feeling and opinion about Christ :—
Here we see our words literally fulfilled. He did not bring “ peace, but division ”’
(Luke xii. 51), It will always be so as long as the world stands. So long as
human nature is corrupt Christ will bea cause of division and difference among men.
To some He isa savour of life, and to others of death. Grace and nature never
will agree any more than oil and water, acid and alkali. A state of entire quiet, and
the absence of any religious division, is often no good sign of the condition of a
Church ora parish. It may even be asymptom of spiritual disease and death. The
question may possibly be needful in such cases, “Is Christ there?” (Bp. Ryle.)
Various opinions :—We often speak of the great changes and revolutions which
have occurred in the world. But through the long series there may be traced much
that is permanent, so that probably uniformity is as truly the characteristic of
human history as variety. It may, e.g., be always ascertained that the same
principles have pervaded God’s moral government. It may also be perceived that
the elements of human character have throughout been the same. Our text,
relating as it does opinions of the Jews regarding our Lord, will give us opportu-
nities of observing this sameness in particular cases. We may be compelled to say
that men are what they were eighteen hundred years back, on discovering that
modern indifference and unbelief borrows from ancient its form and apology.
I. The first parties introduced are THOSE DISPOSED TO RECOGNIZE CHRIST AS A
TEACHER SENT FRoM Gop, 1. The cause of this conviction was not any action of
Christ’s, but a “saying” of His. Then surely the saying must have been one of
extraordinary power, some assertion of Divinity, or some verification in Himself of
ancient prophecy too complete and striking to be resisted. No; the wonder-working
saying was that of ver. 37, which the Evangelist thought so obscure as to require an
explanation. Yet simple as it seems to us and dark as it seemed to St. John, it
succeeded at once in wringing the confession that He was a Divinely-sent Teacher,
2. The saying is one of those gracious invitations into which are gathered the
whole gospel. It demands a sense of want, a feeling of thirst, but proffers an
abundant supply, and by adding a reference to Scripture, which could only be
interpreted of some measure of supernatural influence, our Lord intimated that His
promise was a spiritual gift, satisfying desires after God and immortality. Here is
the moral thirst which is not to be slaked at the springs of human science and
theology. And ass there must have been many in the crowd dissatisfied with the
traditions of the elders, and feeling a need of higher teaching, the promise would
come home as meeting their wants, and the suitableness of the offer would pass as
an argument for Christ’s Divine mission. 3. There is no difference here between
past days and our own, for the argument is but that based on the self-evidencing
power of the Bible. A religion may commend itself either by prodigies wrought in
its support, or by the nicety with which it fits in to the mental and moral constitu-
tion, to the wants and cravings of a soul which sought in vain everywhere else for


660 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. fomar. vie
—— ee eeeeSeSeSESFSeSFSS


supply. And this latter is the standing witness for the Bible. The sinner, conscious

of exposure to the wrath of God, and of inability to ward off destruction, will find

in Christ the Saviour he needs, and in the aid of the Spirit the help he wants, so

that there will seem to him no room for doubt as to the truth of the gospel.
I, Mix again with the crowd and hearken to SoME OTHER OPINIONS. 1. Those who

are inclined to conclude that Jesus is the long promised Christ, find themselves met

with objections, formidable because professedly grounded on Scripture (ver. 42).

There is no attempt to depreciate Christ’s teaching, but there was a fatal argument

deduced from prophecy which has expressly fixed the birthplace and lineage of

Christ. But this is one of the most surprising instances of ignorance or inattention,

if we may go no further. It is hardly possible to imagine a fact more readily ascer-

tainable than that our Lord was born at Bethlehem, and was of the lineage of

David; for the massacre of the innocents had made His birth so conspicuous, and

now there was no one left but our Lord who could prove Himself to have been born

at Bethlehem on the expiration of Daniel’s week of years. Therefore either He

was the Messiah, or prophecy had failed. Yet so great was the popular indifference

or prejudice, that a statement seems to have gone uncontradicted that the pretended

Messiah was a Galilean. He passed as “Jesus of Nazareth,” and this was proof

that He was not born in Bethlehem; and men were 50 glad of some specious excuse

for rejecting Him, that they made this shallow falsehood a pretext for rejecting

Him. It looked very fine to have Scripture on their side; the devil used

the Bible in tempting Christ, and they could now tse it in justifying their unbelief.

The ‘‘ Sword of the Spirit,” like every other,|may be used for suicide as welljas for

war. 2. The like of this is of frequent occurrence amongst ourselves. What is

that scepticism which is often met with among the boastful and young? Is it the

result of careful investigation? No. The fashionable young man, the orator at

some juvenile literary club, gets hold of some objection against Christianity which

has a specious sound and formidable look—all the better if it come out of the Bible,

in the shape of an alleged contradiction and this is enough; he has his ‘‘ Shall

Christ come out of Galilee?” and with so decisive an argument, why should he

trouble to search further? This is our quarrel with him. He wishes to continue

deceived. The sceptic, like the Jew, has only to look around him and he would find

that Jesus did not come out of Galilee, but out of Bethlehem. God suffered infants

to be slain that Jewish unbelief might be inexcusable, and He has raised up giants

in His Church whose writings render modern unbelief the same. (H. Melvill, B.D.)

The wonderful nature of Christ’s teaching :—His mode of speaking is like that

of a prince, who, having been educated in a splendid court, could speak with

ease of many magnificent things, at the sudden view of which a peasant would

be swallowed up in astonishment, and would find himself greatly embar-

rassed in an attempt to explain them to his equals at home. (P. Doddridge, D.D.)

Then came the officers.—It is not clear what interval of time elapsed between ver.

32, where we read that the officers were sent by the priests to take our Lord, and

the present verse, where we are told of their coming back to their Master. At first

sight, of course, it all happened in one day. Yet, if we observe that between the
sending them to take our Lord and the present verse there comes in the remark-

cble verse, ‘In the last day, that great day of the feast,” it seems impossible to

avoid the conclusion that an interval of two or three days must have elapsed. It

seems highly probable that the .officers had a general commission and warrant to

take our Lord prisoner, whenever they saw a fitting opportunity, about the fourth

day of the feast. They found, however, no opportunity, on account of the temper

and spirit of the crowd, and dared not make the attempt. And at last, at the end

of the feast, when the multitude was even more aroused than at first by our Lord’s

open testimony, they were obliged to return to those who sent them, and confess

their inability to carry out their orders. (Bp. Ryle.) The return of the bailiffs :—

I. Tue mMasEsry or JESUS CONFESSED (ver. 47). One almost wishes that the officers

had been more specific. Perhaps it was the same qualities that had affected Christ’s
listeners from the first. 1. Openness (ver. 26). No greatness, criticism, danger,
daunted Him, Before the hierarchs (chap. xviii. 20), the hostile mob (xviii. 5), and

Pilate (xviii. 33), He was ever the same resolute and outspoken preacher of the

truth. 2. Authority. There was not a solitary realm in which He did not reign
supreme—the kingdom of nature (Matt. viii. 26; xiv. 82), the world of humanity
(Matt. viii. 8), the empire of devils (Mark i. 27; Luke iv. 36), the region of the dead

(Matt. ix. 25; Luke vii. 15; John xi, 44), the innermost domain of the conscience

(chap. vili.9). 3. Graciousness (Luke iy. 22). IL. Tum rrrenps or Jesus SILENCED,


CHAP. VII.] ST. JOHN. 661


1. The bailiffs rebuked (vers. 47-49). They were reminded that they were only
menials, who had no right to think, &c.; hearing which, no doubt, crestfallen, they
slunk away; let us hope rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer for Him
(Acts v. 41) and following up the favourable impression. 2. Nicodemus put down
(vers. 50-52). The Sanhedrists could not frown at him as ignorant of the law (ver.
51), but they could sneer at his sympathy with the Galilean Preacher, and stopped
his mouth by delicately hinting that he was growing old and did not know his Bible
as accurately as he should (ver. 52). Exactly so have Christ’s champions in all
ages been treated. III. Tau enemies oF CHRIST HARDENED, The hierarchs, deter-
mined on Christ’s removal, are henceforth impervious to everything advanced in
His favour. The light that was in them became darkness. Lessons: 1. The power
of Christ’s words over honest and sincere hearts, 2. The doctrine of Christ an
argument for His divinity. 3. The superior religious instincts of the masses as
distinguished from the classes. 4. The certainty that Christ and His cause will
never lack defenders. 5. The downward course of those who wilfully oppose Christ.
(TL. Whitelaw, D.D.) Opposition to the truth :—I. GmrNERALLY SERVES TO ELICIT
THE MOST IMPORTANT TESTIMONY IN ITS BEHALF. The officers could have no possible
interest in Christ, but were, if anything, prejudiced against Him. Hence their
testimony was disinterested. It was—1l. To the justice of His claims as a Divine
messenger. Unless aided by Divine influence, there was the difficulty the Jews
themselves started (ver. 15). 2. Tothe earnest persuasiveness of His manner. He
spoke the truth, but in love. He concealed nothing to soften prejudice, but clothed
warnings, &c., so as to win conviction (ver. 46). 3. To the force of His reasoning
on conscience. What but this could have induced the officers to risk disapproval ?
II. GENERALLY IGNORES MAN’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR His BELIEF (ver. 48). We are
told that we are not competent to judge for ourselves, and therefore should believe
what our superiors bid. Some submit from indolence; others for the sake of a
good appearance, “ willing to be damned for fashion’s sake, and to go to hell out of
compliment to the scribes and Pharisees”; others from policy. How is it that so
many of the great ones are arrayed against the truth? Because—l. It is indepen-
dent of their patronage. 2. It is indifferent to their prejudices. 3. It promises no
worldly rewards. Hold to your personal responsibility. III. Is espucranuy carE- -
FUL TO CONSERVE ADVENTITIOUS DISTINCTION (vers. 48, 49). Truth is levelling in its
influence. It debases the great and exalts the humble. It destroys caste. Error,
on the other hand, preserves it, for it is essential to its continuance. IV.
FREQUENTLY CALLS OUT THE SYMPATHIES OF ITS SECRET DISCIPLES (ver. 50). If we
resolve never to do less for Christ than Nicodemus did, we shall be of service.
Whatever we are not able to do, we can prevent a vote of censure on Christ
unanimously. V. Is GENERALLY MARKED BY RIDICULE INSTEAD OF ARGUMENT (ver.
52). This method is often successful, or it would not be employed. Truth revolts
from levity. VI. Is GENERALLY CONDUCTED IN VIOLATION OF EVEN ITS SELF-CONSTITUTED
BTANDARDS. ‘These men, who professed to go by the law and sneered at the people
as ignorant of it, were themselves convicted of violating it (Deut. xix. 15-18), VII.
WILL FINALLY BE SILENCED AND OvERCoME. The assembly, unable to answer Nico-
demus, bro..e up with every mark of haste and confusion. (J. W. L. M.) The
officers answered, Never man spake like this man.—The circumstance :—Our
Lord’s ministry was now nearly completed; the effects of His example and
preaching were so manifesting themselves that the Sanhedrim had become des-
perate. ‘he prey was about to slip from their grasp, and they must either lose
their position or silence the Preacher. They accordingly sent their officers to
apprehend Him. They were accustomed to obey such orders, and were selected
because naturally possessed of more firmness than sensibility, and because the
more insensible by having practised the duties of their office. Like other Jews,
they had heard much preaching by their rabbis, and therefore expected to find a
ranter. The idea they had must have been that the apprehension of a fanatical
preacher, disturbing the public peace, would be an easy task, and rather a pastime.
So they may have gone jocularly on from street to street until they had come to the
immense multitudes gathered in and around the Temple celebrating the feast of
tabernacles. But the chief interest of that multitude seems to radiate from the
vast circumference to Christ as its centre. They press through the throng, and
approach the hallowed spot. But what checks their rude steps? Why do they not
advance to seize their prey, please their masters, and secure an extra fee? They
are confounded, not with fear, but with amazement, reverence, and an unwonted
human sympathy. There He stands, incarnate Deity! No fierceness of a mob-


—


se


662 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. (crap. vil.
On et a ee eee
leader is seen in Him, no cringing to formidable enemies, no caressing the
populace. He stands alone and lofty in the meek dignity of a descended God.
And they might first have said, ‘‘ Never man looked like that man.” But they felt
the attractive force of the very power that disarmed them. There was a presence
that annihilated the authority of Sanhedrims; there was a manifest virtue that
acquitted Him at the bar of their consciences. And before it they laid down their
vile commission, and joined the devout and admiring hearers. This added to their
wonder and reverence. Surely Moses never spake more according to the mind of
God. Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, never spake with more authority than this
man. He is a prophet of the living God; and surely the elders of Israel never
intended to arrest such a man; and they returned, not with a prisoner, but with a
nolle-prosequi, a report that there was no ground of arrest. ‘‘ Never man spake like
this man.” (H. N. Kirk, D.D.) Similar but contrasted incidents :—Plutarch
mentions it as a memorable proof of the extraordinary eloquence of Mark Antony,
that, when soldiers were gent to kill him, he pleaded for his life in such affecting
language that he totally disarmed them of their resolution, and melted them into
tears. But these officers are vanquished, not by the forcible arguments of a man
pleading for his life, but by hearing one of the ordinary discourses of our Lord, not
particularly directed to them, but to the people at large. (G. Burder.) In the
troublous times that closed the great Republic, amongst the men that arose and
made themselves masters of the world there was hardly a greater than Caius
Marius. The conqueror of Jugurtha, the conqueror of the Cimbri, he was looked
upon as the shield and sword of Rome. Six times he sought and six times he
obtained the consulship, and bid fair to die as he had lived, the ruthless lord of the
eternal city. But God decreed otherwise. A rival appeared upon the scene, and
after chequered fortunes Marius had to fly. In the romance of his wanderings we
read that he was once put on shore unattended and unarmed. He was seized and
flung into prison, and an edict came from Rome that he must die. A Gaulish slave
was sent to the dungeon to do the deed. Marius, sitting in a gloomy corner of the
prison, with his bloodshot eyes glared on the man, and with his terrible voice
demanded, ‘* Canst thou kill Caius Marius?” And the slave, fearing the prisoner
more than the gaoler or the judge, flung down his sword and fled away, crying, “I
cannot kill Caius Marius.” Put side by side with this story of a sanguinary life the
incident of the life the most submissive and self-denying the world has ever seen,
and the very likeness of the latter will make the unlikeness of the spirit greater. In
both murder was meant. In both the presence and words of the intended victim
postponed the murder. In both the assailants turned craven. But the shield that
turned the edge of their sword in the one case was terrific rage, in the other placid
mercy. (J. B. Figgis, M.A.) “* Never man spake like this man” :—1. Jesus was
- a popular preacher. The synagogue was full when He spoke, and men went out in
crowds into the fields to listen to Him. 2. He was a powerful preacher. Extra-
orainary changes of character were wrought by His sermons. The tax-gatherer
left his money-changing and the fisherman his boats to follow Him. All classes
were affected by it, from the most cultured and religious to the most abandoned. 8.
Whatever theory men may have respecting His person, there can be no doubt that
the world has been revolutionized by His teaching. What, then, were the elements
of His power? (1) He spoke to the common in their vernacular, using illustrations
from common life, but He never descended from the high place of a noble instructor.
The demagogue flatters the prejudices and appeals to the passions of his audience

but Jesus never did this, (2) He used no arts of elocution. Men did not flock to
Him as they flock to an actor. He told them stories, but they were simple stories

and not dramatically, for He taught sitting. (3) Nor did He use the arts of rhetoric,
He employed no-ornament for the sake of ornament. You find nothing that could
be called out and recited. (4) There are no literary classics in His sermons. His
was not the power which comes from scholastic learning or position. Men have
shrugged their shoulders at lay preaching, but Christ was a lay preacher who had
never graduated and become a Rabbi. His style was simple and transparent

Sometimes the waters are so deep that one cannot see the bottom, but they are
never muddy. 4. We must look elsewhere for the sources of the eloquence of Jesus.
If we look over the history of oratory, we find that three elements enter into it: I. A
GREAT occasion. All the great masterpieces were the offspring of great occasions—
the orations of Demosthenes, when Greece was battling for its liberty; of Cicero

when the free institutions of Rome were threatened; of Chatham, at the time of the
American reyolution, Jesus had a great occasion, The world had reached itg


GHAP, Vu. ] ST. JOHN. 663
ran a pw a aa ea a ee
lowest ebb—politically, intellectually, socially, morally. Yet there was one little
province which kept the light of hope burning, one little people who had an expec-
tation of deliverance. A great need and a hope—these formed the occasion of
Jesus. II. A creat THEME. The greatest orators, on the greatest occasions, have
broken down, because they have ranged themselves on the wrong side and failed to
rise to the occasion with a great message. Not so Jesus. He proclaimed “ The
kingdom of God is at hand.” This was a message of hope, and one which called
men with a trumpet-call to battle. In this kingdom all could take part; it was one
that was for all, and one that defied the gates of hell. This message is for all the
centuries and for to-day. When the ship was on the sands at Malta the crew did
not stop to study the rhetorical form of Paul’s message. When the soldiers in the
Shenandoah valley were in flight they did not stop to study the elocution of
Sheridan when, waving sword in air, he bade them turn and fullow him to victory.
And when the world felt the darkness of night resting upon it, it was not the
eloquence of drama; it was the eloquence of this great truth—the hope that there
is in God and in immortality—that made Christ eloquent then and has made His
words eloquent from that day to this. III. For behind the words was a GREAT
PERSONALITY—a personality so great that when He first rose in the synagogue of
Nazareth all eyes were fastened upon Him; that when the mob gathered to stone
Him as He passed they parted and let Him go; that when they rose to lead Him
to the precipice He passed uninjured through them ; that when these police came
to arrest Him they went away saying, ‘‘ Never man spake,” ce. This we cannot
analyze, and must therefore leave it. (Lyman Abbott, D.D.) Christ a preacher,
as contrasted—I. WiTH THE SCRIBES AND PuaniseEs. 1. In the spirituality of His
instructions. The Jewish teachers and their modern imitators are distinguished by
their degrading conceptions of religion, morality, and worship. The Scriptures are
made a cumbrous book of court etiquette; the heart is ignored; judgment and
mercy pass for trifles as compared with ritual; and theology is turned into hair-
splitting casuistry. But what a Teacher is this! With Him a broken heart is a
sacrifice; a believing heart a sanctuary; love to God and man all duty. 2. In the
dignity of His instructions. Rabbinical teaching, ancient and modern, is gravely
puerile, and as you pass from it to Christ’s you pass from a prison to a mountain
top. Contrast with His their notions of (1) Jehovah—the national patron with the
Universal Father. (2) The Messiah—the Jewish conqueror with the Saviour of
the world. (3) The law overwhelmed with traditional burdens and superstitions,
with the law as pointing to and fulfilled by Him. Il. Tue ports. Apart from
Christ’s influence, their teaching has no concrete reality nor anything to meet the
deepest wants of the soul. Which of the non-Christian poets has sung anything
calculated to make men holy, bring God near, secure pardon, lift the veil from the
tomb, respond to any one of the queries of the human soul? But Christ says,
“ God is a spirit,” &c. ‘There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth.”’
‘‘In My Father’s house are many mansions,” &c. ‘Come unto Me all ye that
labour,” &c. Where in uninspired poetry shall we find lines like these? Christ
was a true poet, but He gave truths adapted to meet the urgent necessities of the
soul. III, Tue pumosopHers. 1. They can do no more than conjecture in regard
to religious truth. But here we must have authority absolutely Divine, Socrates
confessed this necessity but could not meet it. Christ confessed it and met it.
‘No man hath seen God at any time,” &c. He did not reason, He affirmed. 2.
They can only talk of abstractions, such as deity, laws of nature, &., good words
in their place, and so is “ humanity,” and if you should call your friend
“humanity,” you would deal with him as philosophers deal with God. But
Christ teaches a personal God. Abstract teaching has its place, but to teach
therapeutics to a man in a fever is as cruel as to mock at-disease. Christ was a
practical teacher, and told us not only what to believe, but what to do. IV. THE
PRETENDERS. 1. His claim, the loftiest ever made, was put forth under circum-
stances which fully attested its genuineness. It was open, in the presence of
enemies, without human help. These and other tests would have detected impos-
ture. 2. Imposters chiefly address the senses and the imagination, but Jesus’
whole manner is that of one who would win man’s intelligent confidence, and all
He said was to give a basis to intelligent faith, (EH. N. Kirk, D.D.) Christ the
standard of preaching :—Long before the Messiah appeared it was foretold that He
should sustain the office of preacher. “ The spirit of the Lord God is upon Me.”
Consequently the Jews expected that He would appear in this character. “When
Messias cometh He will teach us all things.” This general expectation Christ did


=


664 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. VIL
eet 5 MAR eS ee areas ee eee hese
not disappoint. As soon as He appeared He drew the attention of admiring mul-
titudes, but His addresses were too galling not to rouse the resentment of the
enemies of truth. Hence the incident before us. But how did Christ preach to
make such impressions on those who had resolved to resist Him. I. Christ was a
pian Preachor. His ideas lay clear in His own mind, He was master of every
subject on which He preached. He knew the whole character and counsel of God,
the frame and constitution of the human mind, the circumstances of all mankind.
Upon these subjects He expressed Himself in a style which was not only intel-
ligible but agreeable to persons of every capacity. Sensible that figurative language
is the voice of nature, He made free use of images, not borrowed from the arts
which are confined to the learned few, but from the air, light, water, &c., which
were familiar to all. Hence ‘the common people heard Him gladly.” II. Christ
was a SEARCHING Preacher. He knew the heart, and so was able to speak to the
heart. This gave His preaching irresistible force, and men felt their whole souls
to be naked before the all-seeing eye, and as they will feel at the day of judgment.
Christ never drew a bow at a venture, but always sent His arrows home. Witness
His dealings with the Pharisees, the rich young man, Martha, the woman taken in
adultery, &c. III. Christ was a senTIMENTAL Preacher. His teaching was replete
with interesting truths which not only enlighten the mind, but find the nearest
passage to the heart. He urged, e.g., the necessity of disinterested love upon all
His followers as the essence of true religion. IV. Christ was a movine Preacher.
He is the most moving Preacher, and possesses the power of persuasion in the
highest degree, who is best able to convey His own views and feelings to the minds
of Hig hearers, This Christ was able to do, and was thus able to move the minds
of His hearers with whatsoever passions He wished to excite. What could equal
His language to hardened hypocrites, and what could be more melting than His
invitations to penitents! (N.EHmmons, D.D.) The teaching of Jesus Christ :—1.
Irs opsect. There is a primary sense in which Christ taught as never man taught,
viz., in that He was Himself its object. Others, even the greatest, convey the
truth, but are not that truth. Jesus alone could say, “I am the Truth.’”? The
whole of Christianity is in Christ, neither He nor His disciples taught any other.
The two terms of the religious problem are God and man. To know them is the
whole of religious truth. 1. An apostle said, ‘‘Show us the Father.” Christ re-
sponded, ‘* He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father.” All that we can know of
God Christ has taught, or rather shown us. All His perfections and all His works.
2. In the same way all concerning man, his true nature and high destiny, we see in
Him who is the perfect man. 3. Not only so, but He reveals the true relations of
God and man. He is the Mediator between the two. On the one hand, by the fact
of His mediation He manifests man’s fall and his inability to save himself, and on
the other, the love of the Father who gave His Son that whosoever believeth in
Him, &, 4. All that we can know of the work of salvation is bound up in the
person of Christ. He is ‘‘made unto us wisdom and righteousness,” &. 5.
Christian morality, through sanctification, is entirely referred to Him, 6. As to
the future, all depends on Christ, who will raise the dead, judge the world, and
bring His own to glory. Are we not justified in saying with Paul, ‘ God forbid that I
should glory,” &c. Let us beware of withering this living teaching by our abstrac-
tions ! Every doctrine, if separated from Christ, is smitten with barrenness, II.
The incomparable excellence of Christ’s teaching results also from its PERFECT
rorm. The perfection of human words is measured by the fidelity with which they
manifest the human soul, A man may be very eloquent and yet his words be a
brilliant lie, because not in harmony with his moral state. Perfectly sincere words
are perfect words, and they are only so when it can be said: As are the words so is
the life, If this be the case our text is justified, for never was man sincere like
Christ. He lived His words and spoke His life. His life was the perfect life of
love, and His words were the perfect language of Divine love. 1.Theloveof Christ
rested on His humility, and never man spake like this Man in respect to humility.
Compare His words with the despotic authority or pompous solemnity of the Jewish
doctors. Their teaching was like their persons, clothed with long robes and phylac-
teries, and sitting in Moses’ seat. Christ sat not on the benches of a Jewish school

had no official title, spake in the streets or by the sea side, and rendered homage to
truth without exercising compulsion. And what could be more simple than His
words. ‘They were free from all solemn form. No doctor ever taught more in the
style of a layman. He spoke as a friend to friends, without any rhetorical embel-
lishment, and without aiming at effect. The simplicity of Christ’s words is what


j«


a


CHAP. vit.) , ST. JOHN. 665


constitutes their perfection, By resting on external authority He would have con-
fessed that His doctrine needed foreign aid; by enveloping it in solemn forms He
would have suggested a doubt of its intrinsic value. Christ knew that nothing is
so beautiful or powerful as truth, and He wished that it should appear alone in His
teaching. 2. Christ’s love was especially characterized by mercy, which is love to
the unfortunate and the poor, and the merciful character of Christ’s teaching is
evinced by its popularity. It was admirably suited to the wants of the simple
and ignorant many. For Christ never admitted that distinction between the pro-
fane and the initiated which is always found in the religions and philosophy of
antiquity, but rather gave special attention to the former. Not that He rejected
the enlightened; but He knew that a doctrine which suits the poor is a truth for
poor and rich, ignorant and learned alike. He could speak, then, to the people
without fear of restricting His mission; and who has ever spoken to them like the
Saviour? In bringing the truth to the feeblest reason Christ took nothing from
the truth, nor subjected it to any alteration. It is very easy to gain the goodwill
of men if we flatter their errors and their prejudices, but Christ never employed
that accommodation which is treason against the cause of God. If then He re-
jected this we can only explain the popularity of His teaching by the form He gave
to it. He ever found means to connect the truth with some feeling, idea, or fact
in harmony with itself. And so He made constant appeals to conscience, con-
viction of sin, need of deliverance, sorrow and suffering. Nor was He content
to rest on general dispositions, He knew what was wanted by each, and He
addressed to each the precise teaching that was made for him. Recall the nume-
rous persons who conversed with the Saviour. You will not find a word that
is not the most affecting that could have been pronounced. Is He talking to
fishermen? He says, “I will make you fishers of men.” Is He addressing
doctor of the law? He makes constant allusion to his dignity. Is He speaking to
agreat multitude that He has just satisfied with food? He discourses of the bread
of life. It was with the same design that Christ multiplied His admirable parables.
None of His hearers, after listening to Him, could look on the external world without
reading His doctrines there afresh, something to raise the thoughts to God. Never
man spake like this man because never man loved our poor humanity like Christ.
3. The teaching of Christ was full of love also in that it was essentially creative
and fertilizing to the mind of His hearers. A teacher not impelled by love does
not tolerate spontaneity of thought in his disciples ; but Jesus’ method was to give
men a glimpse of the precious mine of truth that they might dig and search for
themselves. He did not hurry anything, wishing to prepare the new bottles for the
new wine, and pour it into them drop by drop. With what gentleness did He
endure their slowness of understanding and weakness of faith. 4. The words of
Christ were the expression of perfect love, because never was there addressed to
man language so consoling as His. (H. De Pressense, D.D.) Our Lord as a
Teacher :-No one can read His discourses without seeing that He differs generically
from all other teachers. He is an order by Himself (chap. iii. 11-13). I. Compare
Him with Socrates, whom we know well, and have a full record of his teaching
and methods. Like our Lord his one aim was moral improvement. His end in
discovering truth was conduct. To know, with him, was but the way to live. But
when we come to his method it contrasts sharply to that of Jesus. For he affirmed
nothing, professed himself ignorant, but thought that by inquiry and consideration
it might be possible to find out what ideas were just and what were false, and so to
establish a sound healthy knowledge that might be the guide to a sound and healthy
life. But he dreaded to say “I have the truth” about anything. This is the
method of Acts xvii. 27. Our Lord’s method is at the opposite pole, Itis calm,
convincing affirmation. It is entirely unparalleled. It is the word of one who
does know ; who has not to argue and inquire, but to declare. Its simplicity arises
from absolute certainty. Agnosticism, notwithstanding, this is the teaching for
which the world yearns, and which can only meet the world’s needs. II, Compare
Him wits Monamuep. Christ dealt only with the highest spiritual truth—with
ideas and principles of conduct alone. He did not occupy Himself in marking out
safe paths for men ; He gave them light that they might see their way (Matt. xi.
1-5; John x. 24). This is in striking contrast with Mohammed’s method. The
chances are that if any one had asked him, “ Speak to my brother, that he divide
the inheritance with me,” he would have had a revelation about it. The Koran ig
full of private direction and legislation, and it is that which has crippled the free
development of Mohammedan society. Men go to it, not for principles of guidance,


666 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHaP. VII.
Te a EE ee
but for particular precepts. With Christ there is always a breadth which transcends
the need of the moment, and furnishes a principle which is good forall times. This
is the reason for the largeness of the development of Christendom. Christ tells us
not what to do, but how to be. Mohammed’s words are full of direction. Christ’s
of inspiration. (J. Baldwin Brown, B.A.) Christ the incomparable Teacher :—
Because In Him—I. Docrrine anp TEACHER ARE ONE. Other teachers are different
from what they teach, and never make themselves the object of their own instruc-
tion. Christ is the sole Teacher who is able to say, ‘‘ I am the Truth,” and as such
the substance of His own teaching. Christ’s purpose was not to give a right con-
ception of God, or to lead men to rightly know themselves. We have this in the
Old Testament. His purpose was to reconcile men to God. Hence He required
not faith in God—this the Jews had long ago—but in Himself. IL Docrrinz anp
LIFE PERFECTLY HARMONIZE. This can be said of no other. However careful the
teacher, his life falls behind his teaching. He could alone say, ‘‘ Which of you
convinceth Me of sin?” When He said, ‘Be ye perfect as your Father,” &. He
could also say, ‘I and My Father are one.” If He exhorted to resignation He said,
“Thy will be done.” His requirement of self-denial was illustrated in His actual
bearing of the cross. Of His new commandment He was the model, ‘‘ As I have
loved you.” He went about doing good to those who rejected Him, to enforce the
duty of doing good to those who hate us, and prayed, ‘‘ Father, forgive them,” that
we might pray for our persecutors. III. THe pocrRINE AND THE GROUNDS OF THE
DOCTRINE COINCIDE. Other teachers convince their scholars by proofs, and prophets
by “Thus saith the Lord ”—Christ simply sayg, ‘‘ Verily, verily, I say unto you.”
He is the ground of His teaching just as certainly as when the Lord God confirms
His words by saying, ‘‘ As surely as I live.” IV. His DocTRINE AND ITS EFFECTS
ARE IN FULLEST UNISON. Every teacher aims at this, but no one fully reaches it.
As the husbandman often finds that his seed does not germinate, so there are many
whose teaching has not the desired results. One does not speak intelligibly, another
wants impressiveness, a third dies prematurely. But Christ speaks so that even fisher-
men understand Him ; s0 attractively that crowds press upon Him, and authorities
envy Him; s0 irresistibly that friends cannot be turned from Him by threats. And
now He speaks through a thousand tongues, in pulpits, schools, and homes. You
who are burdened, do you not find rest in Christ’s teaching? You who suffer,
comfort? You who are guilty, pardon? You who are dying, triumph? Verily the
result of Christ’s teaching is not to be doubted. Conclusion : If, then, after eighteen
centuries we are compelled to confess that, despite all the wonderful advances in
knowledge, never man spake like Christ, it must be clear that He was more than a
child of man. Were He only this we must have outstripped Him. (R. Nesselmann.)
Incomparableness of Christ’s teaching in—I. Its ManneR. It was this which struck
His hearers whenon the mount (Matt. vii. 29). Itis no less striking to us who compare
the “I say unto you” with the prophetic “thus saith the Lord.” II. Irs marrer.
‘Never man spake””—1. Such wise words. There have been many wise men, but
as Solomon excelled all the children of the East, so may we say of the great Teacher
‘a wiser than Solomon is here.” His words were those of one who ‘“‘ knew what
was in man.’”? How admirably does He lay open human hearts! With what
Divine skill did He answer all questions! How suitably and readily—His enemies
being judges (Luke xx. 39), 2. Such holy words! He never spoke one that was
idle or unprofitable. 3. Such gracious words (Psa. xlv; Luke iv.)! III. Ivs errecr
(Luke iv. 32). 1. It was a wonder-working voice which Jesus uttered. Devils fled
before it, diseases vanished ; it called the dead out of their tombs; the winds heard
it and were still, the fig-tree and was withered. Yet what was go wonderful as its
effect upon men’s consciences! What terror and confusion it struck into His
enemies (John xviii. 4), &c.! 2. It wrought wonders in those whom it called to
mercy. (1) Of conviction (John iv. 29; Heb. iv. 12; 1 Cor. xiv. 24, 25). (2) Of
conversion (John y. 25). Look at the manner in which the disciples were called
3) Of consolation (Matt. xiv. 26, 27). Conclusion: What, then, is our duty? i
To hear and obey (Heb, xii. 25; John xii, 48; Prov. i. 24). 2. To imitate (Eph.
iy. 29). (A. Roberts, M.A.) The incomparable ministry :—The text is one of the
truisms of Christianity, but the confession came from men who were not the
disciples, nor particularly the audience of Jesus. They were a band of ignorant
men, the mere police of the Sanhedrim. And it is remarkable that not a word was
spoken by Christ directly to them why they should not execute their mission. What
was said was said to the multitude at large upon subjects entirely independent of
His guilt or innocence. The purpose of their coming is simply ignored. There


CHAP. VIt.] ST. JOHN. 667


were but two brief utterances after their arrival which the Evangelist has written
down, and while it would be an improbable supposition that they were all that gave
occasion for the confession, yet they were specimen utterances. They belonged to
very different fields of thought and speech, and together go far towards giving an
idea of Christ’s teaching as a whole. I. (vers. 33, 34.) Try to hear with the ears of
these men, and to imagine the impression. Must not any one have said, ‘‘ What an
independence of human enmity and human power.” “A little while I am with
you, and then I go,” asking no questions, dreading no interference. The officers
heard, and felt themselves impotent. This man speaks that He doth know; He
has His own times and seasons; Sanhedrim and Procurator are alike nothing to
Him. Butis there not a deeper awe behind? We shall seek Him and not find
Him. “Ye will be wanting Me one day. When terrified Jerusalem is crying for
pity I shall be beyond the reach not only of violence, but of sight and access. Oh!
in this day of your merciful visitation, be ye gathered under My wings.” ‘ Never
man spake like this man,” were it but for the pienrry. We were born to have
some one over us; may it be the right one! Other voices, counterfeiting the true
Voice, have had an easy sway. But there is a Voice which moves heaven and earth,
and if that Voice makes itself heard in the living world, in conscience we feel that
if we had been sent by ten Sanhedrims we, too, should exclaim ‘never man spake
it!” II. (ver. 37.) Well He knew what was in man when He addressed this language
to common humanity. If any man thirst, be it for comfort, rest, knowledge, holi-
ness, or love, let Him come unto Me. Strange words these for these rough police-
men to listen to when they came to apprehend this Man for a malefactor. And yet
so simple were the words, so strong, so directly did they make appeal to the man
within the man, finding him out in memory and conscience, reminding him of so
many cisterns of human or sinful desire broken, awakening so many recollections
of better impulses and higher aspirations, that they could not lay hands on Him,
III. Dignity alone might be coldness, and tenderness effeminancy, but DIGNITY AND
TENDERNESS combined are an irresistible strength; and He who could utter both
these sayings had a key to man’s heart as God made it, and as man had corrupted
it is sure of a hearing. 1. “A little while,” &c., He says to us, and it is well to
hear Him sometimes speak in that tone. It is not true to represent Him as a mere
humble suitor. The Voice which pleads is the Voice which made and which shakes
heaven, and as He speaks now from heaven in heaven we must seek Him, 2. The
dignity of Jesus is the one thought, and if He speaks of that it is to give energy to
His tenderness. I will not affront any man by supposing that he thirsts not. He
may tell me that he is satisfied—but all in the deep of their several hearts are athirst
in one way or another. To how few of us is life as we would have it. Many
delights once possessed have been lost. But there is a keener thirst, that of the
spirit for the conscious love of its Maker. This Christ can quench. Try Him.
(Dean Vaughan.) The unrivalled eloquence of Jesus :—The constables could not
take Jesus for He had fairly taken them. Note by way of preface—l. That it is a
sure sign of a falling Church when its leaders call in the aid of the secular arm.
The Church which cannot maintain itself by spiritual power is dying, if not dead. 2.
That in the end the spiritual power will baffle the temporal. The officers are fully
armed, the preacher has no weapons, and yet they cannot arrest him. What stays
their hand? It has come to be a combat between body and mind, and mind pre-
vails. Abel may be killed, but from the ground his blood continues to cry. Martyrs
have a greater power in their graves than in their pulpits. 3. That God can get
testimonies to the majesty of His Son from the most unlikely places. Civil


priests would naturally select those least likely to be affected by Christ’s teaching.
Yet these rough, brutal men felt his matchless oratory. Not only as in the case of
Saul can God direct a high character into the right path. He makes the wrath of
men to praise Him, and compels adversaries to do Him homage. Let us note—I.
The PECULIAR QuaLitizs of our Lord’s eloquence, as among kings, He is the King of
kings, among priests the great High Priest, among prophets the Messiah, so is He
the Prince of preachers, the Apostle of our profession. Christ spoke—l. Clearly,
and yet His matter is profound. Did ever man speak so simply? Even little
children gathered round Him. He never gives forth dark sayings that His hearers
may credit Him with vast learning and profound thinking. And yet there is in His
teaching a depth that genius cannot fathom, but all the while He speaks in short
sentences, with plain words and homely illustrations. The common people with
their gommon sense heard Him gladly. 2 With authority. He was a master


668 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. 2 {cHaP. VIE


dogmatist. It was not, “It may be so,” but “ Verily, verily,” &c. And yet side
by side with this there was an exiraordinary self-sinking. He never assumed
official dignity. 3. Faithfully, yet tenderly. Even Nathan could not be more true
to human conscience. ‘ Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,” &c. There was
no mincing matters because wickedness was associated with greatness, no excusing
sin because it put on sanctimoniousness, He neither fawned on the great nor
pandered to the populace. Perhaps no preacher ever used more terrible werds with
regard to the fate of the ungodly. Yet He did not break the bruised reed. What a
Son of Consolation He was! 4. Zealously, yet prudently. He was full of ardour,
never preached a cold, dull sermon. Yet His fervour never degenerated into wild-
fire. He was not afraid of the Herodians, yet how quietly did He allow them to
walk into the trap. He was ready to meet the Sadducees, but He was on His guard
so that they could not entangle Him in His speech. 5. Lovingly. He was full of
tenderness even to tears, but was far removed from that efieminacy which some-
times passes for Christian love. He was manly all through. 6. His preaching
was remarkable for its co-mingling of all the excellencies which are found separate
in His servants. He addressed the head and the heart. He aroused the conscience,
but was also great in the arts of consolation. 7. The main aspect of His eloquence,
however, was that it was the vehicle of the greatest truths. II. Personal RECOL-
Lections of this eloquence, 1. Do you remember when you first heard Him speak ?
Recall—(1) His words of pity. ‘‘ Come unto Me,” &c. (2) His words of persuasion.
‘Turn ye, turn ye,” &c., ‘Come now let us reason together.” (3) His words of
power, ‘‘ Awake thou that sleepest.” (4) His word of pardon. 2. Since we heard
His pardoning voice, we have heard many a time—(1) His word of promise. (2)
His word of consolation. (3) His word of fellowship. 3. There are some words
spoken long ago which have been so quickened by His presence that we number
them among our personal recollections. ‘I have loved thee with an everlasting
love’; ‘‘It is I, be not afraid,” &c., &c. III. Propueric anricrpations. 1. As
long as you live you are to speak for Jesus, but your hope for His kingdom lies in
His voice. And we expect Him to speak more loudly yet, for ‘‘ the knowledge of
the Lord shall cover the earth.” 2. We expect Him to speak sweetly to us in the
hour of death. ‘ Fear not, for Iam with thee.” 3. In paradise. 4, At the judg-
ment. ‘Come ye blessed of My Father.” Will He say that to you, or “ Depart ye
cursed.’? Anyhow your confession will be then if not now, ‘‘ Never man spake,”
&e. (C. H. Spurgeon.) The words of Jesus:—I. His trrune. Those whose
words have moved mankind have for the most part addressed an audience in some
chamber selected for the suitability of its construction or for the sanctity of its
associations. Not so with the words of Jesus. His tribune was the plank of Peter’s
boat, the portico of Jerusalem, any place on which He chanced, to any person
whom He met. He not only sought the people, but let the people seek Him; and
some of His most striking utterances were addressed to a single auditor. The
great orators of Nétre Dame called their sermons ‘ conferences.” But they are no
such thing, for Lacordaire or Hyacinthe had it all to himself, like the least of us,
But the Master’s sermons were “conferences” in truth. He let the people inter-
rupt Him by their questions, by bringing their sick, by leading their little ones to
His arms. And yet, in spite of these defects of His audience-chamber, and diffi-
culties with the audience, the golden silence made the silver speech the brighter.
IJ. Curisr’s Texts are a marvel of beauty for their appositeness. The well of
Sychar suggests a sermon on the water of life; the feeding of the five thousand and
a reference to the fall of the manna, a discourse on the bread of life; the water in
the priest’s pitcher a promise of the outpouring of the Holy Ghost. A corn-field
was probably in sight when He said, ‘‘ Behold, a sower went forth to sow.” And a
vine may have trellised the window of the upper room, or a vineyard grown on the
sunny slopes beneath, when He said, ‘* I am the True Vine.” Thus would the atten-
tion of His auditors be riveted while Jesus spoke ; they would leave Him astonished
and delighted, and they would never forget words founded on facts before their
eyes. III. Curisx’s Topics were as varied as His texts were timely, and the variety
was as striking as the timeliness, Some distinguished preachers have really only
one topic, and, begin where they will, you soon find them on their favourite sub-
ject. But Jesus of Nazareth had no beaten paths, or rather all paths were alike
familiar to His feet. A very short index often suffices for a very large volume, but
it would require a catalogue of some length to tabulate all the subjects on which
even our four brief Gospels tell us that Jesus had something to say. Natural as the
ginging of the lark was His speech ; but His strain, like the lark’s, was never mono-


:


ee a ae


chap, vir] ST. JOHN. 669
i eeeree ere Sn eee Se ee ee
tonous. The many-stringed harp of human life was in His hands, and He touched
every chord in turn. He has words to speak about Divine love, and words also
about human charity. He has something to tell about the holiness of heaven, and
something also about the happiness of earth: much about the Jerusalem above, and
much about the earthly Zion. But how can we select where every stone is a gem,
or to cull where every flower is an exotic? Enough that He touched upon every-
thing in turn, and everything He touched turned to gold. IV. Curist’s MODE OF
TREATMENT; we find this as varied as the topics. Sometimes there is the orderly
succession of thoughts, built up into a harmonious whole, as in the sermon on the
Mount. At other times there is a beautiful carelessness. Just as flowers and forest
trees, creepers and mosses, are intermingled in nature, so amid stupendous subjects
of appalling grandeur dealt with in the Master’s teaching we find minute touches of
gentleness and grace, which give the play of light and shade to the whole. 1. “ He
taught as one having authority.” He spake as one who dwelt in very deed in the
secret place of the Most High. To the question “ How hath this man letters, having
never learned?” the answer is ‘ My doctrine is not Mine, but His that sent Me.”
We do not wonder now that ‘‘ never man spake like this man.” 2. A very human
interest belongs to the words of Jesus from the fact that they are full of illustraticn.
Sometimes it is parable all worked out, like a broad lace of gold, sometimes mers
metaphor, like a golden thread flashing through a silken mantle, but at all times
instance or illustration is ready to relieve the dry details of doctrine or precept.
Since His words were so sparkling, no wonder that ‘‘ the common people heard Him
gladly.” 3. His words atfect every faculty in succession. (1) He speaks to the
intellect, His hand the while digging wells in the surface of the earth, in which you
can see the stars by day. (2) He speaks to the heart, striking off appeal after
appeal with a fervour that makes His words, not as the col steel of the armoury,
but the flashing iron of the forge. (3) He speaks to the conscience a simple
word, like a seemingly harmless wire, conveying an electric thrill to the soul, 4.
Christ addressed mankind in many and varied capacities, but His versatility made
Him equal to every occasion. (1) He spoke as a king, and never monarch “ spake
like this man,” whether he is sending his subjects to the field, putting the sword
into one hand and the cup of sorrow into the other, or welcoming them home from
the war and garlanding their brows with the joy of their lord. (2) He spoke as a
legislator, and never lawgiver ‘‘ spake like this man.” Few but lawyers read law
books ; even the legal parts of the books of Moses are sealed to most men. But the
second Moses has given His laws in such language that, while statesmen learn wis-
dom from their pages, little children linger over their lines. His code was suited
to His own age and suitable to every age succeeding, (3) He spoke as a teacher of
morals, and never moralist “spake like this man.” When He told men to mark
the secrets of their hearts as the seeds of sin He put His hand upon the plague spot
which physicians for ages had been seeking in vain, And when He opened His
mouth and taught them, saying, ‘‘ Blessed are the poor in spirit”—the mourners,
the meek, the merciful—a new era dawned upon mankind. (4) He spoke as a
teacher of wisdom, and never philosopher ‘‘ spake like this man.” His aposiles,
though they knew it not, were the esoteric disciples of a school destined to outlive
the most celebrated of antiquity. How few now care to read “ Aristotle,” who
wrote elaborate treatises, compared with the number of those who love to linger
over the reported utterances of Jesus Christ, who never wrote a line! (5) He spoke
as a brother born for adversity, and never friend “spake like this man.” Do you
yearn for sympathy? “ Come unto Me all ye that labour,” &c. Do you ask for
society? ‘Lo, I am with you alway.” Do you seek for intimacy? ‘ I have not
called you servants... but friends.” Do you pant for love? ‘* Greater love
hath no man than this.’ And His promises are as full as His heart is large. Is
your concern About earthly need? ‘The very hairs of your head, they are all num-
bered.” About heavenly grace? “I am come that ye might have life.” About
death? ‘I am the Resurrection and the Life.” About eternity? ‘Where Iam
there shall also My servant be.” (6) He spoke as a revealer of secrets, and never
prophet ‘ spake like this man,” for man never before or besides had such tidings
to tell. He came, He said, because “ God so loved the world.” He came to die,
giving ‘‘ His life a ransom for many,” shedding His blood “ for the remission of
sins.” Conclusion: 1. Go to Him as a child of sin. A sinner went to Him once,
and she came away amazed that He who was incarnate purity should notice her.
Would not she say, ‘“‘ Never man spake like this man ”? And if you, sinner, go
you will say the same, 2. Go to Him asa child of sorrow. Jairus went to Him


“7


~


670 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHap. vit.


bereaved, and he came away comforted. Mary of Magdala went in trouble, and
she came away at peace. Mary of Bethany went weeping, and she came away re-
joicing. The woman who had an issue of blood went trembling, and she came
away triumphing. You go too, sufferer, and see if He has not reserved a blessing
for thee that shall make thee say, ‘‘ Never man spake like this man.” 3, Go to Him
as a child of man, and He will teach you about earthly duty; for He has words for
parents, words for children, words for masters, words for servants, words for friends,
words for enemies; and for all words such as ‘“‘never man spake.” 4, Go to Him as
a child of God, and He will teach you about the beginning of the spiritual life, the
progress of the spiritual life, and the perfection of the spiritual life, till at length,
tired of leaving you to listen at a distance, He shall take you to Himself, and there
as He leads you unto living fountains of waters, while you drink in every word you
will exclaim, ‘‘ Never man spake like this man.” (J. B. Figgis, M.A.) The testi-
mony of sceptics :—Is this the tone of an enthusiast or of a mere sectary ? What
sweetness, what purity of manners! What touching grace in His instructions! What
elevation in His maxims! What profound wisdom in His discourses! What pre-
sence of mind, what acuteness, what justness in His replies! What empire over
His passions! Where is the man, where is the sage who knew in this way how to
act, suffer, and die? What prejudice, blindness, or bad faith does it require to
compare the son of Sophroniscus with the Son of Mary! What distance between
the two? They say that Socrates invented ethics; but others practised morality
before he taught it. Aristides was just before Socrates described justice ; Leonidas
died for his country before Socrates taught the duty of patriotism; Sparta was
temperate before Socrates praised sobriety; Greece abounded in virtuous men
before he defined virtue. But Jesus—where did He find the lofty morality of which
He alone gave both the lesson and the example? From the midst of a furious
fanaticism proceeds the purest wisdom ; among the vilest of the people appears the
most heroic and virtuous simplicity. If Socrates lives and dies like a philosopher,
Jesus lives and dies likea God. (J. J. Rosseau.) The benefit of hearing the truth :-—
It is good to come to the Word, though with ill intent; they that come to see only,
as Moses did to the bush, may be called as he was. They that come to sleep may be
taken napping, as Latimer saith. They that come to catch may be caught as those
in the text. (J. Trapp.) Christ’s matchless teaching :—He spake with grace, and
with gravity : they were all oracles that He uttered ; honey-drops that fell from Him.
Of Christ it might better be said than ever it was said of Crassus the Roman orator,
‘‘Cxtaros a Crassa semper omnes illo autem die etiam ipsum a sese superatum.”
(Ibid.) The power of Divine truth :—There went a man out of this place one
evening who was spoken to by one of our friends, who happened to know him in
trade, and had him in good repute. ‘‘ What! have you been to hear our minister
to-night?’’? The good man answered, “ Yes, I am sorry to say I have.” ‘ But,”
said our friend, ‘‘ why are yousorry?” ‘* Why,” he said, ‘he hasturned me inside
out,and spoiled my idea of myself. When I went into the Tabernacle I thought I
was the best man in Newington, but now I feel that my righteousness is worthless,”
“Oh,” said the friend, ‘‘that is all right; you will come again, I am sure. The
Word has come home to you, and shown you the truth: ye will get comfort soon.”
That friend did come again, and he is here to-night: he takes pleasure in that very
truth which turned him inside out; and he comes on purpose that the Word of the
Lord may search him, and try him, and be to him as a refiner’s fire. (C. H.
Spurgeon.) I knew a man who was of a fierce temper, a troubler to his own house-
hold when he happened to fall into his fits; he was so passionate at times that I
should not like to tell all the wild things which he would do. I haveseen that man
since conversion, and he has had things to test him which might, as we say, have
provoked a saint, but he bore them patiently, and in a manner which I desire to
imitate. The lion has become a lamb, he is gentle and tender; no ene could think
that he was the same man; indeed, he is not, for grace has made him a new man
in Christ Jesus. We have seen persons revelling in licentiousness, who sinned
greedily, who could not be satisfied with any common sin; but they have heard
the gospel, and become chaste and even delicate in purity, so that the very mention
of their former crimes has shocked them and made them weep. Such persons have
manifested a watchful care against the fault in which they once delighted. They
have been afraid to go near their old haunts, or to mix with their old companions.
What has wrought this? What teaching must that be which accomplishes such
marvels? (Ibid.) Then answered the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived ?—The
opponents of the truth:—We have here a dramatic sketch of the opposition to


CHAP. VII.] ST. JOHN. 671


Christ and His gospel, which may stand, in part, or as a whole, for every subsequent
scene in which error has been pitted against the truth. I. Tas preparers, 1. Their
respective standings, (1) Unequal. The officers were no match for the Sanhedrim
in point of social position, religious profession, wealth, and learning. How often in
this great controversy has there been a clean cleavage between the masses and the
classes, and how often has God chosen, as here, the weak things of the world ta
confound the things that are mighty? &c. (2) Equal. Nicodemus was the peer
of his colleagues in all respects, and Christianity has seldom wanted defenders as
completely equipped as their opponents, ready to fight them with their own
weapons, and to meet them on their own ground. 2. Their qualities—(1) Interest
and disinterestedness. The Jewish authorities had everything to lose by the success
of Christ. The occupants of Moses’ seat must needs tremble when the seat itself
was undermined. The officers, on the other hand, had nothing to gain, except the
anger of their masters, and the possible deprivation of their offices; while Nico-
demus, from his pre-eminent position, was in greater danger. These two forces have
been conspicuously displayed all through the greatstruggle. But in every religious
crisis the truth has triumphed over the powerful vested interests by which it has
been opposed. (2) Bigotryand candour. Selfishness blinds the eyes to the clearest
evidence. The officers related simple facts, Nicodemus recited an incontestible
principle. Both were plain, and were urged with obvious sincerity. But the chief
priest would not see. The same fault marks the opponents of truth in all ages.
There are sincere sceptics, men who cannot see, but these are never antagonists.
(3) Ignorance and knowledge. The Pharisees had not heard these particular words,
and had therefore not felt their power. Hence their controversial weakness, which
showed itself in the blind rage which ever characterizes the defenders of a lost
cause. As for the principle of equity stated by their colleagues, while not theoreti-
cally ignorant of it, they were practically unacquainted with it, for they never used
it. But both the officers and Nicodemus were fortified with experimental know-
ledge, and it is with this weapon that Christianity has invariably conquered. There
is no getting over the argument, ‘‘OnceI was blind, but nowI see.” II. Tue
METHODS OF DEBATE. 1. As between the Sanhedrim and the officers. To the plain
unwarranted report of the latter, the former oppose—(1) An imputation of intel-
lectual weakness. ‘‘ Are ye also deceived?” This is the standard calumny against
Christians. They have weak heads, and so are imposed upon by specious arguments,
or unread, and so led astray for want of knowledge. Insome circles to be a Chris-
tian is quite synonymous with deficiency of intellect and susceptibility to delusion.
(2) An assumption of infallibility—a characteristic of unbelief all through the ages.
How can Christianity be true when the ‘‘modern,” ‘‘ advanced,” “ progressive,”
“ripe,” thinker does not believe in it? (3) Scurrilous abuse (ver. 49)—the time-
honoured method of argument when there is no case; the well-worn weapon of
anti-Christianity. 2. As between the Sanhedrim and Nicodemus. The latter
Appeals to a simple principle of equity. To this the former oppose—(1) A base in-
sinuation. To belong to Galilee was about the grossest insult that could be perpe-
trated on a Jewish gentleman—but Christians are by this time accustomed to be
accounted the offscouring of the earth. The offence of the Cross, so far as outward
profession is concerned, has well-nigh ceased, but let a man in certain circles put
its principles into practice, or venture to assert them, and what epithets, such as
“ fanatic,” ‘“ humbug,” canter,” will be hurled at his head! (2) A gratuitous as-
sumption. Nicodemus had not said that a prophet had or would arise out of
Galilee; nor had Christ asserted a Galilean origin. Because a man has lived ina
certain locality that is not to say that he was born there. How often has the
opponent of Christianity fought an enemy of his own making ? How many carica-
tures of the Trinity, the atonement, heaven, hell, &c., pass muster as Christian
doctrines, and are criticized as such? (3) The closure (ver. 53). The Sanhedrim
having spoken there was an end of all discussion—a convenient course frequently
adopted since. Christianity is not afraid of a patient hearing, but its opponents
are. (J. W. Burn.) Nicodemus saith unto them.—Nicodemus:—l. A timid
but honest inquirer after truth (chap. iii.). 2. A calm and decided advocate
of justice (chap. vii.). 3. A heroic confessor of the Lord bringing grateful
offerings (chap. xix. 39). Here he meets their boasts—(1) That no ruler
believes in Jesus. (2) That they were zealous for the law. (J. P. Lange.)
Boldness best:—Nicodemus got little favour from the Pharisees, though his
favourable feeling towards our Lord was so cautiously expressed. This is
generally the case with those who act timidly as he did. People may just as


672 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [cHav. vit.
en ae
well be out-spoken and bold, (Musculus.) _ Nicodemus and the Sanhedrim:—
Nicodemus does not announce himself a believer in Jesus but he lays down a
general principle sanctioned by the law of Moses (Exod. xxiii. 1); and by the law
of nature. His cautious answer may have been dictated by a constitutional timidity,
or by a hope that if the Pharisees would only have the fairness to examine the doc-
trine and the claims of Jesus before they condemned Him they would not wish to
condemn Him; that, like the officers who were sent to apprehend Him, they too
would be filled with admiration for Him. But the Pharisees, who are blinded by
envy and spite, see not the want of truth, or the falsehood as well as the irrelevancy
of their answer to Nicodemus. Many prophets had come out of Galilee. But if
not, that was no reason why prophets should not still arise in Galilee. Deborah the
Prophetess was from the country of Galilee. She dwelt between Ramah and Bethel
in Mount Ephraim (Judg. iv.). Anna the Prophetess was from Galilee, of the tribe
of Asher (Luke ii. 36). The prophet Jonah was of Gathhepher, a town of Lower
Galilee in Zebulun (2 Kings xiv. 25). There is also a general consent among com-
mentators that the Prophecies of Hosea were delivered in the kingdom of Israel.
It was also anciently believed that Hosea belonged to the tribe of Issachar, which
would be included in the more modern district of Galilee. Nahum was born in
Elkosh, a small village in Galilee; hence he was called Nahum the Elkoshite (chap. i. 1).
The Prophet Elijah the Tishbite was born, according to some, at Thisbe, in the tribe
of Naphtali, in Galilee ; according to others in Gilead, on the east side of the Jordan.
Elisha was born at Abel-Meholah, in the northern part of the valley of the Jordan.
Though neither of these were strictly in the district called Galilee, they were neither
of them in the country of Judea, or in the kingdom of Judah, but both in the
kingdom of Israel. Nicodemus simply asks that they should hear Him before they
condemn Him. The answer of the Pharisees shows that they had already con-
demned Him, and unheard. It was impossible, they said, that He could be the
Christ, because the Christ should come from Bethlehem, in Judah, and Jesus was
born in Galilee. (F. H. Dunwell, B.A.) Grace cannot remain hidden :—Good
blood will not belie itself: love, as fire, will not be long hid. Croesus’ dumb son
could not but speak to see his father ready tobe slain. Nicodemus, though hitherto
a night-bird, now shows himself for Christ in a council. Nicodemus was but a
slow scholar, Judas was a forward preacher ; yet at last, when Judas betrayed Christ
in the night, Nicodemus faithfully professed Him in the day. (J. Trapp.)


Ver. 53. And every man went to his own house. Jesus went to the Mount of
' Olives.—If we group together the scenes of these chapters we mighi treatthem. 1.
A day with Jesus; in which we have not merely His answers to the disputing Jews,
but His proclamation of love. 2. A night with Jesus on the Mount of Olives. 3.
Dawn with Jesus in the Temple, listening to His early teaching. 4. Sunrise with
Jesus, as pointing to the Hast, He says, ‘I am the light of the world.” These two
verses suggest—Man at home, Jesus not at home :—The crowd which had surrounded
Him all the day gradually drops off, one by one, as the evening draws on, and
Jesus is left alone. Each one has a home to go to, and retires to rest with his
family ; Jesus has nowhere to lay His head; they go one way, He goes another;
they keep within the city walls, He goes without the gate to Olivet, there to spend
the nightin prayer. He is not at home; even in the Temple whichis His Father’s
house, He must not stay; its gates are closing, and He is shut out. He can only
go to the places where man is not; to the solitudes where, outside of Jerusalem,
outside even of Bethany, He can meet with God. This homelessness was for us;
that we might have a home in His Father’s house. He went without the gate that
we might enter in. He became an exile, taking our place and life of banishment,
that we might enter the celestial city, the paradise of God. Hast thou entered in?
Or art thou still an exile from God though at home on earth? (H. Bonar, D.D.)
The Saviour and the Sanhedrim:—We have here a notable instance of the injury
done to the Scriptures by the arbitrary division into chapters and verses. The
severance here diverts the attention from the object which the writer had in view.
The greater part of chap. vii. is occupied with the conflicting opinions of the popu-
lace respecting Christ, and closes with a striking representation of a scene which
took place in the council chamber of the metropolis, The officers had returned
without their prisoner, and one of their own number dared to protest against their
injustice. The distracted council break up and go home to concoct fresh schemes;
the tranquil Saviour quietly departs to Olivet to meditate and pray. What a con-
trast! Those seventy men crossed in their cruel project; that one harmless


CHAP, VII.] ST. JOHN. 673


wanderer, sustained by the conscious rectitude of His life! They seeking new
channels for the pent up torrent of their wrath ; He calm in the rich tides of peace
that filled His soul; they to their luxuriant dwellings, whose enchantments wera
all marred by the day’s discomfiture ; He to the mountain and the midnight, whose
dark shadows threw into bold relief the presence of God and His glory. On their
side all worldly influence; on His side all heaven. Their purpose, murder, and
suppression of the truth; His purpose, salvation, and God’s eternal glory by His
own self-sacrifice. (W. G. Lewis.) The moral tangent :—This “ parting of the
ways’? exhibited—I. Tue separnaTENESS oF CHRIST AMID His owN PEOPLE. It bears
out chap i.11. How could it have occurred in a region and amongst a race so
noted for hospitality ? Such experiences may have begotten the realization (Matt.
viii. 20). Some offer may have been made, but, if so, it was either too half-hearted
to tempt the great solitary, or still, night-wrapped Olivet exercised an irresistible
fascination. 1. That the Founder of society in its true conception should have been
Himself an outcast ; imagination dwells on such a paradox. 2. To take the mildest
view of the circumstance it was not to the credit of the social life of Jerusalem.
Some defect in those home circles rendered them uncongenial. Hearts there were
that hated Him, but the general sentiment was indifference. 3. And how did He
regard their attitude? It was impossible for Him to be unconcerned. Not yet was
the passionate wail, “‘O Jerusalem,” &c., but the woeful sorrow of which it was the
outcry was even then gathering. Incarnate love could not but desire to be loved by
those for whom He had descended to such depths; but it must be on His own
terms, II. A DIFFERENCE IN SPIRITUAL TENDENCY AND arm. 1. The isolation of
Christ did not arise from obscurity or insignificance. His departure must have
been observed and felt. That lonely form, the centre of so much observation as
with calm dignity it stepped from the wrangling crowd into the quiet fields, did it
not judge them? 2. The mere departure convicted them of a lack of moral earnest-
ness. ‘The deadly conspiracy which had been hatched in their midst, and which
had been arrested just when success seemed easy ought to have put every true man
upon his honour, and made him open his doors to the homeless One. He had dis-
turbed Judean thought and life to its core. To an onlooker it might have seemed
as if a moral revolution were impending. How near they were to the kingdom of
God! But assenting to Christ’s lofty truths their hearts were indisposed to receive
them. They lacked ‘the courage of their convictions. Good men! it did not im-
pair their digestion nor break the continuity of their “little life.” How trifling
the spirit that can shelve the greatest question and stifle the grandest inspiration
thus. 38. Not so easy was it for the Son of Man to put behind Him the strenuous
controversy in which He had engaged. With Him heart as well as intellect were
enlisted. Stung by their indifference, or horror-struck at their villany, the Great
Sensitive Soul hurries forth to the only house of prayer where He can be alone with
His Father, and to brace Himself for the effort of to-morrow. Yet how incompre-
hensible it must have been to minds so besotted with earthliness! They knew not
that commerce with the skies. Conclusion: In every life there is such a momené
quick with spiritual issues. Shall we follow Christ to Olivet or go to our own
house? (St. John A. Frere, M.A.) Diverging paths :—I. Every MAN WENT TO
HIS OWN HOUSE. A symbol of the general conduct of humanity. ‘ We have turned
every one to his own way.” 1. Our house is where we live, and represents all that
we live for. (1) Some men live for wealth and adorn their noble houses with
elegant furniture and costly pictures. (2) Some men live for pleasure, and their
houses will be supplied with all that gratifies the senses—luxurious couches, ex-
pensive wines, and elaborate menu’s. (3) Some men live for learning, and the
principal room in the house will be the well-furnished library, and every depart-
ment will proclaim, “‘A scholar lives here.” (4) Some men live for friendship,
and keep ‘open house” for their boon companions. (5) Some men live for
domestic felicities, and consult the comfort and fellowship of wife and children
in all the appointments of the house. 2. We may go to our own house without
Christ. A Christless house, a Christless life is that in which something else
besides Christ predominates. Where wealth, pleasure, &c., are supreme Christ is
not. He hasgone tothe Mount of Olives. II. Jesus went To THE Mount oF Ouivzs.
1. Jesus went—(1) To cool His fevered brain and heart after the anxieties and
labours of the day. (2) To pray, and realize more deeply His union and communion
with the Father. 3 To brace Himself for the efforts of the coming day. 2.
Jesus went alone, yet every member of the crowd He left needed to go with Him—
and for the same reason. So dowe. Only with Jesus shall we find rest, com


Se


674 THE BIBLICAL ILLUSTRATOR. [CHAP. VIq.


munion, strength. 3. Jesus came back to judge those who had forsaken Him
(chap. viii. 16), and will come to judge those who are forsaking Him now. HUI.
THE ALTERNATIVE—1, Is not house or Christ. He does not require us to break up
our homes or desolate our lives. Let it be remembered that one reason for going
to Olivet was because there was not a home in Jerusalem that would take Him in.
He would have supped with the meanest who would have accorded Him a welcome.
2. The alternative is house without Christ or house with Him. We must take our
Saviour into our house, and then take our house to Olivet—make Him the sacred
centre round which wealth, pleasure, &c., may cluster, and sanctify all by sympathy
with Him, prayer and consecration. 3. Thus the alternative sharply put is self or
Christ. Which? Conclusion: 1. If we let Christ alone He will let us alone.
Hell in this life and in the next is abandonment by Christ. 2. Christ ascended
Olivet—the Jews descended from Moriah. With Christ’s companions it is ever a
going up till heaven at last is reached. With Christ-forsakers it is ever down—
down until the depths of the bottomless pit are fathomed. (J. W. Burn.)


;
j
q
|
i


oe


tale te te
