P,.: 


J  C<X/Ct^5C-   /t 


/ 


-x> 


fr^[  Yi/.lli,SLa 


1-L 


\ 


BX  6333  .S6  S75  1885 
Spurgeon,  C.  H.  1834-1892. 
Storm  signals 


SPURGEON^S    SERMONS. 

From  the  Chicago  Standard. 

Eobert  Carter  &  Brothers  issue  in  ten  volumes  a  very 
excellent  edition  of  Spurgeon's  Sermons.    They  are  neatly 
grouped  in  a  box,  and  have  much  the  appearance  of  a 
library  in  themselves.     While  by  no  means  presenting 
the  well  known  aspect  of  "cheap  books,"  these  sermons 
are  after  all  furnished  at  a  surprisingly  low  price, — one 
dollar  per  volume;  ten  dollars  for  the  entire  set.     No 
man  need  trouble  himself  to  either  praise  or  criticise  the 
sermons  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon.    They  have  been  read  every- 
where, and  the  thousands  and  thousands  of  such  readers 
have  their  own  opinion — and  that  a  most  favorable  one 
— as  to  their  merits.     It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that,  as 
sermons,  they  stand  alone;  combining  with  their  pure 
evangelical  doctrine,  a  directness,  a  simplicity,  a  trans- 
parency, and  an  effectiveness  of  style,  unequaled  by  any 
other  published  sermons,  by  men  now  in  the  pulpit,  or 
by  those  of  other  generations.     It  is  not  necessary  to 
claim  for  them  greatness  in  the  usual  sense  of  that  word. 
They  are  unique  in  this,  that  they  are  so  perfect  as  ser- 
mons.    Taken  down,  stenographically,  while  in  process 
of  delivery,   afterwards  revised  and  prepared  for  the 
press,  they  have  all  the  glow  of  the  true  preacher's  in- 
spiration while  in  the  full  tide  of  his  message,  and  yet 
are  singularly  correct  in  style — as  much  so,  probably,  as 
if  composed  and  written  down  in  the  quiet  of  the  study. 
For,  as  a  colloquial  speaker,  addressing  the  people  in 
their  own  vernacular,  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  no  superior  in 
this  age;  and  what  he  says  in  the  pulpit  might  almost 
go  to  the  printer  without  any  of  that  careful  revision 
which,  notwithstanding,  he  conscientiously  gives  it. 


WORKS    OF    a    K    SPUR  GEO  N, 


SPURGEON'S  SERMONS.   New  and  neat  edition.  lo  vols.,  i2mo.  $10.00 

Any  Volume  sold  separately  at i.oo 

"  These  sermons  are  thoroughly  Scriptural,  earnest  and  simple,  and  full  of 

that  intense  earnestness  which  always  marks  Mr.  Spurgeon's  preaching." — 

Presbyitrian. 

MORNING  BY  MORNING.     i2mo i.oo 

95,000  HAVE  BEEN  SOLD   IN   ENGLAND. 

EVENING  BY  EVENING.     i2mo i.oo 

71,000  H.-KVE  BEEN  SOLD   IN   ENGLAND. 

LECTURES  TO  STUDENTS i.oo 

THE  SAINT  AND  SAVIOUR i.oo 

TYPES  AND  EMBLEMS i.oo 

THE  PRESENT  TRUTH.     Recent  Sermons i.oo 

STORM  SIGNALS.     New  Sermons.     i2mo i.oo 

HANDS  FULL  OF  HONEY, 

And  Other  Sermons  Preached  in  1883.  i2mo  ,  .  .  frco 
RETURN,  G  SHULAMITE  ! 

And  Other  Sermons  Preached  in  1884.  i2mo  ,  .  ,  i.oo 
FIRST  HEALING  AND  THEN  SERVICE, 

And  Other  Sermons  Preached  in  1885.     i2mo         •       •       .    i.oo 

MY  SERMON-NOTES— Genesis  to  Proverbs        .        .        .        .1.00 

"  "  "  Ecclesiastes  to  Malachi         .        .        .     I.oo 

"  In  point  of  freshness,  the  work  is  such  a  contrast  to  many  books  of  the 

same  order,  that  preachers  of  every  grade  will  find  something  suggestive 

under  every  head." — Christian  World. 

COMMENTING  AND  COMMENTARIES 1.00 

"  This  volume  has  few  equals,  if  any." — Literary  World, 

GEMS  FROM  SPUR  GEO N 1.00 

FEATHERS  FOR  ARROWS i.oo 

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALK 75 

320,000  have   been  sold  in   ENGLAND 

yOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  PICTURES 75 

100,000   have   BEEN   SOLD   IN   ENGLAND. 

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALK  AND  PICTURES.     In  one  vol.     i.oo 
GLEANINGS  AMONG  THE  SHEA  VES 60 


ROBERT  CARTER  &-  BROTHERS. 

Any  of  the  above  sent  by  mail,  postage  prepaid,  on  receipt 
of  the  price. 


STORM    SIGNALS 


Storm  Signa 


BEING 


a  Collection  of  $ermons 


PREACHED 


AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   ON 
SUNDAY  AND  THURSDAY  EVENINGS 


BY 


C.   H,    SFURGEON 

OF  LONDON, 


NEW  YORK 

ROBERT   CARTER   &   BROTHERS 

530  Broadway 


5'^.  ynknland 
Stereotype  Foundry, 

Sufoik  Co.,  N.  y. 


"The  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying,  Son  of 
man,  I  have  made  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  house  of 
Israel:  therefore  hear  the  word  at  my  mouth,  and 
give  them  warning  from  me." 

ECTKrRT.  iii.  16,  17. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


The  Pastor  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  lives 
so  much  on  his  watch  tower,  and  is  so  constantly 
on  the  look-out  for  souls  in  imminent  danger,  or  in 
absolute  distress,  that  our  special  set  of  volumes, 
selected  from  his  Sunday  evening  and  Thursday 
evening  sermons,  must  appear  incomplete  without 
such  a  series  of  flaring  beacons  and  shrill  warnings 
as  we  have  here  entitled 

''STORM  SIGNALS." 
We  have  therefore  issued  it  as  a  sequel  to  "  Types 
AND  Emblems,"  and  "The  Present  TRUTH,"each  and 
all  of  which  have  found  wide  acceptance  with  the 
Christian  public. 

That  this  volume,  like  those,  may  be  blessed  of 
Him  who  is  the  Fountain  of  all  blessings  is  the 
sincere  prayer  of 

THE  PUBLISHERS. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Spared  !        .        .        ,, 11- 

Startling  ! 29 ' 

Lovely,  but  Lacking 51 

A  Geate  Chakge  .        .        .        •        .        .        .        .72 

Woes  to  Come  !...,.....  86 

The  Sinner's  Only  Alternative         .                ...  101  • 

A  Jeremiad 124 

Ho!    Ho! HI 

A  Caution  for  Sin-sick  Souls 158  • 

Contrition 179 

The  Battle  op  Life 201 

Attention  ! 224 

Perilous  Procrastination 250- 

A  Soul-Stirring  Meditation 270 

The  Wandering  Bird 287 

The  Strait  Gate 310 

Cries  of  Distress 330 

A  Firebrand         .        .        .        • 350 

To  the  Rescue 370 

The  Lions'  Den 388 


STORM  SIGNALS. 

Sparetr  I 

** Iwas  left.^^ — EzEKiELix.  8. 

nnHE  vision  of  Ezekiel,  which  is  recorded  in  the 
-^  previous  chapter,  brought  to  h'ght  the  abom- 
inations of  the  house  of  Judah.  The  vision  which 
follows  in  this  chapter  shows  the  terrible  retribu- 
tion that  the  Lord  God  brought  upon  the  guilty 
nation,  beginning  at  Jerusalem. 

He  beheld  the  slaughtermen  come  forth  with 
their  weapons,  he  marked  them  begin  the  destroy- 
ing work  at  the  gate  of  the  Temple,  he  saw  them 
proceed  through  the  main  streets,  and  not  omit  a 
single  lane;  they  slew  utterly  all  those  who  were 
not  marked  with  the  mark  of  the  writer's  inkhorn 
on  their  brow.  He  stood  alone — that  Prophet  of 
the  Lord — himself  spared  in  the  midst  of  universal 
carnage;  and  as  the  carcasses  fell  at  his  feet,  and 
the  bodies  stained  with  gore  lay  all  around  him, 
he  said,  "  I  was  left."  He  stood  alive  amongst 
the  dead,  because  he  was  found  faithful  among 
the  faithless;  he  survived  in  the  midst  of  universal 


12  STORM   SIGNALS. 

destruction,  because  he  had  served  his  God  in  the 
midst  of  universal  depravity. 

We  shall  now  take  the  sentence  apart  altogether 
from  Ezekiel's  vision,  and  appropriate  it  to  our- 
selves, and  I  think  when  we  read  it  over  and 
repeat  it,  "  I  was  left,"  it  very  naturally  invites  us 
to  take  a  retrospect  of  the  past,  very  readily  also  it 
suggests  a  prospect  of  the  future,  and,  I  think,  it 
permits  also  a  terrible  oontrast  in  reserve  for  the 
impenitent. 

I.  First  of  all,  then,  my  brethren,  we  have  here 
a  pathetic  reflection,  which  seems  to  invite  us  to 
take  a  solemn  retrospect — "  I  was  left."  You 
remember,  many  of  you,  times  of  sickness,  when 
cholera  was  in  your  streets.  You  may  forget  that 
season  of  pestilence,  but  I  never  can;  when  the 
duties  of  my  pastorate  called  me  continually  to 
walk  among  your  terror-stricken  households,  and 
to  see  the  dying  and  the  dead.  Impressed  upon 
my  young  heart  must  ever  remain  some  of  those 
sad  scenes  I  witnessed  when  I  first  came  to  this 
metropolis,  and  was  rather  employed  at  that  time 
to  bury  the  dead  than  to  bless  the  living.  Some 
of  you  have  passed  through  not  only  one  season  of 
cholera  but  many,  and  you  have  been  present,  too, 
perhaps,  in  climates  where  fever  has  prostrated  its 
hundreds,  and  where  the  plague  and  other  dire 
diseases  have  emptied  out  their  quivers,  and  every 
arrow  has  found  its  mark  in  the  heart  of  some  one 
of  your  companions.  Yet  you  have  been  left. 
You  walked  among  the  graves,  but  you  did  not 


SPARED!  13 

stumble  into  them.  Fierce  and  fatal  maladies 
lurked  in  your  path,  but  they  were  not  allowed  to 
devour  you.  The  bullets  of  death  whistled  by 
your  ears,  and  yet  you  stood  alive,  for  his  bullet 
had  no  billet  for  your  heart.  You  can  look  back, 
some  of  you,  through  fifty,  sixty,  seventy  years. 
Your  bald  and  gray  heads  tell  the  story  that  you 
are  no  more  raw  recruits  in  the  warfare  of  life. 
You  have  become  veterans,  if  not  invalids,  in  the 
army.  You  are  ready  to  retire,  to  put  off  your 
armor,  and  give  place  to  others.  Look  back, 
brethren,  I  say,  you  who  have  come  into  the  sear 
and  yellow  leaf;  remember  the  many  seasons  in 
which  you  have  seen  death  hailing  multitudes 
about  you ;  and  think — "  I  was  left."  And  we,  too, 
who  are  younger,  in  whose  veins  our  blood  still 
leaps  in  vigor,  can  remember  times  of  peril, 
when  thousands  fell  about  us,  yet  we  can  say  in 
God's  house  with  great  emphasis,  "  I  was  left" — 
preserved,  great  God,  when  many  others  perished; 
sustained,  standing  on  the  rock  of  life  when  the 
waves  of  death  dashed  about  me,  the  spray  fell 
heavy  upon  me,  and  my  body  was  saturated  with 
disease  and  pain,  yet  am  I  still  alive — permitted 
still  to  mingle  with  the  busy  tribes  of  men. 

Nov/,  then,  what  does  such  a  retrospect  as  this 
suggest?  Ought  we  not  each  one  of  us  to  ask  the 
question,  What  was  I  spared  for?  Why  was  I 
left?  Many  of  you  were  at  that  time,  and  some 
of  you  even  now  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  ! 
You  were  not  spared  because  of  your  faithfulness, 


14  STORM  SIGNALS. 

for  you  brought  forth  nothing  but  the  grapes  of 
Gomorrah.  Certainly  God  did  not  stay  his  sword 
because  of  anything  good  in  you.  A  multitude  of 
clamorous  evils  in  your  disposition  if  not  in  your 
conduct  might  well  have  demanded  your  summary 
execution.  You  were  spared.  Let  me  ask  you 
why  V  Was  it  that  mercy  might  yet  visit  you — 
that  grace  might  yet  renew  your  soul  ?  Have  you 
found  it  so?  Has  sovereign  grace  overcome  you, 
broken  down  your  prejudices,  thawed  your  icy 
heart,  broken  your  stony  will  in  pieces  ?  Say, 
sinner,  in  looking  back  upon  the  times  when  you 
have  been  left,  were  you  spared  in  order  that  you 
might  be  saved  with  a  great  salvation  ?  And  if 
you  cannot  say  "  Yes"  to  that  question,  let  me  ask 
you  whether  it  may  not  be  so  yet?  Soul,  why  has 
God  spared  you  so  long,  while  you  are  yet  his 
enemy,  a  stranger  to  him,  and  far  oif  from  him  by 
wicked  works  ?  Or,  on  the  contrary,  has  he  spared 
you — I  tremble  at  the  bare  mention  of  the  possi- 
bility— has  he  prolonged  your  days  to  develop 
your  propensities,  that  you  may  grow  riper  for 
damnation — that  you  may  fill  up  your  measure  of 
crying  iniquity,  and  then  go  down  to  the  pit  a 
sinner  seared  and  dry,  like  wood  that  is  ready  for 
the  fire?  Can  it  be  so?  Shall  these  spared 
moments  be  spoiled  by  misdemeanors,  or  shall 
they  be  given  up  to  repentance  and  to  prayer? 
Will  you  now,  ere  the  last  of  your  sins  shall  set  in 
everlasting  darkness,  will  you  now  look  unto  him  ? 
If  so,  you  will  have  reason  to  bless  God  through 


SPARED !  15 

all  eternity  that  you  were  left,  because  you  were 
left  that  you  might  yet  seek  and  might  yet  find 
him  who  is  the  Saviour  of  sinners. 

Do  I  speak  to  many  of  you  who  are  Christians — 
and  you,  too,  have  been  left  ?     When  better  saints 
than   you  were   snatched  away  from  earthly  ties 
and  creature   kindred — when  brighter  stars  than 
you  were  enclouded  in  night,  were  you  permitted 
still  to  shine  with  your  poor  flickering  ray  ?     Why 
was  it,  great  God  ?     Why  am  I  now  left  ?     Let  me 
ask  myself  that  question.     In  sparing  me  so  long, 
my  Lord,  hast  thou  not  something  more  for  me  to 
do  ?     Is  there  not  some  purpose  as  yet  unconceived 
in  my  soul  which  thou  wilt  yet  suggest  to  me,  and 
to  carry  out  which  thou  wilt  yet  give  me  grace 
and  strength,  and  spare  me  again  a  little  while? 
Am  I  yet  immortal,  or  shielded  at  least  from  every 
arrow  of  death,  because  my  work  is  incomplete  ? 
Is  the  tale  of  my  years  prolonged  because  the  full 
tale  of  the  bricks  hath  not  been  made  up?     Then 
show    me    what    thou    wouldst    have    me    do  ? 
Since  thus  I  have  been  left,  help  me  to    feel   my- 
self a  specially-consecrated  man,  left  for  a  purpose, 
reserved  for  some  end,  else  I    had    been    worms' 
meat  years  ago,  and  my  body  had  crumbled  back 
to  its  mother  earth.     Christian,  I  say,  always  be 
asking   yourself  this  question;    but  especially    be 
asking  it  when  you  are  preserved  in  times  of  more 
than  ordinary  sickness   and   mortality.     If  I    am 
left,  why  am  I  left?     Why  am  I  not  taken  home 
to  heaven  ?     Why   do  I  not  enter  into  my  rest  ? 


16  STORM   SIGNALS. 

Great  God  and  Master,  showme  what  thou  woiildst 
have  me  do,  and  give  me  grace  and  strength  to 
do  it. 

Let  us  change  the  retrospect  for  a  moment,  and 
look  upon  the  sparing  mercy  of  God  in  another  light. 
"  1  was  left."  Some  of  you  now  present,  whose 
history  I  well  know,  can  say,  "  I  was  left;"  and  say 
it  with  peculiar  emphasis.  You  were  born  of  un- 
godly parents;  the  earliest  words  you  can  recollect 
were  base  and  blasphemous,  too  bad  to  repeat.  You 
can  remember  how  the  first  breath  your  infant 
lungs  received  was  tainted  air — the  air  of  vice,  of 
sin,  and  iniquity.  You  grew  up,  you  and  your 
brothers  and  your  sisters,  side  by  side;  you  filled 
the  home  with  sin,  you  went  on  together  in  your 
youthful  crimes,  and  encouraged  each  other  in  evil 
habits.  Thus  you  grew  up  to  manhood,  and  then 
you  were  banded  together  in  ties  of  obliquity  as 
well  as  in  ties  of  consanguinity.  You  added  to 
your  number;  you  took  in  fresh  associates.  As 
your  family  circle  increased,  so  did  the  flagrancy 
of  your  conduct.  You  all  conspired  to  break  the 
Sabbath;  you  devised  the  same  scheme,  and  per- 
petrated the  same  improprieties.  Perhaps  you  can 
recollect  the  time  when  Sunday  invitations  used 
always  to  be  sent,  a  sneer  at  godliness  was  couched 
in  the  invitations.  You  recollect  how  one  and  an- 
other of  your  old  comrades  died;  you  followed  them 
to  their  graves  and  your  merriment  was  checked  a 
little  while,  but  it  soon  broke  out  again.  Then  a 
sister  died,  steeped  to  the  mouth  iu  infidelity;  after 


SPARED !  17 

that  a  brother  was  taken ;  he  had  no  hope  in  his 
death ;  all  was  darkness  and  despair  before  him. 
And  so,  sinner,  thou  hast  outlived  all  thy  comrades 
If  thou  art  inclined  to  go  to  hell,  thou  mast  go 
there  along  a  beaten  track :  a  path  which,  as  thou 
lookest  back  upon  the  way  thou  hast  trodden,  is 
stained  with  blood;  for  thou  canst  remember  how 
all  that  have  been  before  thee  have  gone  to  the 
long  home  in  dismal  gloom,  without  a  glimpse  or 
ray  of  joy.  And  now  thou  art  left,  sinner;  and, 
blessed  be  God,  it  may  be  you  can  say,  "  Yes,  and 
I  am  not  only  left,  but  I  am  here  in  the  house  of 
prayer;  and  if  I  know  my  own  heart,  there  is  noth- 
ing I  should  hate  so  much  as  to  live  my  old  life 
over  again.  Here  I  am,  and  I  never  believed  I 
should  ever  be  here.  I  look  back  with  mournful- 
ness  indeed  upon  those  who  have  departed ;  but 
though  mourning  them,  I  express  my  gratitude  to 
God  that  I  am  not  in  torments — not  in  hell — but 
still  here;  yea,  not  only  here,  but  having  a  hope 
that  I  shall  one  day  see  the  face  of  Christ,  and 
stand  amidst  blazing  worlds  robed  in  his  righteous 
ness  and  preserved  by  his  love."  You  have  been 
left,  then;  and  what  ought  you  to  say?  Ought 
you  to  boast  ?  Oh,  no;  be  doubly  humble.  Should 
you  take  the  honor  to  yourself?  No;  put  the 
crown  upon  the  head  of  free,  rich,  undeserved  grace. 
And  what  should  you  do  above  all  other  men  ? 
Why,  you  should  be  doubly  pledged  to  serve  Christ. 
As  you  have  served  the  devil  through  thick  and 
thin,  until  you  came  to  serve  him  alone,  and  your 


18  STOA'M   SIGNALS. 

company  had  all  departed,  so  by  divine  grace  may 
you  be  pledged  to  Christ — to  follow  him,  though 
all  the  world  should  despise  him,  and  to  hold  on  to 
the  end,  until,  if  every  professor  should  be  an 
apostate,  it  might  yet  be  said  of  you  at  the  last, 
"  He  was  left;  he  stood  alone  in  sin  while  his  com- 
rades died;  and  then  he  stood  alone  in  Christ  when 
his  companions  deserted  him."  Thus  of  you  it 
should  ever  be  said,  "  He  was  left." 

This  suggests  also  one  more  form  of  the  same 
retrospect.  What  a  special  providence  has  watched 
over  some  of  us,  and  guarded  our  feeble  frames ! 
There  are  some  of  you,  in  particular,  who  have 
been  left  to  such  an  age  that  as  you  look  back  upon 
your  youthful  days  you  revoke  far  more  of  kinsfolk 
in  the  tomb  than  remain  in  the  world,  more  under 
the  earth  than  above  it.  In  your  dreams  you  are 
the  associates  of  the  dead.  Still  you  are  left.  Pre-j 
served  amidst  a  thousand  dangers  of  infancy,  then 
kept  in  youth,  steered  safely  over  the  shoals  and 
quicksands  of  an  immature  age,  and  over  the 
rocks  and  reefs  of  manhood,  you  have  been  brought 
past  the  ordinary  period  of  mortal  life,  and  yet  you 
are  still  here.  Seventy  years  exposed  to  perpetual 
death,  and  yet  preserved  till  you  have  come  almost, 
perhaps,  to  your  fourscore  years.  You  have  been 
left,  my  dear  brother,  and  why  are  you  left  ?  Why 
is  it  that  brothers  and  sisters  are  all  gone  ?  Why 
is  it  that  your  old  school-companions  have  gradu- 
ally thinned  ?  You  cannot  recollect  one,  now  alive, 
who  was  your  companion  in  youth.     How  is  it  that 


SPARED !  19 

now,  you,  who  have  lived  in  a  certain  quarter  so 
long,  see  new  names  there  on  all  the  shop  doors, 
new  faces  in  the    street,    and    everything    new    to 
what  y^ou  once  saw  in  your  young  days  ?     Why 
are  you  spared  ?     Are  you  an  unconverted  man  ? 
are   you   an   unconverted    woman  ?     To  what  end 
are  you  spared  ?     Is  it  that  you  may  at  the  eleventh 
hour  be  saved  ?— God  grant  it  may  be  so~or  art 
thou  spared  till  thou  shalt  have  sinned  thyself  into 
the  lowest  depths  of  hell  that  thou  mayest  go  there 
the  most  aggravated  sinner  because  of  oft-repeated 
warnings  as  often  neglected— art  thou  spared  for 
this,  or  is  it  that  thou  mayest  yet  be  saved  ?     But 
art  thou  a  Christian  ?     Then  is  it  not  hard  for  thee 
to  answer  the  question,  AVhy  art  thou  spared  ?     I 
do  not  believe  there  is  an  old  woman  on  earth,  liv- 
ing in  the  most  obscure  cot  in  England,  and  sitting 
this  very  night  in  the  dark  garret,  with  her  candle 
gone  out,  without  means  to  buy  another—I  do  not 
believe  that  old  woman  would  be  kept  out  of  heaven 
five  minutes  unless  God  had  something  for  her  to 
do  on   earth ;   and   I   do  not  think  that  yon  gray- 
headed  man  now  would  be  preserved  here  unless 
there   was  somewhat  for  him   to  do.     Tell  it  out, 
tell  it  out,  thou  aged   man;   tell  the  story  of  that 
preserving  grace  which  has  kept  thee  up  till  now. 
Tell  to  thy  children  and  to  thy  children's  children 
what  a  God  he  is  whom  thou  hast  trusted.     Stand 
up  as  a  hoary  patriarch  and  tell  how  he  delivered 
thee  in  six  troubles,  and  in  seven  suffered  no  evi] 
to  touch  thee,  and  bear  to  coming  generations  thy 


20  STORM   SIGNALS. 

faithful  witness  that  his  word  is  true,  and  that  his 
promise  cannot  fail.  Lean  on  thy  staff,  and  say 
ere  thou  diest  in  the  midst  of  thy  family,  "  Not  one 
good  thing  hath  failed  of  all  that  the  Lord  God 
hath  promised."  Let  thy  ripe  days  bring  forth  a 
mellow  testimony  to  his  love;  and  as  thou  hast 
more  and  more  advanced  in  years,  so  be  thou  more 
and  more  advanced  in  knowledge  and  in  confirmed 
assurance  of  the  immutability  of  his  counsel,  the 
truthfulness  of  his  oath,  the  preciousness  of  his 
blood,  and  the  sureness  of  the  salvation  of  all  those 
who  put  their  trust  in  him.  Then  shall  we  know 
that  thou  art  spared  for  a  high  and  noble  purpose 
indeed.  Thou  shalt  say  it  with  tears  of  gratitude, 
and  we  will  listen  with  smiles  of  joy — "  I  was  left." 
IL  I  must  rather  suggest  these  retrospects  than 
follow  them  up,  though,  did  time  permit,  we  might 
well  enlarge  abundantly,  and  therefore  I  must  hur- 
ry on  to  invite  you  to  Si  prospect  "  And  I  was  left." 
You  and  I  shall  soon  pass  out  of  this  world  into 
another.  This  life  is,  as  it  were,  but  the  ferry 
boat;  we  are  being  carried  across,  and  we  shall 
soon  come  to  the  true  shore,  the  real  terra  Jirma, 
for  here  there  is  nothing  that  is  substantial.  When 
we  shall  come  into  the  next  world  we  have  to  ex- 
pect by  and  by  a  resurrection — a  resurrection  both 
of  the  just  and  of  the  unjust;  and  in  that  solemn 
day  we  are  to  expect  that  all  that  dwell  upon  the 
face  of  the  earth  shall  be  gathered  together  in  one 
place.  And  he  shall  come,  who  came  once  to 
Buffer,  "he  shall  come  to  judge  the  world  in  right- 


SPARED!  21 

eousness,  and  the  people  in  equity."  He  who 
came  as  an  infant  shall  come  as  the  Infinite.  He 
who  lay  wrapped  in  swaddling  bands  shall  come 
girt  about  the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle,  with  a 
rainbow  wreath,  and  robes  of  storm.  There  shall 
we  all  stand  a  vast  innumerable  company;  earth 
shall  be  crowned  from  her  valley's  deepest  base  to 
the  mountain's  summit,  and  the  sea's  waves  shall 
become  the  solid  standing-place  of  men  and  women 
who  have  slept  beneath  its  torrents.  Then  shall 
every  eye  be  fixed  on  him,  and  every  ear  shall  be 
open  to  him,  and  every  heart  shall  watch  with 
solemn  awe  and  dread  suspense  for  the  trans- 
actions of  that  greatest  of  all  days,  that  day  of  days, 
that  sealing  up  of  the  ages,  that  completing  of  the 
dispensation.  In  solemn  pomp  the  Saviour  comes, 
and  his  angels  with  him.  You  hear  his  voice  as 
he  cries,  "  Gather  together  the  tares  in  bundles 
to  burn  them."  Behold  the  reapers,  how  they 
come  with  wings  of  fire  !  see  how  they  grasp  their 
sharp  sickles  which  have  long  been  grinding  upon 
the  mill-stone  of  God's  long-suff'ering,  but  have 
become  sharpened  at  the  last.  Do  you  see  them 
as  they  approach?  And  there  they  are  mowing 
down  a  nation  with  their  sickles.  The  vile  idol- 
aters have  just  now  fallen,  and  yonder  a  family  of 
blasphemers  has  been  crushed  beneath  the  feet  of 
the  reapers.  See  there  a  bundle  of  drunkards 
being  carried  away  upon  the  reapers'  shoulders  to 
the  great  blazing  fire.  See  again  in  another  place 
the  whoremonger,  the  adulterer,  the  unchaste,  and 


22  STORM    SIGNALS. 

such  like,  tied  up  in  vast  bundles — bundles  the 
withes  of  which  shall  never  be  rent — and  see  them 
cast  into  the  fire,  and  see  how  they  blaze  in  the  un- 
utterable torments  of  that  pit:  and  shall  I  be  left? 
Great  God,  shall  I  stand  there  wrapped  in  his 
righteousness  alone,  the  righteousness  of  him  who 
sits  my  Judge  erect  upon  the  judgment  seat  ?  Shall 
I,  when  the  wicked  shall  cry,  "  Rocks  hide  us, 
mountains  on  us  fall,"  shall  this  eye  look  up,  shall 
this  face  dare  to  turn  itself  to  the  face  of  him  that 
sits  upon  the  throne  ?  Shall  I  stand  calm  and  un- 
moved amidst  universal  terror  and  dismay  ?  Shall 
I  be  numbered  with  the  godly  company,  who, 
clothed  with  the  white  linen  which  is  the  right- 
eousness of  the  saints,  shall  await  the  sbock,  shall 
see  the  wicked  hurled  to  destruction,  and  feel  and 
know  themselves  secure  ?  Shall  it  be  so,  or  shall 
I  be  bound  up  in  a  bundle  to  burn,  and  swept 
away  forever  by  the  breath  of  God's  nostrils,  like 
the  chaff  driven  before  the  wind?  It  must  be  one 
or  the  other;  which  shall  it  be?  Can  I  answer 
that  question  ?  Can  I  tell  ?  I  can  tell  it — tell  it  now 
— for  I  have  in  this  very  chapter  that  which 
teaches  me  how  to  judge  myself  They  who  are 
pres^ved  have  the  mark  on  their  foreheads,  and 
they  have  a  character  as  well  as  a  mark,  and  their 
character  is,  that  they  sigh  and  cry  for  all  the  abom- 
inations of  the  wicked.  Then,  if  I  hate  sin,  and  if  I 
sigh  because  others  love  it — if  I  cry  because  I  my- 
self through  infirmity  fall  into  it — if  the  sin  of  my- 
self and  the  sin  of  others  is  a  constant  source  of 


SPARED!  23 

grief  and  vexation  of  spirit  to  me,  then  have  I  that 
mark  and  evidence  of  those  who  shall  neither  sigh 
nor  cry  in  the  world  to  come,  for  sorrow  and  sigh- 
ing shall  flee  away.  Have  I  the  blood  mark  on 
my  brow  to-day  ?  Say,  my  soul,  hast  thou  put  thy 
trust  in  Jesus  Christ  alone,  and  as  the  fruit  of  the 
faith,  has  thy  faith  learned  how  to  love,  not  only 
him  that  saveth  thee,  but  others  too,  who  as  yet  are 
unsaved?  And  do  I  sigh  and  cry  within  while  I 
bear  the  blood  mark  without?  Come,  brother, 
sister,  answer  this  for  thyself,  I  charge  thee;  I 
charge  thee  do  so,  by  the  tottering  earth,  and  by 
the  ruined  pillars  of  heaven,  that  shall  surely  shake. 
I  pray  thee  by  the  cherubim  and  seraphim  that 
shall  be  before  the  throne  of  the  great  Judge;  by 
the  blazing  lightnings,  that  shall  then  kindle  the 
thick  darkness,  and  make  the  sun  amazed,  and 
turn  the  moon  into  blood;  by  him  whose  tongue 
is  like  a  flame — like  a  sword  of  fire;  by  him  who 
shall  judge  thee,  and  try  thee,  and  read  thy  heart 
and  declare  thy  ways,  and  divide  unto  thee  thine 
eternal  portion.  \  I  conjure  thee,  by  the  certainties 
of  death,  by  the  sureness  of  judgment,  by  the 
glories  of  heaven,  by  the  solemnities  of  hell — I  be- 
seech, implore,  command,  entreat  thee — ask  thyself 
now,  "Shall  I  be  left?"  Do  I  believe  in  Christ? 
Have  I  been  born  again  ?  Have  I  a  new  heart 
and  a  right  spirit?  Or,  am  1  still  what  I  always 
was — God's  enemy,  Christ's  despiser,  cursed  by  the 
law,  cast  out  from  the  gospel,  without  God  arid 
without  hope,  a  stranger  to  the  commonwealth  of 


24  STORM   SIGNALS. 

Israel  ?  Oh,  I  cannot  speak  to  thee  as  earnestly  as 
I  would  to  God  I  could.  I  want  to  thrust  this 
question  into  your  very  loins,  and  stir  up  your 
heart's  deepest  thoughts  with  it.  Sinner,  what 
will  become  of  thee  when  God  shall  winnow  the 
chaff  from  the  wheat,  what  will  be  thy  portion  ? 
Thou  that  standest  in  the  aisle  yonder,  what  will 
be  thy  portion,  thou  who  art  crowded  there  what 
will  be  thy  portion,  when  he  shall  come,  and 
nothing  shall  escape  his  eye  ?  Say,  shalt  thou 
hear  him  ?  Say,  and  shall  thy  heart-strings  crack 
whilst  he  utters  the  thundering  sound,  "  Depart, 
ye  cursed;"  or  shall  it  be  thy  happy  lot — thy  soul 
transported  all  the  while  with  bliss  unutterable — 
to  hear  him  say,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father, 
inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
foundations  of  the  world."  Our  text  invites  a  pro- 
spect. I  pray  you  take  it,  and  look  across  the 
narrow  stream  of  death,  and  say,  "Shall  I  be  left?" 

**  When  thou,  my  righteous  Judge,  shalt  come, 
To  fetch  thy  ransom' d  people  home, 

Shall  I  among  them  stand  ? 
Shall  such  a  worthless  worm  as  I, 
Who  sometimes  am  afraid  to  die, 
Be  found  at  thy  right  hand  ?  " 

III.  But  now  we  come  to  a  terrible  contrast^ 
which  I  think  is  permitted  in  the  text — "  I  was 
left."  Then  there  will  be  some  who  will  not  be  left 
in  the  sense  we  have  been  speaking  of,  and  yet 
who  will  be  left  after  another  and  more  dreadful 
manner.     They  will  be  left  by  mercy,  forsaken  by 


SPARED!  25 

hope,  given  up  by  friends,  and  become  a  prey  to 
the  implacable  fury,  to  the  sudden,  infinite,  and 
unmitigated  severity  and  justice  of  an  angry  God. 
But  they  will  not  be  left  or  exempted  from  judg- 
ment, for  the  sword  shall  find  them  out,  the  vials 
of  Jehovah  shall  reach  even  to  their  hearts.  And 
that  flame,  the  pile  whereof  is  wood,  and  much 
smoke  shall  suddenly  devour  them,  and  that  with- 
out remedy.  Sinner,  thou  shalt  be  left.  1  say, 
thou  shalt  be  left  of  all  those  fond  joys  that  thou 
huggest  now — left  of  that  pride  which  now  steels 
thy  heart:  thou  wilt  be  low  enough  then.  Thou 
wilt  be  left  of  that  iron  constitution  which  now 
seems  to  repel  the  dart  of  death.  Thou  shalt  be 
left  of  those  companions  of  thine  that  en  lice  thee 
on  to  sin  and  harden  thee  in  iniquity.  Thou 
shalt  be  left  by  those  who  promise  to  be  thy 
helpers  at  the  last.  They  shall  need  helpers  them- 
selves, and  the  strong  man  shall  fail.  Thou  shalt 
be  left  then  of  that  pleasing  fancy  of  thine,  and  of 
that  merry  wit  which  can  make  sport  of  Bible 
truths  and  mock  at  divine  solemnities.  Thou 
shalt  be  left  then  of  all  thy  buoyant  hopes,  and  of 
all  thy  imaginary  delights.  Thou  shalt  be  left  of 
that  sweet  angel,  Hope,  who  never  forsaketh  any 
but  those  who  are  condemned  to  hell.  Thou  shalt 
be  left  of  God's  Spirit,  who  sometimes  now  pleads 
with  thee.  Thou  shalt  be  left  of  Jesus  Christ, 
whose  gospel  hath  been  so  often  preached  in  thine 
ear.  Thou  shalt  be  left  of  God  the  Father;  he  shall 
shut  his  eyes  of  pity  against  thee,  his  bowels  of 


26  STORM   SIGNALS. 

compassion  shall  no  more  yearn  over  thee ;  nor  shall 
his  heart  regard  thy  cries.  Thou  shalt  be  left; 
but  oh !  again  I  tell  thee,  thou  shalt  not  be  left  as 
one  who  hath  escaped,  for  when  the  earth  shall 
open  to  swallow  up  the  wicked,  it  shall  open  at 
thy  feet  and  swallow  thee  up.  When  the  fiery 
thunderbolt  shall  pursue  the  spirit  that  falls  into 
the  pit  that  is  bottomless,  it  shall  pursue  thee  and 
reach  thee  and  find  thee.  When  God  rendeth  the 
wicked  in  pieces,  and  there  shall  be  none  to  de- 
liver, he  shall  rend  thee  in  pieces,  he  shall  be  unto 
thee  as  a  consuming  tire,  thy  conscience  shall  be 
full  of  gall,  thy  heart  shall  be  drunken  with  bit- 
terness, thy  teeth  shall  be  broken  even  with  gravel 
stones,  thy  hopes  riven  with  his  hot  thunderbolts, 
and  all  thy  joys  withered  and  blasted  by  his  breath. 
Oh !  careless  sinner,  mad  sinner,  thou  who  art  dash- 
ing thyself  now  downward  to  destruction,  why  wilt 
thou  play  the  fool  at  this  rate?  There  are  cheaper 
ways  of  making  sport  for  thyself  than  this.  Dash 
thy  head  against  the  wall;  go  scrabble  there,  and, 
like  David,  let  thy  spittle  fall  upon  thy  beard,  but 
let  not  thy  sin  fall  upon  thy  conscience,  and  let  not 
thy  despite  of  Christ  be  like  a  millstone  hanged 
about  thy  neck,  with  which  thou  shalt  be  cast  into 
the  sea  forever.  Be  wise,  I  pray  thee.  Oh,  Lord, 
make  the  sinner  wise;  hush  his  madness  for  awhile; 
let  him  be  sober  and  hear  the  voice  of  reason ;  let 
him  be  still  and  hear  the  voice  of  conscience;  let 
him  be  obedient  and  hear  the  voice  of  Scripture. 
"Thus  saith  the  Lord,  because  I  will  do  this,  con- 


SPARED !  27 

sider  thy  ways."  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God." 
*'  Oh,  Israel,  set  thine  house  in  order,  for  thou  shalt 
die  and  not  live."  "Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  I  do  feel  I  have 
a  message  for  some  one  to-night.  Though  there 
may  be  some  who  think  the  sermon  not  appro- 
priate to  a  congregation  where  there  is  so  large  a 
proportion  of  converted  men  and  women,  yet 
what  a  large  portion  of  ungodly  ones  there  are 
here  too !  I  know  that  you  come  here,  many  of 
you,  to  hear  some  funny  tale,  or  to  catch  at  some 
strange,  extravagant  speech  of  one  whom  you  re- 
pute to  be  an  eccentric  man.  Ah,  well,  he  is  eccen- 
tric, and  hopes  to  be  so  till  he  dies;  but  it  is  simply 
eccentric  in  being  in  earnest,  and  wanting  to  win 
souls.  Oh,  poor  sinners,  there  is  no  odd  tale  I  would 
not  tell  if  I  thought  it  would  be  blessed  to  you. 
There  is  no  grotesque  language  which  I  would  not 
use,  however  it  might  be  thrown  back  at  me  again, 
if  1  thought  it  might  but  be  serviceable  to  you.  I 
set  not  my  account  to  be  thought  a  fine  speaker; 
they  that  use  fine  language  may  dwell  in  the  king's 
palaces.  I  speak  to  you  as  one  who  knows  he  is 
accountable  to  no  man,  but  only  to  his  God;  as 
one  who  shall  have  to  render  his  account  at  the 
last  great  day.  And  I  pray  you  now  go  not  away 
to  talk  of  this  and  that  which  you  have  remarked 
in  my  language.  Think  of  this  one  thing,  "  Shall 
1  be  left  ?  shall  I  be  saved  ?  Shall  I  be  caught  up 
and  dwell  with  Christ  in  heaven  ?  or  shall  I  be 
cast  down  to  hell  for  ever  and  ever  ?"     Turn  over 


28  STORM   SIGNALS. 

these  things.  Tliink  seriously  of  them.  Hear 
that  voice  which  says,  ''  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I 
will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  Give  heed  to  the  voice 
which  expostulates — "  Come  now,  let  us  reason 
together,  saith  the  Lord:  though  your  sins  be  aSi 
scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow;  though 
they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool." 
How  else  fehall  your  life  be  spared  when  the 
wicked  are  judged  ?  How  else  shall  you  find 
shelter  when  the  tempest  of  divine  wrath  rages? 
How  else  shall  you  stand  in  the  lot  of  the  right- 
eous at  the  end  of  the  days  ? 


Startling ! 

*•  And  Hazael  said,  Why  weepeth  my  Lord  ?  And  he  answered. 
Because  I  know  the  evil  that  thou  wilt  do  unto  the  children  of 
Israel.  And  Hazael  said,  But  what,  is  thy  servant  a  dog,  that  he 
should  do  this  great  thing  ?  " — II  Kings  viii.  12,  13. 

I  SUPPOSE  that  none  of  us  can  doubt  that 
Hazael  acted  with  perfect  freedom  when  he 
became  the  murderer  of  his  master.  No  one, 
surely,  would  dare  to  suggest  that  any  constraint 
was  put  upon  him.  The  glittering  prospect  of 
wearing  the  crown  of  Syria  was  before  his  eyes. 
Nothing  stood  between  him  and  the  kingdom  but 
the  life  of  his  master.  That  master  lies  sick  of  a 
fever.  A  wet  cloth  is  the  usual  remedy.  He  has 
but  to  select  one  that  shall  be  thicker  than  usual, 
and  take  care  in  spreading  it  over  his  face  to  ac- 
commodate it  so  that  the  man  is  suffocated,  and 
lo !  he  comes  to  the  throne.  What  wonder  is  it 
that  Hazael  easily  puts  his  master  oat  of  the  way, 
and  then  mounts  the  vacant  seat  ?  None  of  us 
will  imagine  for  a  moment  that  he  was  under  con- 
straint, unless  it  was  Satanic.  And  yet  while  he 
acted  as  a  free  agent,  is  it  not  quite  clear  that  God 
foreknew  what  he  would  do — that  it  was  absolutely 


30  STORM   SIGNALS. 

certain  he  would  destroy  his  master?  The  prophet 
speaks  not  as  one  who  hazarded  a  conjecture.  He 
foresaw  the  event  with  absolute  certainty,  yet  did 
this  man  act  with  perfect  freedom  when  he  went 
and  accomplished  the  prophecy  of  Elisha.  I  be- 
lieve, my  brethren,  that  it  is  quite  as  easy  to  see 
how  God's  predestination  and  mari's  free  agency 
are  perfectly  compatible,  as  it  is  to  see  how  divine 
foreknowledge  and  human  free  agency  are  consis- 
tent with  one  another.  Doth  not  the  very  fact  of 
foreknowledge  imply  a  certainty?  Is  not  that 
which  is  foreknown  certain  ?  Is  not  the  fact  sure 
to  be  when  God  foreknows  that  it  will  be  ?  How 
could  it  be  foreknown  conditionally?  How  could 
it  be  foretold  conditionally?  In  this  instance 
there  was  no  stipulation  or  contingency  whatever. 
It  was  absolutely  foretold  that  Hazael  should  be 
king  of  Syria.  The  prophet  knew  the  fact  right 
well,  and  right  clearly  he  descried  the  means,  or 
else  why  should  he  look  into  his  face  and  weep? 
God  foreknew  the  mischief  that  he  would  do  after- 
wards, when  he  came  to  the  throne;  and  yet  that 
foreknowledge  did  not  in  the  least  degree  interfere 
with  his  free  agency.  Nor  is  this  an  isolated  and 
exceptional  case.  The  facts  most  surely  believed 
among  us,  like  the  doctrines  most  clearly  reyeaLed 
to  us,  point  all  of  them  to  the  same  inference.  The 
predestination  of  God  does  not  destroy  the  free 
agency  of  man,  or  lighten  the  responsibility  of 
the  sinner.  It  is  true,  in  the  matter  of  salvation, 
when  God  comes  to  save,  his  free  grace  prevails 


STARTLING!  31 

over  our  free  agency,  and  leads  the  will  in  glori- 
ous captivity  to  the  obedience  of  faith.  But  in  sin 
man  is  free — free  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term, 
never  being  compelled  to  do  any  evil  deed,  but  be- 
ing left  to  follow  the  turbulent  passions  of  his  own 
corrupt  heart,  and  carry  out  the  prevailing  tenden- 
cies of  his  own  depraved  nature.  In  reference  to 
this  matter  of  predestination  and  free  will,  I  have 
often  heard  men  ask,  "How  do  you  make  them 
agree?  "  I  think  there  is  another  question  just  as 
difficult  to  solve.  "  How  can  you  make  them 
differ?"  The  two  may  be  as  easily  made  to  con- 
cur as  to  clash.  It  seems  to  me  a  problem  which 
cannot  be  stated,  and  a  subject  that  needs  no  solu- 
tion. It  is  but  a  difficulty  which  we  surmise,  and 
theoretical  dilemmas  are  always  hard  to  deal  with 
and  difficult  to  disentangle.  When  we  look  at  the 
matters  of  fact,  the  mist  that  clouds  our  under- 
standing vanishes.  We  see  God  predestinating 
and  man  premeditating;  God  knowing  fully,  yet 
man  acting  freely;  God  ordaining  every  circum- 
stance, yet  man  manoeuvring  to  compass  his  own 
projects;  in  short  we  see  man  accurately,  but  un- 
consciously, fulfilling  all  which  was  written  in  the 
wisdom  of  God;  and  that  without  any  impetus  of 
the  Almighty  upon  his  mind  constraining  or  incit- 
ing him  so  to  do.  You  will  observe  in  this  chap- 
ter three  or  four  distinct  instances  in  which  both 
the  foreknowledge  and  foreordination  of  God  are 
distinctly  proven,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  the 
free  agency  of  the  creature  is  conspicuously  set 


32  STORM   SIGNALS. 

forth.  That  point,  however,  I  have  merely  ad- 
verted to  by  way  of  introduction.  My  subject  this 
evening,  as  more  immediately  suggested  by  the 
words  before  us,  is  the  common  and  too  often  fatal 
ignorance  of  men  as  to  the  wickedness  of  their 
own  hearts. 

First,  let  us  expose  and  expound  this  ignorance, 
and  then  let  us  draw  two  practical  lessons — one  of 
restraint,  what  it  suggests  to  us  that  we  should 
not  do — the  other  of  counsel,  what  it  suggests  to 
us  that  we  should  do. 

Our  ignorance  of  the  depravity  of  our  own  hearts 
is  a  startling  fact.  Hazael  did  not  believe  that  he 
was  bad  enough  to  do  any  of  the  things  here 
anticipated.  "  Is  thy  servant  a  dog  that  he  should 
do  this  great  thing?"  He  might  have  been  con- 
scious enough  that  his  heart  was  none  so  pure  but 
it  might  consent  to  do  many  an  evil  thing;  yet 
crimes  so  flagrant  as  those  the  prophet  had  foretold 
of  him,  he  thought  himself  quite  incapable  to  com- 
mit. He  could  not  believe  that  such  wanton  cru- 
elty lurked  in  his  breast,  or  that  such  barbarity 
towards  women  and  children  could  be  perpetrated 
with  his  sanction.  Not  yet,  perhaps,  was  the  am- 
bition that  aspired  to  the  throne  of  Syria,  or  the 
treachery  that  issued  in  the  murder  of  his  master, 
fully  ripe.  Ah,  my  brethren,  the  ignorance  of 
Hazarel  is  ours  to  a  greater  or  less  degree.  In  our 
natural  state  we  are  oblivious  of  the  depravity  of  our 
own  hearts.  How  commonly  we  hear  men  deny 
that  their  hearts  are  depraved.     They  tell  us  that 


STARTLING!  33 

though  man  be  a  little  injured  by  the  fall  he  is 
still  a  noble  creature.  His  high  and  glorious  in- 
stincts make  amends,  they  would  persuade  us,  for 
his  low  and  beggarly  vices.  Such  foolish  conceits 
we  impute  to  ignorance.  Men  account  crimes  re- 
volting when  they  hear  of  their  comrades  being 
convicted  of  committing  them,  but  they  do  not 
know  the  innate  plague  of  their  own  heart.  They 
have  not  yet  learned  that  their  own  heart  is  base 
and  depraved.  Hence  they  challenge  the  doctrine 
when  we  state  it — because  they  are  unconscious  of 
the  fact.  We  do  not  expect  a  man  to  accept  it  as 
an  axiom  merely  upon  our  testimony.  He  had 
need  have  some  experience  himself  before  he  will 
be  able  to  lay  hold  upon  a  truth  so  humbling,  so 
self-abasing,  as  that  of  total  depravity.  The  base- 
ness of  our  hearts  has  barely  dawned  on  our 
apprehensions,  though  we  have  a  faint  gleam  of 
suspicion.  Conscience  is  sensitive  enough  to  let 
us  know  that  all  is  not  quite  right.  We  feel  that 
we  are  not  pure,  that  we  are  not  completely  per- 
fect. We  do  admit  that  we  make  some  mistakes, 
though  we  set  them  down  to  weakness  rather  than 
willfulness;  we  apologize  for  our  infirmities,  and 
rather  excuse  than  accuse  our  own  hearts.  Most 
of  us,  however,  I  trust,  have  enough  light  to  dis- 
cern that  there  was  something  willfully  wrong  with 
our  hearts  before  the  Spirit  of  Christ  began  to  deal 
with  us.  We  would  frankly  and  freely  confess 
that  we  were  not  all  that  we  desired  to  be  our  own 
selves,  that  there  was  some  radical  evil  that  defied 


34  STORM    SJGXALS. 

our  capacity  to  search  it  out.  Ah,  but  how  pale 
was  that  gleam ;  it  was  mere  starlight  in  the  soul 
— not  like  the  sunlight  which  has  since  shone  in, 
and  shown  us  the  blackness  of  our  nature.  We 
were  ignorant,  then,  of  the  fact  that  our  nature 
wa& totally  corrupt;  we  did  not  know  that  it  was 
essentially  tainted  with  iniquity;  we  could  not 
have  endorsed  that  saying  of  the  apostle,  "  The 
carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God,  and  is  not 
subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be." 
We  could  hardly  underst-and  it,  when  we  heard  the 
Christian  minister  say  that  the  old  nature  was 
positively  irreclaimable,  and  must  be  crucified 
with  its  affections  and  lusts,  and  that  a  new  nature 
must  be  given  us.  If  we  ever  heard  a  preacher 
speak  of  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  of  our 
evil  heart  being  broken  up,  we  thought  he  exagger- 
ated; at  least  we  said,  "Surely  this  might  be  true 
of  some  notorious  criminals  or  it  might  be  even 
alleged  of  some  ill-bred  people  who  had  seen  an  ill 
example  from  their  youth  up,"  but  we  could  not 
imagine  that  this  was  actually  the  case  with  our- 
selves. Ay,  but,  my  brethren,  we  were,  to  a  great 
degree,  cured  of  this  our  ignorance  when  the  Spirit 
of  God  brought  us  under  conviction.  Oh,  what  a 
view  of  ourselves  he  then  gave  to  some  of  us  !  I 
think  we  could  say  with  Bunyan,  we  thought  the 
most  loathsome  toad  in  the  world  to  be  a  better 
creature  than  ourselves.  We  have  been  led,  when 
under  conviction  of  sin,  to  sigh  and  wish  we  had 
been  made  a  viper  or  some  reptile  that  men  would 


STARTLING!  35 

tread  upon  and  crush  rather  than  we  should  have 
been  such  base,  such  vile,  hell-deserving  sinners  as 
we  felt  ourselves  to  be.  No  disco-urse,  then,  about 
human  dignity,  could  have  pleased  us;  it  would 
have  been  rubbing  salt  into  our  sore  to  have  told 
us  that  man  was  by  birth  a  pure  and  noble  crea- 
ture. In  vain  might  they  have  attempted  to 
persuade  us  then  that  though  we  were  a  little 
awry,  a  diligent  pursuit  of  some  orthodox  plan  or 
prescription  might  easily  restore  us  and  lift  us  up 
from  the  position  into  which  we  had  been  cast  by 
Adam  and  by  our  sin.  No;  we  felt  that  divine 
grace  must  new-make  us,  that  there  must  be  a 
supernatural  work  wrought  in  such  beings  as  we 
were,  or  else  surely  we  never  could  be  fit  to  stand 
before  the  face  of  God,  and  see  him  with  joy  and 
greet  him  with  acceptance.  Thus,  I  say,  brethren, 
that  much  of  our  ignorance  was  taken  away ;  but 
alas  I  how  much  remained  !  We  did  not  know 
even  then  how  "depraved  we  were.  When  Sinai's 
lightnings  were  flashing  abroad,  and  all  our  hearts 
seemed  lit  up  with  its  dread  fire,  that  lurid  flame 
was  not  bright  enough  to  show  to  us  all  our  base- 
ness. While  we  stood  trembling  there,  and  the 
law  was  thundering  over  our  heads,  we  bowed  to 
the  very  dust,  but  we  did  not  cower  then  as  we 
ought  in  penitent  humiliation.  We  were  rather 
awed  than  melted;  for  we  had  only  just  begun  to 
decipher  the  black  letters  of  that  volume  of  our 
total  depravity.  I  think  we  knew  more  of  our 
moral  obliquity  afterwards,  when   Jesus  came  to 


86  STORM   SIGNALS. 

US,  and,  by  his  sweet  love,  bade  us  be  of  good 
cheer,  for  our  sins,  which  were  many,  were  all 
forgiven  us.  Oh,  how  we  saw  the  baseness  of  sin 
as  we  had  never  seen  it  before;  for  we  now  saw  it 
in  the  light  of  his  countenance.  The  love  of  his 
eyes  flashed  a  brighter  light  into  our  hearts  than 
all  the  lightnings  of  Mount  Paran.  Horeb's  burn- 
ing steep  never  gave  us  such  illuminations  as  did 
Calvary's  hallowed  summit.  Calvary  might  be 
the  lesser  height,  it  may  not  have  seemed  to  stand 
out  with  such  majesty  and  awe,  but  it  exerted 
greater  power  over  us.  In  its  tender  flush  of 
mellow  light,  our  eyes  could  see  more  clearly  than 
in  all  the  fitful  flashes  that  had  scared  us  hitherto. 
I  think  we  saw,  then,  to  as  full  an  extent  as  it  was 
possible  for  us  to  bear,  how  vile,  how  desperately 
evil  was  our  nature  !  When  we  perceived  how 
great  must  be  the  sacrifice  which,  by  its  virtue, 
could  atone  for  sin,  how  vast  that  price  of  our 
Redeemer's  blood  which  only  could  provide  a 
ransom  from  the  fall,  we  had  lessons  once  for  all 
taught  us,  never  to  be  forgotten.  And  yet,  since 
then,  methinks  we  have  learnt  more  of  the  evil  of 
our  own  hearts  than  we  could  at  first  apprehend. 
We  said,  then,  "  Surely,  now  I  have  come  into  the 
innermost  chamber  of  iniquity;"  but  often,  since 
that  day,  has  the  Spirit  said  to  us,  "  Son  of  man,  I 
will  show  thee  greater  abominations  than  these," 
and  we  have  been  led  to  see,  in  the  light  of  God's 
continual  mercies,  his  perpetual  faithfulness,  his 
unfailing  love — we  have  been  led  to  view  in  that 


STARTLING!  37 

light  our  continued  wanderings,  our  idolatries  of 
heart,    our  murmurings,  our  pride,  and  our  lusts, 
and    we    have    found    ourselves   out   to   be   worse 
tlian  we  thought  we  were.     I  appeal  to  you,  Chris- 
tian men  and  women,  if  any  one  had  told  you  that 
you  would  have  loved  your  Saviour  so  little  as  you 
have  done;  if  any  prophet    had  told  you,    in  the 
hour    of  your    conversion,    that   you    would  have 
served  him  so  feebly  as  you  have  done,  would  you 
have. believed  it?     I  appeal  to  you  from  the  dew 
of  your  youth,  from  that  morning  blush  of  your 
soul's  unclouded  joy,  if  an  angel  from  heaven  had 
said  to  you,  "  You  will  doubt  your  God,  you  will 
murmur  against  his  providence,  you  will  kick  at 
the  dispensations  of  his  grace"— say,  would  you 
not  have  replied,  ''  Is  thy  servant  a  dog,  that  he 
should  do  this  evil  thing  !  "     Your  experience,  I 
am  sure,  has  taught  you  that  you  were  not  aware, 
when  you  put  on  your  harness,  how  dastard  was 
the    soldier    who    then    did  gird    himself  for   the 
battle.     But  mark  this,  we  none  of  us  know,  after 
all,  much  of  the  baseness  of  our  hearts.     Some  of 
you  may  have    had  more   drill    than    others;  you 
may  have  made  proof  of  it  by   sad  backsliding, 
your    lusts   may    have   outwardly    betrayed    their 
inward   vigor;   you  may  have  been  discarded  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  for  a  little  season  that  the  Lord 
might  show  you  that  you  were  weak  as  other  men, 
that  he  might  prove  to  you  the  hollownessof  all 
your  self-confidence,  and  wean  you  from  all  trust 
in  your  own  integrity;  but  the  most  sorely  exer- 


38  STORM   SIGNALS. 

cised  among  you  have  not  learnt  this  lesson  fully 
3''et.  God  only  knows  the  vileness  of  the  huaian 
heart.  There  is  a  depth  beneath,  a  hidden  spring, 
into  which  we  cannot  pry.  In  that  lower  depth 
there  is  a  still  deeper  abyss  of  positive  corruption  ► 
which  we  need  not  wish  to  fathom.  God  grant 
that  we  may  know  enough  of  this,  to  humble  us, 
and  keep  us  ever  low  before  God.  Yet  hold,  Lord, 
lest  we  should  yield  to  despair,  and  absolutely  lie 
down  to  die  under  the  black  thought  of  our  alien- 
ation from  righteousness,  our  naturalization  in 
sin,  and  the  deplorable  tendency  of  our  heart  to 
rebel  more  and  more  against  thee,  the  faithful  and 
true  God.  Show  us  not  our  wretchedness.  As  for 
the  most  of  us  who  cannot  talk  of  this  experience, 
let  us  not  think  ourselves  doctors  of  divinity;  let 
us  sit  down  at  once  on  the  lowest  form  of  the 
divine  school.  We  have  only  begun  to  know  our- 
selves in  part;  albeit  we  do  know  something  of 
the  Saviour,  blessed  be  his  name !  That  some- 
thing is  exceedingly  precious.  Yet  how  much 
there  is  to  learn  !  We  have  hardly  begun  to  sail 
on  that  unfathomable  sea.  We  have  not  dived  yet 
into  its  depths.  We  know  not  all  its  heights,  and 
depths,  and  lengths  and  breadths.  I  have  been 
startled  often — and  if  any  should  say,  jeeringly, 
"  The  preacher  speaketh  by  experience,"  they  may 
— I  have  often  been  startled  when  I  have  found  in 
my  heart  the  possibilities  of  iniquity  of  which  I 
thought  I  never  could  have  been  the  subject,  in 
reveries  by  day  or  in  dreams  of  the  night.     All  at 


STARTLING!  39 

once  a  blasphemy  foul  as  hell  has  started  up  in  the 
very  middle  of  offering  a  prayer  so  earnest  that  my 
heart  never  knew  more  fervor.  I  had  been  stag- 
gered at  myself  When  God  has  called  us  into 
the  pulpit — we  thought  at  one  time  we  never  could 
be  proud  if  God  honored  us — this  has  seemed  to 
quicken  our  step  in  the  black  march  of  our  de- 
praved heart.  Or  when  a  little  cast  down  and 
troubled  in  spirit,  we  have  wished  to  leave  the 
world  altogether,  and  have  been  like  Jonah,  trying 
to  flee  to  Tarshish  that  we  might  not  go  to  this 
great  Nineveh  at  his  bidding.  Little  did  we  reck 
that  there  was  such  cowardice  in  our  soul.  We 
have  found  out  another  phase  in  our  own  nature. 
Does  any  man  imagine  that  his  heart  is  not  vile  ? 
If  he  be  a  professing  Christian,  I  much  suspect 
whether  he  ought  not  to  renounce  his  profession ; 
for  methinks  any  enlightened  man  who  sincerely 
looks  to  himself,  and  whose  experience  leads  him 
somewhat  to  look  within,  will  surely  find,  not  mere 
foibles,  but  foulness  that  literally  staggers  him.  I 
question  the  Christianity  of  that  man  who  doubts 
whether  there  are  in  his  soul  the  remains  of  such 
corruption  as  drown  the  ungodl}^  in  perdition ;  or 
whether  though  a  quickened  child  of  God,  he  hath 
another  law  in  his  members,  warring  against  the 
law  of  his  mind.  What !  hath  he  no  such  battle 
within  that  the  things  he  would  do  he  often  doeth 
not,  while  the  things  that  he  would  not  do  he  often 
doeth?  Hath  he  no  need  to  be  in  constant  prayer 
to  God  to  deliver  him  from  the  evil  in  his  heart 


40  STORM   SIGNALS. 

that  he  may  be  more  than  a  conquerer  over  it  at 
last?  I  do  assert  once  more,  and  1  think  the 
experience  of  God's  children  beareth  me  out,  that 
when  we  shall  be  most  advanced,  and  when  we 
come,  at  last,  to  sit  down  in  God's  kingdom,  we 
shall  find  that  we  have  not  learnt  all  that  there  is 
to  be  learnt  of  the  foulness  of  onr  nature,  and  the 
desperateness  of  the  disease.  "  The  whole  head  is 
sick,  the  whole  heart  is  faint.  From  the  sole  of 
the  foot  even  to  the  head  there  is  no  soundness  in 
it;  but  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putrefying  sores." 
"The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things  and  des- 
perately wicked ;  who  can  know  it  ?  "  "  Cleanse 
thou  me  from  secret  faults."  "  Search  me,  0  God, 
and  know  my  heart;  try  me  and  know  my 
thoughts;  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in 
me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting."  Perhaps 
if  we  knew  more  of  this  terrible  evil  it  might  peril 
our  reason.  Hardly  could  it  be  possible  for  us  to 
bear  the  full  discovery  and  live.  Among  the  wise 
concealments  of  God,  is  that  which  hides  from 
open  view  the  depravity  of  our  heart,  and  the 
corruption  of  our  nature. 

But  now  I  turn  to  the  practical  use  of  our  sub- 
ject, looking  at  it  in  two  ways — what  it  forbids  and 
what  it  suggests.  The  depravity  of  our  nature 
forbids,  first  of  all,  a  venturing  or  presuming  to 
play  and  toy  with  temptation.  When  a  Christian 
asks,  "  May  I  go  into  such  a  place  ?  " — should  he 
parley  thus  with  himself?  "True;  temptation  is 
very  strong  there,  but  1  shall  not  yield.     It  would 


STARTLING!  41 

be  dangerous  to  another  man,  but  it  is  safe  to  me. 
If  I  were  younger,  or  less  prudent  and  circum- 
spect, I  might  be  in  jeopardy;  but  I  have  passed 
the  days  of  youthful  passion.  I  have  learned  by 
experience  to  be  more  expert.  I  think,  therefore, 
that  I  may  venture  to  plunge,  and  hope  to  swim 
where  younger  men  have  been  carried  away  by  the 
tide,  and  less  stable  ones  have  been  drowned." 
All  such  talking  as  this  cometh  of  evil,  and  gender- 
eth  evil.  Proud  flesh  vaunteth  its  purity  and  be- 
comes a  prey  to  every  vice.  This  is  the  conception 
of  iniquity ;  only  let  it  be  nourished  and  it  will  soon 
bring  forth  in  hideous  form  every  development  of  . 
sin.  He  who  carries  gunpowder  about  him  had 
better  not  stand  where  there  are  many  sparks;  he 
whose  limbs  being  out  of  joint  is  in  danger  of  fall- 
ing every  moment,  had  better  not  trust  himself  to 
walk  on  the  edge  of  the  precipice.  Let  those  who 
feel  themselves  to  be  of  a  peculiarly  sensitive  con- 
stitution not  venture  into  a  place  where  disease 
is  rife.  If  I  knew  my  lungs  to  be  weak  and 
liable  to  congestion,  I  should  shrink  from  foul  air 
and  any  vicious  atmosphere.  If  you  know  that 
your  heart  has  certain  proclivities  to  sin,  why  go 
and  tempt  the  devil  to  take  advantage  of  you  ? 
Satan  will  surprise  you  often  enough;  why  then 
should  you  borrow  fuel  from  his  forge  for  your 
own  destruction  ?  Why  will  you  go  forth  to  meet 
him  instead  of  trying  with  all  vigilance  to  elude  his 
insidious  attacks?  You  have  enough  temptation. 
It  is  an  ill  thing  for  God's  people  when  they  leave 


42  STORM  SIGNALS. 

their  quarters  and  visit  the  localities  where  sin 
abounds.  Were  you  an  angel,  were  you  sure  you 
could  never  fall,  then  you  might  pitch  your  tent  in 
the  pestilential  swamps  securely,  or  frequent  the 
haunts  of  sensual  attraction,  wliose  house  is  the 
way  to  hell,  going  down  to  the  chambers  of 
death,  without  apprehension  of  harm.  But  you 
are  so  prone  to  evil,  so  susceptible  of  contagion, 
that  I  warn  you  not  to  trifle.  Were  you  strong  as 
adamant  your  duty  would  still  be  to  keep  out  of  the 
way  of  temptation,  to  keep  as  far  as  possible  from 
that  forbidden  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil.  Howbeit,  you  are  not  as  strong  as  adamant, 
you  are  a  creature  whose  moral  power  is  weak, 
whose  bias  to  evil  is  extreme.  I  implore  thee, 
therefore,  as  thou  wouldst  honor  thy  God,  and  as 
thou  wouldst  stand  in  his  brightness,  go  not  I 
beseech  thee  where  the  temptation  to  sin  is  glar- 
ing, and  flatter  thyself  that  thou  wilt  come  out 
guileless.  There  are  some  of  us  such  poor  soldiers 
that  I  think,  if  we  had  our  choice,  we  should 
rather  be  where  there  was  least  danger.  It  is 
right  for  some  brave  men,  when  duty  calls,  to  go 
into  the  thickest  of  the  ,battle :  but  every  Christian 
is  not  meant  to  be  in  the  front  rank.  There  are 
some  men  who  have  to  deal  with  great  sins,  who 
are  to  seek  and  pluck  sinners  as  brands  from  the 
burning.  There  are  those  who,  like  the  physician, 
must  go  into  the  midst  of  the  plague  that  they 
may  save  such  as  are  smitten  with  it.  Some  men's 
calling  necessarily  demands  that  they  should  be  in 


STARTLING!  43 

the  midst  of  sin.  Yet  they  have  need  to  keep 
a  special  guard  over  themselves,  lest  while  they 
seek  to  pluck  others  from  the  jfire,  they  be  like 
Nebuchadnezzar's  men,  who  in  going  near  the 
furnace,  were  burned  themselves.  Let  them  take 
heed  then  to  themselves  who  seek  to  take  care  for 
others.  In  some  of  those  charitable  missions  in 
which  you,  my  dear  brethren  in  the  church,  are 
daily  engaged,  take  care  lest  you  yourselves, 
exposed  to  temptation,  should  so  slip  and  slide, 
that  Satan  may  have  to  rejoice,  that  instead  of 
smiting  the  lion  the  lion  hath  smitten  you,  and 
you  are  lying  at  his  feet.  Oh  !  keep  out  of  tempt- 
ation's way,  or  invade  it  armed  with  the  entire 
panoply  of  God.  Not  many  of  us  are  called  to 
expose  ourselves  to  it.  Keep  as  far  off  as  you  can. 
You  had  need  be  watchful. 

But,  again,  knowing  how  vile  we  are  by  nature, 
knowing  indeed  that  we  are  bad  enough  for 
everything,  let  us  take  another  caution.  Boast 
not,  neither  in  any  wise  vaunt  yourselves.  Pre- 
sume not  to  say,  "  I  shall  never  do  this,"  "  I  shall 
never  do  that."  Never  venture  to  say  with  Hazael, 
"  Is  thy  servant  a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  great 
thing  ?  "  My  experience  has  furnished  me  with 
many  instances  that  the  braggart  in  morality  is 
not  the  man  to  be  bound  for.  I  would  not  like  to 
stand  surety  for  his  virtue.  He  professes  to  hate 
drunkenness,  he  was  certain  he  never  could  be  in- 
toxicated, and  yet  he  has  indulged  the  vicious 
taste  when  his  companions  have  lured  him  on,  and 


44  STORM   SIGNALS. 

stained  the  character  that  he  vainly  aifected.  If 
not  that  particular  sin,  yet  there  has  been  some 
other  crime  more  terrible,  perhaps,  more  fatal  to 
the  sonl,  which  has  smitten  that  man  down  to  the 
dust  who  has  dared  to  vaunt  his  integrity.  He 
has  said,  "  My  mountain  standeth  firm ;  I  shall 
never  be  moved;"  and  in  that  very  point  where  he 
thought  his  firmness  lay,  or  in  some  other  which 
was  next-of-kin  to  it,  he  has  proved  his  weakness. 
Lo  !  the  mountain  tottered  to  its  base,  and  was  cast 
into  the  midst  of  the  sea.  There  are  no  men  who 
are  in  such  danger  as  the  men  who  think  they  are 
not  in  any  danger.  There  are  none  so  likely  to  sin 
as  those  who  say  they  cannot  sin.  I  remember  a 
story  told  me  by  a  dear  brother,  who  is  present 
with  us  now.  A  tradesman  who  held  office  in  the 
church  asked  him  for  a  loan  of  money.  Though 
rather  inconvenient  he  was  about  to  comply,  and 
would  have  done  so  had  not  some  such  induce- 
ment as  this  been  offered — "  You  know  you  may 
safely  advance  this  money  to  me,  for  I  am  incor- 
ruptible. I  am  not  young;  I  am  past  temptation." 
Thereupon  my  friend  promptly  declined,  as  he  did 
not  like  the  security.  The  result  justified  his 
shrewdness.  At  that  very  time  the  borrower  knew 
he  was  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy,  and,  ere  long, 
was  actually  a  bankrupt,  and  yet  he  could  pretend 
to  say  he  was  above  temptation.  Above  all,  avoid 
those  men  who  think  themselves  immaculate,  and 
never  fear  a  fall.  If  there  be  a  ship  on  God's  sea 
the   captain  of  which  declares  that  nothing   can 


STARTLING!  45 

ever  sink  her,  stand  clear,  get  to  the  first  leaky- 
boat  to  escape,  for  she  will  surely  founder.  Give 
a  ship  the  flag  of  humility,  and  it  is  well ;  but  they 
that  spread  out  the  red  flag  of  pride,  and  boast 
that  they  are  staunch  and  trim,  and  shall  never 
sink,  they  will  either  strike  upon  a  rock,  or  founder 
in  the  open  sea.  Pride  is  the  mother  of  soul  ruin ; 
self-confidence  is  next  door  to  self-destruction. 
*' Pride  goeth  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty 
spirit  before  a  fall."  Boast  not,  though  thou  be 
never  so  strong.  Boasting  becometh.  not  any  mor- 
tal. Not  the  stature  nor  the  strength  of  Goliath 
could  furnish  a  pretext  for  his  arrogance.  Goliath 
never  seemed  so  little  as  when  he  said,  "  Come  to 
me,  and  I  will  give  thy  flesh  to  the  fowls  of  the 
air."  Leave  thy  boasting  until  the  battle  is  done. 
Do  not  begin  to  glory  till  thou  hast  trodden  all 
thine  enemies  beneath  thy  feet.  Wait  till  thou 
hast  crossed  the  Jordan,  and  hast  reached  the 
shores  of  the  promised  land.  Do  not  begin  to  say- 
yet,  "  I  am  out  of  gunshot;  I  am  beyond  the  reach 
of  sin."  "  Oh,"  saith  one,  "  I  am  so  grown  in  grace 
that  I  cannot  sin."  Brother,  I  would  not  have  thee 
think  so.  Thou  hast  so  grown  in  grace  that  thou 
raayest  not  slip.  "  The  man  after  God's  own 
heart  "  sinned  foully.  What  if  thou  be  after  God's 
own  heart,  why  shouldst  thou  say,  "  I  cannot  sin  ?" 
Think  thou  of  Lot — -just  Lot,  vexed  with  the  filthy- 
conversations  of  the  wicked,  into  what  follies  he 
was  betrayed.  Art  thou  wise  as  Solomon?  Yet 
Solomon  was  an  arrant  fool.     Mayest  thou  not  be 


4G  STORM   SIGNALS. 

in  thine  old  age  a  fool  too  ?  Art  thou  a  believer  ? 
So  was  Peter,  and  yet  Peter  denied  his  Master. 
Mayest  not  thou  deny  thy  Master  too  ?  Let  the 
fact  that  many  of  God's  saints  have  fallen  where 
they  seemed  to  be  the  strongest — Moses  the  meek 
failed  in  his  temper,  Abraham  faltered  in  his  faith, 
patient  Job  waxed  irritable,  and  so  forth — let 
their  example  teach  thee  to  take  heed  to  thyself, 
lest  thou  also  be  tempted,  and  thou  also  be  cast 
down. 

And  let  this  fact  that  we  do  not  know  our  base- 
ness teach  us  not  to  be  harsh,  or  too  severe,  with 
those  of  God's  people  who  have  inadvertently 
fallen  into  sin.  Be  severe  with  their  sin;  never 
countenance  it;  let  your  actions  and  your  conduct 
prove  that  you  hate  the  garment  spotted  with  the 
flesh,  that  you  abhor  the  transgression,  cannot 
endure  it,  and  must  away  with  it.  Yet  ever  dis- 
tinguish between  the  transgressor  and  the  trans- 
gression. Think  not  that  his  soul  is  lost  because 
his  feet  have  slipped.  Imagine  not  that  because 
he  has  gone  astray  he  cannot  be  restored.  If 
there  must  be  a  church  censure  passed  upon  him 
— yet  take  care  that  thou  so  act  that  he  in  penit- 
ence of  spirit  may  joyously  return.  Be  thou  as 
John  was  to  Peter.  Shut  not  out  thy  fallen  brother, 
for  the  day  may  come  when  they  shall  shut  thee 
out,  and  when  thou  mayest  need  all  the  pity  and 
all  the  help  which  the  spiritual  guide  can  give  unto 
thee.  Distinguish,  I  say  again,  between  the  sin 
that  thou  dost   condemn   and   the   sinner   whom 


STARTLING!  47 

thou  must  still  love — the  child  of  God  over  whom 
thou  must  still  weep.  Ah,  sirs !  there  may  be 
some  of  you  here  who  speak  with  bitter  contempt 
and  scorn  of  those  who,  notwithstanding  their 
frailties,  are  better  men  than  yourselves.  God 
may  have  suffered  some  sin  to  attain  a  great  pre- 
dominance over  them  for  a  season.  Perhaps,  if  all 
were  known  of  you,  you  might  be  proved  to  be 
worse  than  they; — and  oh!  were  the  Lord  to  take 
his  bit  from  your  mouth,  and  the  bridle  of  his 
divine  providence  from  your  jaws,  you  might  run 
to  greater  excesses  of  riot  still.  Who  maketh 
thee  to  differ  ?  What  hast  thou  that  thou  hast 
not  received  ?  Say  in  thy  soul,  "  By  the  grace  of 
God  I  am  what  I  am;"'  but  stand  not  up  with  the 
self-righteousness  of  the  Pharisee — say  not,  "  God, 
I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are."- 

Leaving  now  this  point  of  caution,  let  us  con- 
sider, by  way  of  counsel,  what  positive  sugges- 
tions may  arise.  If  we  be  thus  depraved,  and 
know  not  the  full  extent  of  our  depravity,  what 
then  should  we  do  ?  Surely  we  should  daily  mourn 
before  God  because  of  this  great  sinfulness.  Full 
of  sin  we  are.  Let  us  constantly  renew  our  grief. 
We  have  not  repented  of  sin  to  the  full  extent, 
unless  we  repent  of  the  disposition  to  sin  as  well 
as  the  actual  commission  of  sin.  We  should  de- 
plore before  God,  not  only  what  we  have  done,  but 
that  depravity  which  made  us  do  it.  See  how  Da- 
vid repents.  He  does  not  merely  mourn  for  sin, 
but  he  says,  "  Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,  and 


48  STORM   SIGNALS. 

in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  He  makes  it 
a  part  of  his  confessions,  that  iniquity  was  in  his 
inward  parts,  and  that  his  sonl  was  tainted  from 
the  birth.  So  be  it  with  you :  weep  over  the  nature 
as  well  as  over  the  development  of  the  nature. 
Weep  not  over  the  fountain  merely,  but  over  the 
deep  spring  from  which  this  fountain  gushes;  not 
merely  over  the  coin  of  sin  which  has  been  minted 
into  outer  acts,  but  over  that  base  bullion  of  in- 
iquity which  lies  uncoined  in  your  heart.  Every  day 
exposes  this,  as  well  as  the  sins  you  have  com- 
mitted, before  God.  Lay  before  God,  not  merely 
thy  crutches,  but  thy  lameness;  not  merely  thy  cere- 
monial defilement,  but  the  deep  leprosy  that  is  in 
thy  skin  and  in  thy  bone.  Yea,  mourn  over  it,  and 
beg  him  by  his  grace  to  cleanse  thee,  that  thou 
mayest  enter  into  his  kingdom.  And  when  thou 
hast  thus  done,  take  heed  that  thou  walk  every 
day  very  near  to  God,  seeking  daily  supplies  of  his 
grace.  Brethren,  I  charge  you,  and  specially  do  I 
charge  myself  here,  let  us  look  up  to  God,  let  us 
hourly  depend  upon  him,  feeling  that  yesterday's 
grace  is  of  no  use  whatever  to-day;  that  the  grace 
which  saved  us  seven  years  ago  is  not  the  grace 
that  can  save  us  now,  but  we  must  have  fresh  sup- 
plies. Oh,  there  be  many,  I  think,  who  sit  down 
and  say,  "I  did  once  know  Christ."  That  is  not 
enough,  brethren ;  we  must  know  Christ  each  day, 
we  must  have  fresh  grace  each  hour.  It  is  not 
once  to  be  partaker  of  the  divine  nature,  but  to  be 
daily  a  partaker  of  it.     Doth  the  tree  bear  the  fruit 


STARTLING!  49 

by  the  sap  of  seven  years  ago  ?     Is  it  not  the  sap 
of  this  year  which  will  produce  the  seed  of  this 
year's   fruit  ?     And  must  it  not  be  so  with  you  ? 
Must  you  not  have  daily  influxes  of  the  divine  in- 
fluences of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?     Must  you  not  receive 
from  Christ  each  hour  that  life  without  which  you 
must  droop  and  die  ?     Oh,  brothers  and  sisters,  let 
no  day  pass  by  without  commending  yourselves  to 
God;  let  no  hour  be  spent  withojit  resting  under 
his  wing.     Oh,  may  our  daily  habit  be  to  cry  unto 
him,  "Hold  thou  me  up  and  1  shall  be  safe."     Oh, 
my  dear  hearers,  there  are  some  of  you  who  think 
you  are  not  vile.     You  have  never  had  your  eyes 
open  to  learn  your  depravity.     Let  me  tell  you  this, 
that  you  are  so  depraved  that  except  you  be  born 
again  you  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.     You 
may  reform,  you  may  go  and  seek  to  make  your- 
selves better.     It  will  not  do.     Know  the  old  prov- 
erb and  consider  it :  "  The  dog  is  turned  to  his  vomit 
again;  and  the  sow  that  was  washed  to  her  wal- 
lowing in  the  mire."     Ay,  the  nature  is  so  base — 
the  nature  itself  is  so  depraved  and  so  vile — that 
there  must  be  a  radical  change  of  the  whole  self. 
How  then  canst  thou  change  thy  nature  ?     Canst 
thou   renew  thine    own   heart?     God  forbid  that 
thou  shouldst  be  so  vainly  infatuated  as  to  imagine 
it  possible  !     No  arm  but  the  eternal  arm  can  make 
thee  what  thou  shouldst  be.     Can  the  Ethiopian 
change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots?     Canst 
thou  make  thyself  a  new  creature  in  Christ  ?     Thou 
canst  not  create  a  flj  or  a  grain  of  dust,  much  less 


50  STORM   SIGNALS. 

create  thyself  a  new  heart.  But  there  is  one  who 
can.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  able,  Jesus  Christ  is  will- 
ing. Dost  thou  say,  "  Oh,  that  he  would  renew  my 
heart  to-night  ? "  Methinks  he  has  begun  the 
work;  that  desire  of  thine,  if  sincere,  would  prove 
it.  Keniember  what  he  bids  thee  to  do  is  to  trust. 
If  thou  hast  longing  desires  for  him,  cast  thyself 
down  at  his  feet  and  say,  "  Jesu,  salvation  is  brought 
nigh  to  me;  1  trust  in  thee  to  make  known  in  me 
this  strange,  this  God-like  grace.  Work  in  me  the 
new  heart,  the  divine  life,  the  new  nature;  save 
me,  save  me,  Jesus;  put  my  feet  in  the  narrow 
way,  and  then  guide  me  all  the  days  of  my  pil- 
grimage and  bring  me  to  thyself,  that  where  thou 
art,  in  heaven,  there  I  may  be  with  thee."  Sinner, 
he  will  do  it,  he  will  hear  thy  cry  and  answer  thy 
petition,  and  thou,  in  the  heights  of  heaven,  shall 
sing  of  the  mercy  which  received  thee  when  thou 
wast  not  worthy  to  be  received,  of  the  love  which 
loved  thee  when  thou  wast  wholly  unlovely,  and  of 
all  the  grace  which  changed  thy  nature  and  made 
thee  meet  to  be  a  partaker  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light.  God  grant  that  we  may  not,  any  of 
us,  be  as  Hazael,  the  perpetrators  of  crimes  of  which 
we  never  suspected  ourselves  capable ;  but  rather, 
feeling  that  we  are  men  and  women  of  the  same  kith 
and  kin  as  the  vilest  sinners  that  ever  trod  this  earth, 
may  it  be  our  grateful  surprise  and  our  lot  to  be  jus- 
tified freely  by  God's  grace  through  the  redemption 
that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  So  shall  we  be  numbered  with 
the  saints  now  and  throughout  eternity.     Amen. 


"  One  thing  thou  lackesty — Mark  x.  21. 

nn HOUGH  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  most 
-*-  certainly  addresses  itself  to  the  vilest  of  the 
vile,  it  is  not  exclusively  to  such  that  the  message 
of  salvation  is  sent.  There  are,  indeed,  no  char- 
acters so  far  gone  in  vice  that  the  gospel  does  not 
speak  to  them.  However  abandoned  they  may  be, 
still  is  this  inviting  voice  sent  to  the  very  chief  of 
sinners — "  Come  to  Christ  and  live."  But  the  gos- 
pel, with  equal  affection,  addresses  itself  to  those 
who  are  not  upon  any  common  estimation  to  be 
numbered  with  the  chief  of  sinners, — to  those,  for- 
sooth, whose  moral  integrity  has  been  unimpeach- 
able, whose  outward  propriety  has  been  scrupulous, 
whose  lives  in  all  their  domestic  and  social  relations 
have  been  commendable.  There  are  always  some 
such  individuals  in  our  congregation.  We  are 
very  thankful  that  there  are.  We  have  an  invita- 
tion for  them  as  frank,  as  honest,  and  as  earnest, 
as  for  wanton  sinners,  heinous  transgressors,  and 
hardened  criminals,  and  our  sincere  desire  is  that 
such  may  be  saved;  for  we  believe  that  they  also 


52  STORM  SIGNALS. 

will  make  illustrious  trophies  of  divine  grace  when 
grace  contrains  them  to  decide  for  Christ. 

Amongst  us  we  have  a  large  number  of  most 
hopeful  people,  to  whom  it  may  be  said — '-One 
thing  thou  lackest."  Let  me  address  a  word  of 
congratulation  to  you,  that  you  only  lack  one  thing; 
then,  a  teaming  hecause  you  do  lack  one  thing; 
and  after  that  a  few  ivords  of  instruction  to  shoiuhow 
this  one  lack  may  he  supplied.  God  grant  that  his 
power  may  rest  upon  his  Word,  so  that  you  may 
lack  the  one  thing  no  longer. 

I.  First,  then,  here  is  a  word  of  congratulation. 
Let  us  take  this  young  man's  case  as  descriptive  of 
that  of  many  here  present.  He  did  not  lack  moral- 
ity. He  could  say,  "  All  these  things  have  I  kept 
from  my  youth  up;"  nor  did  the  Saviour  tell  him 
that  he  was  uttering  a  falsehood.  He  looked  upon 
him  and  loved  him,  which  he  would  not  have  done 
if  he  had  been  a  willful  liar.  No,  he  had  been 
neither  unchaste,  nor  dishonest,  nor  profane.  He 
was,  we  may  presume,  all  that  could  be  desired  in 
these  respects.  I  congratulate  you  if  such  is  your 
case.  It  will  save  you  from  a  thousand  sorrows  to 
have  been  kept  from  those  grosser  sins.  You  have 
not  formed  habits  which  will  lead  you  in  after 
years  into  temptation.  You  have  not  entangled 
yourself  with  evil  associations  which  it  will  be 
difficult  to  break.  You  have  not  learned  words, 
and  phrases,  and  sentiments  which  will  defile  your 
memory  in  after  days,  even  though  you  should  live 
to  hate   them.     1   thank    God  that  you  have  this 


LOVELY,    BUT  LACKING.  53 

privilege;  that  it  cannot  be  said  of  you  that  you 
are  lackino-  in  morality. 

Nor  was  this  young  man's  lack  tliat  of  outioard 
religion.  We  are  elsewhere  told — I  think  it  is  by 
Luke — that  he  was  a  ruler;  that  is  to  say,  as  we 
read  it,  a  ruler  in  the  synagogue.  He  was  one  who 
had  taken  office  among  his  co-religionists,  and  had 
even  presided  in  their  religious  assembhes.  He 
was  a  young  man,  recollect,  and  it  is  not  often 
that  young  men  attain  to  such  a  position,  so  that 
he  must  have  been  not  only  scrupulously  excellent 
in  his  conduct,  but  he  must  have  been  regarded  by 
all  who  knew  him  as  remarkably  religious  at  heart; 
indeed,  when  he  knelt  down  before  the  Saviour, 
and  addressed  him  as,  ''Good  Master,"  he  showed 
that  his  outward  habits  were  of  a  religious  cast. 
And  so  I  congratulate  some  of  you  that  you  love 
^the  place  where  Christians  meet,  that  in  their 
sacred  songs  you  take  an  interest,  that  their  Holy 
Book  is  not  altogether  unread  by  you,  that  you 
would  be  grieved  if  you  could  not  go  up  to  the 
assembly  of  God's  people.-  I  am  glad  that,  as 
touching  these  things  in  your  outward  regularity, 
some  of  you  might  even  put  others  to  shame  who 
are  further  advanced  than  you  in  spiritual  things. 
You  do  not  lack  for  morality;  you  do  not  lack  for 
the  outward  part  of  religion. 

Nor  can  I  suppose  that  this  young  man  lacked 
a  becoming  respect  for  whatsoever  was  pure  and  lovely 
and  of  good  report.  His  addressing  our  Lord  by 
that  remarkable  title  which  was  not  used  by  Jews 


54  STORM   SIGNALS. 

even  to  their  Kabbis,  showed  how  he  looked  upon 
the  Holy  Christ  with  a  profound  awe.  He  did  not 
perceive  his  deity,  but  what  he  did  perceive  of  his 
matchless  goodness  he  deferred  to.  And  it  is  so 
with  you,  my  friend.  You  never  utter  an  oppro- 
brious word  against  God's  people.  You  would  be 
very  grieved  to  hear  them  evil  spoken  of.  You 
love  the  ministers  of  Christ.  There  is  no  company 
that  pleases  you  better  than  the  company  of  the 
people  of  God.  You  have  religion ;  you  have  a  re- 
spect for  that  power  of  godliness  which  as  yet  you 
do  not  possess.  You  wisli  you  had  it.  You  envy 
those  who  have  it,  and  would  wish,  though  mean- 
est of  them  all,  that  you  might  but  have  a  part 
amongst  them.  I  congratulate  you  upon  this.  I 
thank  God  concerning  you.  Looking  upon  you, 
I  feel  as  Jesus  did,  that  my  heart  loves  you, 
and  I  fain  would  that  you  had  the  needful  supply  < 
of  that  thing  which  you  still  lack. 

This  young  man  did  not  lack  orthodoxy.  He 
was  no  doubter,  skeptic,  or  professed  infidel.  He 
said:  "What  must  I  do  that  I  may  inherit  eternal 
life?"  He  believed  in  eternal  life.  He  was  not 
one  of  those  Sadducees  who  say  that  there  is  no 
resurrection,  neither  angel  nor  spirit.  He  vener- 
ated the  grand  old  truths  to  which  his  forefathers 
heartily  subscribed ;  he  was  a  firm  believer  in  the 
orthodox  faith.  And  so  it  is  with  you.  You  have 
never  yet  dared  to  doubt  the  Word  of  God,  and  as 
far  as  you  have  learned  its  meaning,  you  hold  that 
meaning  in  the  most  solemn  respect.     You  would 

/ 


LOVELY,    BUT  LACKING.  55 

not  for  the  world  be  accounted  a  heretic.  You 
would  not  willfully  call  in  question  the  existence  of 
God,  the  deity  of  Christ,  the  atonement  by  blood, 
or  any  other  of  the  essentials  of  our  holy  faith. 
As  far  as  your  head  is  concerned  you  are  clear 
enough  about  these  things.  I  thank  God  for  this, 
for  it  is  a  grand  escape  from  a  pestilent  evil.  It  is 
hard  to  get  a  man's  conscience  sound  who  has  gone 
through  the  great  dismal  swamps  of  infidelity. 
After  once  listening  to  the  vile  suggestions  of  un- 
sanctified  reason,  or  reading  such  infamies  as  come 
from  the  pen  of  a  Tom  Paine,  or  the  more  refined 
but  not  less  subtle  insinuations  of  modern  cavilers, 
a  man's  soul  seems  as  if  it  never  could  get  clean  of 
the  corruption.  It  is  such  pitch;  it  sticks  to  one's 
hands,  and  defiles  his  heart.  Though  one  take  to 
himself  niter  and  much  soap,  yet  shall  he  scarce 
clean  himself  from  the  pollution.  You  have  not 
acquired  that  taint  of  your  moral  constitution. 
Thank  God  for  it.  I  bless  God  that,  in  his  abun- 
dant mercy,  you  do  not  lack  for  a  knowledge  of  the 
faith  and  a  degree  of  belief  in  it. 

Nor  yet,  my  dear  friends,  did  this  young  man 
lack  sincerity.  I  have  noticed  that  some  expositors 
speak  of  him  as  a  hypocrite,  but  he  was  as  far 
away  from  being  a  hypocrite  as  the  North  Pole  is 
from  the  South.  He  was  transparent  in  all  he 
said.  Even  that  little  bit  that  looks  like  boast- 
ing— "  All  these  have  I  kept  from  my  youth 
up,"  shows  how  ingenuous  the  young  fellow  was. 
A  man  who  was  not  sincere  would  have  minced  a 


56  STORM   SIGNALS. 

little,  and  kept  back  an  expression  so  compliment- 
ary to  himself.  He  was  the  mirror  of  candor.  So 
are  some  of  yon.  You  have  not  learned  the  ways 
of  craft.  You  do  not  assume  to  be  what  you  are 
not.  Though  you  mix  with  God's  people,  you 
have  not  ventured  to  present  yourself  for  baptism 
without  faith,  nor  do  you  dare  come  to  the  com- 
munion table  because  you  fear  you  have  not  fel- 
lowship with  Christ.  You  prove  your  sincerity  in 
many  ways,  and  upon  this  again  I  congratulate 
you,  and  thank  the  God  of  mercy. 

This  young  ruler,  moreover,  did  not  lack/or  zeoH, 
The  way  in  which  he  came  to  Christ  showed  bis 
ardor.  He  came  to  him  running,  and  fell  down 
before  him  saying,  "  What  must  I  do  to  inherit 
eternal  life  ?  "  You,  too,  have  a  zeal  of  God,  but  not 
according  to  knowledge.  If  the  Holy  Spirit  shall 
but  teach  you  what  the  one  thing  is  that  you  are 
lacking,  I  believe  you  will  seek  after  it.  I  trust 
you  will.  At  any  rate,  up  to  the  measure  of  your 
light  you  have  been  hitherto  quick,  and  zealous, 
and  willing  to  do  what  you  could. 

This  young  man  also  loas  exceedingly  thoughtful. 
Half  the  battle  with  many  men  is  to  make  them 
think,  even  though  they  think  wrongly.  It  is  al- 
most better  for  them  to  think  in  the  most  crooked 
manner  than  not  to  think  at  all.  The  people  most 
hard  to  reach,  and  so  least  likely  to  be  saved,  are 
those  who  pursue  their  business  or  their  pleasures 
till  their  hours  of  labor  and  leisure  are  so  filled  up 
that  they  have  no  time  for  thought.     To  them  the 


LOVELY,    BUT   LACKING.  57 

sweets  and  the  solace  of  solitude  and  reflection  are 
all  unknown.  But  there  was  a  thoughtful  man. 
He  had  studied  the  law,  and  had  tried  to  keep  it. 
He  was  now  something  more  than  thoughtful;  he 
was  anxious.  "  What  lack  I  yet  ?  "  as  if  he  felt 
there  was  something  he  did  not  know,  and  he 
would  fain  know  what  it  was.  He  was  not  so  self- 
righteous  as  some  had  fancied  he  was.  He  had  a 
self-righteous  head,  but  he  had  a  seeking  heart. 
His  head  made  him  think  that  he  had  kept  the  law, 
but  his  heart  told  him  that  he  had  not,  for  he  said, 
"  What  must  I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life?"  This 
he  would  never  have  said  if  he  had  believed  that 
he  had  religion  enough  to  inherit  it.  His  exclam- 
ation— "  What  lack  I  yet  ?  "  would  never  have 
escaped  his  lips,  had  he  not  known  that  he  did 
lack  something,  though  he  knew  not  what.  I  am 
thankful, — I  am  again  thankful  to  God,  and  I  con- 
gratulate you,  my  dear  hearers,  if  you  are  some- 
thing in  the  same  position,  if  you  can  honestly 
say,  "I  have  tried  to  do  what  I  can;  I  have  sought 
to  do  as  far  as  my  light  guides  me ;  I  do  not  believe 
I  am  saved,  but  I  wish  I  were;  what  is  it — what  is 
that  secret  something  which  can  fill  the  aching 
void  within  my  heart  ?  What  is  that  which  can 
give  me  the  rest  which  as  yet  I  do  not  possess?" 
Once  more,  this  young  man  did  not  lack  for 
tmllingness;  at  least  lie  thougid  he  did  not.  He  be- 
lieved himself  willing  to  do  anything,  to  give  any- 
thing, to  suffer  anything,  if  he  might  but  be  saved. 
So  also  do  some  of  you.     You  would  stand  up  in  the 


58  STORM   SIGNALS. 

congregation  to-night  and  say,  "  The  Lord  knows 
there  is  nothing  within  my  reach  that  I  would  not 
do,  there  is  nothing  under  heaven  that  I  would 
not  bear,  if  I  might  but  inherit  eternal  life."  But 
perhaps,  like  this  young  man,  you  do  not  know 
your  own  heart,  and  were  Christ  to  try  you  with 
some  searching  precept,  you  might,  like  him,  go 
away  sorrowing.  But,  at  any  rate,  as  far  as  you 
know,  you  are  willing,  and  I  am  glad  of  this 
and  thankful  that  all  these  points  are  in  you. 
Though  you  do  lack,  yet  you  do  not  lack  any  of 
these,  it  is  in  something  else  you  are  lacking. 

The  fact  is,  this  young  man  lacked  Jcnoivledge. 
He  did  not  know  the  spirituality  of  the  law.  He 
had  never  been  taught  that  the  law  of  God  takes 
account  of  the  veriest  fictions  of  the  brain,  our 
thoughts,  and  our  imaginations.  He  supposed  he 
had  kept  the  law  because  he  had  not  committed 
any  act  of  adultery,  or  of  theft;  nor  had  he  spoken 
the  thing  that  was  not  true.  He  did  not  know 
that  an  unchaste  glance,  or  a  causeless  hatred,  or  a 
covetous  desire,  breaks  the  law  of  God,  and  be- 
trays the  sin  that  lurks  in  the  breast.  He  was 
never  startled  by  a  dream  that  betrayed  the 
sin  which  lurked  in  his  breast.  He  did  not 
know  the  corruptness  of  his  own  nature,  and  per- 
haps some  of  you  do  not  know  it.  Oh,  that  you 
may  be  led  to  know  it.  May  God  not  only  make 
you  know  it  as  a  matter  of  knowledge,  but  under- 
stand it  as  a  matter  of  conviction  deeply  written 
in  the  conscience.     And  he  did  not  know  the  plan 


LOVELY,    BUT  LACKING,  59 

of  salvation.  The  question,  *'  What  must  I  do  to 
inherit  eternal  life?"  showed  that  he  did  not  know- 
that  salvation  is  not  by  doing,  but  by  believing; 
not  by  our  works,  but  by  a  simple  trust  in  Jesus. 
This  was  a  great  deficiency;  though  he  was  a 
model  of  uprightness  in  a  hundred  interesting 
points  which  we  cannot  now  stay  to  discuss,  he 
was  wanting  in  a  matter  of  vital  interest  to  his 
moral  welfare.  In  that  he  was  just  like  many  of 
you.  With  looks  of  love  and  pity,  with  feelings 
of  tender  regard,  but  deep  anxiety,  we  turn  to  you 
therefore  with  this  reflection,  "  One  thing  thou 
lackest.'' 

II.  And  now  we  shall  change  the  note.     This 

TEXT   HAS   k    WORD  OF  WARNING. 

"  One  thing  thou  lackest."  What  was  the  one 
thing  that  this  young  man  lacked  ?  It  luas  tJiefuU 
surrender  of  Ms  heart  to  God  in  Christ  He  had 
not  done  that.  Our  Saviour  gave  him,  therefore, 
a  command  which  tested  him.  He  bade  him  go, 
sell  all  he  had,  and  distribute  it  to  the  poor.  This 
is  not  a  command  which  he  gives  to  all  men,  but 
he  gave  that  particular  command  to  that  particular 
young  man,  according  to  his  particular  circum- 
stances, because  he  saw  that  he  was  not  the  man 
that  could  endure  to  be  poor.  He  saw,  too,  that 
he  had  made  his  riches  his  idol.  He  was  a  gentle- 
man; he  was  a  man  of  great  possessions.  He  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  a  niggard ;  he  could  hardly 
have  been  a  ruler  of  a  synagogue,  one  would  think, 
if  he  had  been.     But  still  he  had  a  great  liking  for 


60  STORM  SIGNALS. 

position.  He  was  a  gentleman,  and  there  are  a 
great  many  people  who  would  sooner  be  gentle- 
men than  they  would  be  saints,  and  sooner  be 
thought  to  belong  to  the  upper  and  respectable 
circles  of  society,  than  they  would  be  thought  to 
be  devout  and  holy.  This  young  man  would  have 
liked  to  have  been  both,  but  the  Saviour,  seeing 
that  his  wealth  was  in  his  heart,  and  that  he  loved 
it  better  than  he  did  his  God,  said  to  him,  "Part 
with  your  wealth ;  for  if  you  are  decided  for  God, 
and  your  heart  is  wholly  his,  you  will  prove  it  by 
the  readiness  of  your  obedience."  Here,  then,  was 
the  thing  he  lacked — he  lacked  the  full  surrender  of 
his  heart  to  God's  will,  and  so  he  went  away  sor- 
rowing, for  he  had  great  possessions. 

This  lack  of  the  full  surrender  of  his  heart  to 
God's  will  made  him  shun  the  reproach  of  being  a 
follower  of  Christ.  Hence,  though  he  would  call 
Christ  "  Good  Master,"  he  would  not  turn  and  fol- 
low him  and  learn  of  him.  So  the  Master  said, 
after  he  had  bidden  him  sell  his  goods,  "  Take  up 
thy  cross;"  that  is  to  say,  "  Come  out  and  confess 
me;  having  done  as  I  bid  thee,  then  come  and  say, 
'I  am  a  disciple  of  that  Man  who  is  despised  and 
rejected ;  1  will  follow  him  to  prison  and  to  death, 
and  I  will  preach  his  word  though  I  be  put  to 
death  for  it;  I  will  take  up  my  cross.'" 

Christ  knew  that  the  one  thing  he  lacked  was 
the  full  giving  up  of  his  heart  to  God,  and  therefore 
he  said,  "  Follow  me,  for  if  you  really  do  love  the 
Eternal   Father,  you  will  follow  his  well-beloved 


LOVELY,    BUT  LACKING.  61 

Son ;  if  your  heart  is  fully  given  to  God,  you  will 
be  willing  to  be  obedient  to  Christ,  to  take  him 
for  your  Leader,  Master,  Saviour,  Guide,  Friend 
and  Counselor."  Now,  in  this  the  young  man 
failed.  He  could  not  so  give  himself  up  wholly  to 
God;  he  could  not,  at  that  time  at  any  rate,  vso 
give  himself  up  as  to  be  completely  Christ's  ser- 
vant. Now,  no  man  who  fails  in  this  respect  can 
enter  heaven.  Christ  will  save  you,  but  a  part  of 
the  agreement  on  your  part  must  be  this:  "Ye  are 
not  your  own,  but  are  bought  with  a  price."  If 
you  would  have  Christ's  blood  to  redeem  you,  you 
must  give  up  to  Christ  your  self, — your  body,  your 
soul,  your  spirit,  your  substance,  your  talents,  your 
time,  your  all.  You  must  from  this  day  be  Christ's 
servant,  come  what  may.  If  persecution  should 
arise,  you  must  be  willing  to  part  with  all  that  you 
possess,  with  your  liberty,  with  your  life  itself,  for 
Christ,  or  you  cannot  be  his  disciple.  It  may  be, 
he  will  never  call  you  literally  to  sell  your  goods 
and  distribute  all,  but  he  does  call  you  to  own  that 
your  goods  are  not  your  own,  but  his;  that  you  are 
only  a  steward,  and  must  be  willing  therefore  to 
give  to  the  poor  and  to  dedicate  to  the  honor  of 
his  kingdom  such  part  as  shall  be  meet  and  right 
of  all  that  you  have,  not  as  though  you  were  be- 
stowing anything  of  your  own,  but  only  as  yield- 
ing up  to  God  what  belongs  to  him.  He  claims 
that  you  do  now  make  over,  if  you  would  be  saved, 
yourself  and  everything  you  have  by  an  indefeasi- 
ble title-deed  to  the  great  Lord  of  all,  whose  you 


62  STORM   SIGNALS. 

must  be.  If  you  would  be  saved  by  the  blood  of 
Jesus,  you  are  not  from  this  day  to  choose  your 
own  pleasures,  nor  your  own  ways,  nor  your  own 
thoughts,  nor  to  serve  yourselves,  nor  live  for  your- 
selves or  for  your  own  aggrandizement.  If  you  k 
would  be  saved,  you  must  believe  what  he  tells 
you,  do  what  he  bids  you,  and  live  only  to  serve 
and  honor  him.  I  am  ashamed  to  have  to  say  that 
a  great  many  Christian  professors  seem  to  be  false 
to  this  their  agreement,  but,  as  my  Lord  will  take 
no  less  from  you,  I  dare  ask  no  less  of  you.  It 
seems  to  me  all  too  little.  He  has  bought  us,  not 
with  silver  and  gold,  but  with  his  own  precious 
blood.  Surely,  then,  we  should  be  quite  willing 
to  say, — 

*''Tis  done,  the  great  transaction's  done 
I  am  my  Lord's,  and  he  is  mine." 

What  you  keep  to  yourselves  you  shall  lose,  but 
what  you  give  to  him  you  save  and  gain.  Your 
treasure  on  earth  the  moth  shall  eat,  and  the  rust 
corrupt,  but  your  treasure  in  his  keeping  no  moth 
shall  ever  fret,  nor  canker  ever  devour.  All  is  safe 
which  is  given  up  to  Christ;  that  which  is  kept 
back  from  him,  whatever  it  may  be,  shall  prove  a 
curse  to  you.  Say,  then  my  dear  young  friend, 
with  all  your  excellencies,  do  you  lack  the  giving 
up  of  your  heart,  the  full  giving  up  of  yourself  to 
Christ?  Oh,  I  am  grieved  that  you  should  lack 
it;  I  am  indeed  grieved  that  you  should  lack  it! 
I  would  like  my  Lord  to  have  such  a  bright  gem 


LOVELY,    BUT  LACKING.  63 

as  you  to  glitter  in  his  crown.     I  would  like  the 
Good  Shepherd  to  have  so  dear  a  lamb  to  carry  in 
his  bosom.     What,  shall  so  fair  a  flower  shed  its 
fragrance  for  his  enemies  ?     Let  the  Saviour  take 
it  and  wear  it  in  his  bosom;  he  is  willing;  may  his 
grace  take  it  to-night.     One  cannot  bear  that  you, 
that  you,  having  so  much,  should  lack   but  one 
thing.     If  you  lacked  all  that  was  needful  it  would 
be  grievous,  but  lacking  only  one  thing,  it  seems 
all  the  more  pitiable.     Oh,  why  should  not  that 
lack  be  made  up  V     God  grant  it  at  once.     To  miss 
heaven !     I  cannot  bear  to  think  that  you  should, 
when  you  really  are  so  sincerely  anxious  about  it. 
To  have  such  desires,  and  to  be  so  fervent  too,  and 
yet  not  to  give  your  whole   heart  to  my  Lord! 
Poor  things  are  desires  if  they  get  no  farther.     De- 
sire will  not  quench  thirst,   neither   will  it  stay 
hunger.     Thou  must  take  Christ  and  live  on  him, 
or  thou   shalt  die.     To  think,   dear  friends,   that 
some  of  you  should  miss   heaven  through   your 
wealth  !     Why  need  it  be  ?     And  yet  often  it  is  so. 
The  rich  will  not  go  to  hear  the  gospel  as  the  poor 
will;  and  when  they  hear  it,  there  is  often  so  much 
care  about  their  extensive  business,  or,  on  the  other 
hand,  there  is  so  much  attraction  in  that  circle  of 
gay  and  thoughtless  friends,  that  it  is  hard  for  them 
to  be  saved.     Oh,  what  a  pity  that  the  mercies  of 
God  should  lead  you  to  hell,  and  that  riches  here 
should  all  but  involve  you,  or  altogether  involve 
you   in    eternal    poverty   hereafter!     God    of   his 
mercy  prevent  it,  that  you  may  yet  be  saved. 


04  STORM   SIGNALS. 

The  sad  thing  to  remember  is,  that  you  who 
lack  one  thing,  in  lacking  that  one  thing  lack  all ; 
for  though  I  congratulated  you  that  you  had  mor- 
ality, that  is  poor  stuff  when  it  has  no  foundation 
in  love  to  God.  Your  sincerity,  methinks  I  must 
suspect  that  it  is  exhausted,  if  after  having  been 
told  the  way,  which  is  simply  to  believe  in  Christ 
and  give  yourselves  up  to  him,  you  now  refuse. 
Yes,  and  all  the  good  things  which  I  have  strung 
together  with  words  of  congratulation  are  but  as 
the  colors  of  a  bubble  that  shall  pass  away,  except 
you  have  this  one  thing.  The  one  thing  is  like 
the  unit  set  before  many  ciphers  which  will  make 
them  into  a  great  amount;  but  without  the  one 
figure  first,  all  those  ciphers  will  stand  for  nothing, 
many  as  they  are.  If  by  the  grace  of  God  in  your 
heart,  and  the  exercise  of  a  living  faith  in  the  dy- 
ing Saviour,  you  give  yourself  wholly  up  to  God, 
then  every  good  thing  and  lovely  thing,  and  thing 
of  good  repute,  shall  be  embalmed  and  preserved; 
but  without  this  they  shall  be  like  faded  flowers, 
fit  only  to  be  cast  behind  the  wall,  or  to  perish  on 
the  dunghill. 

III.  Thirdly,    we    shall    give    you — a    word    of 

DIRECTION. 

If  thou  wouldest  inherit  eternal  life  Christ's  direc- 
tion is — "  Sell  all  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the 
poor."  Now,  what  did  he  mean  by  that  ?  We  shall 
read  it  three  ways,  and  very  quickly.  He  meant  in 
the  young  man's  case — "  Give  icp  tlnne  icJoV  His 
was  wealth.     He  means  the  same  kind  of  trial  for 


LOVELY,    BUT  LACKING.  65 

yoti.  Give  up  your  idol.  What  is  it?  I  pause. 
You  may  look;  but  1  am  sure  that  if  you  are  not 
loving  God  you  are  loving  something  else.  What- 
ever it  is  that  you  love  better  than  God  is  your 
idol,  and  you  are  an  idolater.  That  idol  of  yours 
must  fall  to  the  ground  if  Jesus  is  to  be  all  in  all. 
You  cannot  serve  two  masters,  and  whatever  your 
present  master  is  he  must  turn  out  that  Christ  may 
come  in. 

"  Sell  all  that  thou  hast."  Well,  that  means  an- 
other thing,  as  I  read  it — that  is,  consecrate  your 
qH  to  God.  How  can  you  expect,  if  you  withhold 
and  you  keep  back  part  of  the  price  from  God,  that 
he  should  accept  you,  and  save  you  by  Jesus  Christ. 
Nay,  come,  poor  guilty  sinner,  and  wash  in  the 
purple  stream  that  flows  from  Jesu's  heart,  and 
then  say  in  return — *'  My  Lord,  since  thou  hast 
thus  redeemed  me — 

•  All  that  I  am,  and  all  I  have, 

Shall  be  forever  thine, 
Whate'er  my  dnty  bids  me  give, 
My  cheerful  hands  resign ; 

*  And  if  I  could  make  some  reserve. 

And  duty  did  not  call, 
I  love  my  God  with  zeal  so  great 
That  I  must  give  him  all.' " 

A  third  reading  of  this  passage  will  be — give 
up  your  hindrance.  This  young  man's  hindrance 
was  his  possessions,  and  it  was  better  that  he 
should  relinquish  his  possessions  and  be  saved, 
than  be  hindered  by  his  wealth.  What,  my  dear 
friend,   is  your  hindrance?     Give  it  up;   give  it 


66  STORM  SIGNALS. 

up ;  give  it  up !  Oh,  I  know  some  of  you  that  are 
hindered  by  bad  company.  You  are  often  im- 
pressed; but  it  is  all  blown  away  by  those  merry 
men  whose  merriment  is  tinged  with  lascivious- 
ness.  Give  them  up.  Will  you  give  them  up,  or 
give  Christ  up  ?  Which  shall  it  be  ?  You  remem- 
ber in  John  Bunyan's  Life  he  says  that  one  Sunday, 
when  he  was  playing  on  the  village  green  at  a 
game  of  cat,  he  was  just  about  to  strike  the  cat 
when  a  voice  came  to  him  from  heaven,  and  said, 
"  Wilt  thou  have  thy  sins  and  go  to  hell,  or  leave 
thy  sins  and  go  to  heaven  ?  "  And  he  stood  there 
in  the  midst  of  his  companions  and  paused,  and 
they  could  not  think  what  ailed  the  tinker  while 
he  was  disputing  in  his  mind  which  it  should  be, 
Christ  and  heaven,  or  his  sins  and  hell.  Now, 
whatever  your  hindrance  is — be  it  money,  be  it 
worldly  ambition,  or  be  it  any  fond  passion  of  the 
flesh — whatever  it  is,  give  it  up.  If  it  be  thy 
right  hand,  thou  hadst  better  cut  it  off,  and  cast  it 
from  thee,  than  keeping  it  seal  thine  endless  doom. 
If  it  be  thy  right  eye,  'twere  better  for  thee  to  pluck 
it  out,  than  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell 
fire.  That  is  the  cry  of  the  text ;  down  with  your 
idols;  give  up  your  all;  cast  away  your  hindrances, 
and  come  to  Christ  and  trust  him.  That  is  the 
first  word  of  instruction. 

Another  instructive  word  is  this — "  Take  up  thy 
cross.''  That  means,  profess  Christ  You  have  a 
notion,  perhaps,  some  of  you,  that  you  will  sneak 
into  heaven  as  secret  Christians.     Talie  care  that 


LOVELY,    BUT  LACKING.  67 

you  do  not  find  yourselves  at  another  gate  than 
the  gate  of  pearl,  if  you  try  that.  Christ  came  not 
to  save  those  cowardly  souls  vv^ho  v^ill  not  own 
him.  His  own  words  are,  "  He  that  denieth  me 
before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father 
which  is  in  heaven."  Ashamed  of  Jesus !  Ah ! 
then,  remember  those  words,  "  The  fearful  and  un- 
believing !  "  The  fearful — that  is,  those  who  are 
afraid  to  own  Christ  as  their  Master — "  shall  have 
their  portion  in  the  lake  that  burneth  with  fire 
and  brimstone,  which  is  the  second  death."  I  pray 
you,  then,  if  you  are  Christ's,  confess  him,  own 
him.  Confess  that  you  are  his;  take  up  your 
cross.  Take  up  the  cross — that  is,  endure  his  reproach. 
You  would  not  like  to  be  called  a  canting  Metho- 
dist, or  a  stolid  Presbyterian,  or  some  other  ugly 
name.  Ah !  but  my  dear  friend,  if  thou  wouldest 
have  Christ's  crown  thou  must  have  Christ's  cross; 
and  he  that  is  not  willing  to  be  sneered  at  with 
Christ,  cannot  reign  with  Christ.  And  what  if 
they  do  sneer  at  thee  ?  If  that  be  thy  cross,  take 
it  up.  What  higher  honor  can  a  man  want  on 
this  side  heaven  than  to  be  called  a  fool  for  Christ  ? 
I  wot  the  day  shall  come  when  angels  shall  envy 
the  men  that  were  permitted  to  have  the  privilege 
of  suffering  for  Christ.  You  know  the  old  story  of 
Henry  the  Fifth,  when,  in  view  of  a  battle,  it  was 
said  he  wanted  more  men,  and  he  replied  that  he 
did  not  wish  for  more  men,  for 

•'  The  fewer  men  the  greater  share  of  honor;" 
and  he  pictured  the  day  when 


68  STORM  SIGNALS. 

*'  Gentlemen  in  England,  now  a-bed, 
Shall  tliink  themselves  accurs'dthey  were  not  here." 

Truly,  if  you  could  escape  rebuke  and  persecu- 
tion, you  might  well  be  grieved  to  think  that  you 
went  to  heaven  by  so  mean  a  way.  Be  willing, 
then,  like  a  brave  spirit,  to  take  up  the  cross  and 
carry  it,  counting  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater 
riches  than  all  the  treasures  of  Egypt.  Take  up 
your  cross — that  is,  trust  in  the  cross,  grasp  it  as 
your  only  hope;  let  the  atonement  which  Jesus 
made  by  his  death  be  the  delight  of  your  soul,  and 
ever  from  this  day  boast  therein. 

The  last  word  of  direction  was,  "  Folloio  we." 
Christ  said,  "  Follow  me."  He  meant,  did  he  not, 
confide  in  me  ?  As  a  confiding  sheep  follows  its 
shepherd,  so  follow  me.  He  meant  "  Obey  me;  as 
the  servant  follows  where  the  master  leads,  so 
track  my  footsteps,  and  let  my  example  be  your 
rule."  In  like  manner  Jesus  says  to  you  also — 
"  Persevere  in  following  me;  never  cease  so  doing; 
follow  me  right  up  to  my  throne,  and  there  rest 
with  me." 

Listen,  then,  each  of  you  here  present,  who  have 
only  one  thing  that  you  lack.  Will  you  now — 
may  his  holy  Spirit  make  you — give  up  the  world 
and  all  its  fair  prospects,  give  up  sin  and  all  its 
fascinations,  give  up  your  fleshly  self,  with  all  its 
peculiar  inclinations,  and  close  in  with  God  in 
Christ,  and  give  your  whole  heart  to  him  ?  Multi- 
tudes, multitudes  in  the  valley  of  decision  !  There 
is  a  valley  of  decision  to  us  all,  when  we  are  either 


LOVELY,    BUT  LACKING.  69 

left  to  our  own  wills  and  decide  for  evil,  or  led  by 
the  grace  of  God  to  decide  for  Christ.  The  cry  is 
heard  in  this  house  to-night,  "  Di^dde,  divide." 
Those  who  shall  say  "  aye"  within  their  hearts 
take  their  place  with  Christ ;  but  those  who  are  of 
the  "noes" — those  who  give  the  negative  to  the 
command  of  Christ — let  them,  at  least,  know  what 
they  are  doing;  and  if  they  will  go  the  downward 
road,  let  it  be  with  their  eyes  open,  fully  aware 
where  they  go.  But,  oh!  say  not  "No!"  Oh  I 
Spirit  of  God,  let  them  not  say  "  No  ! "  Yield  thee, 
man,  yield  to  the  gentle  impulse  which  now  bids 
thee  say,  "  I  will  take  his  yoke  upon  me,  for  it  is 
easy;  I  will  follow  him." 

**  Yield  to  his  love  wlio  round  you  now 
The  hands  of  a  man  would  cast — 
The  cords  of  his  love  who  was  given  for  you, 
To  his  altar  binding  you  fast. ' 

Pray  this  prayert  "  Lord,  bind  the  sacrifice 
with  cords,  even  with  cords  to  the  horns  of  the 
altar;  let  me  be  thine  now,  and  thine  hereafter 
when  thou  com  est  in  thy  glory  !  " 

There  is  a  question  that  has  often  been  asked, 
with  feelings  of  curiosity,  which  I  cannot  answer. 
It  is  this.  Did  the  young  man  inherit  eternal  life 
after  all  ?  I  think  he  did ;  I  think  he  did ;  because 
Jesus  loved  him.  I  like  his  character  throughout, 
as  the  Saviour  evidently  did,  and  he  did  not  love 
because  of  outward  appearances;  he  looked  at  the 
heart.  I  am  not  altogether  displeased  at  his  going 
away.     Jt  was  a  deal  better  than  stopping,  if  he 


70  STORM  SIGNALS. 

did  not  feel  disposed  to  follow  the  good  Master, 
who  had  eternal  life  at  his  disposal.  He  would  do 
it  honestly  or  not  at  all.  I  even  look  hopefully  at 
his  pausing  awhile  before  complying,  if  such  was 
the  issue,  for  the  man  that  flings  all  away  in  a 
moment  may  want  it  back  again  to-morrow.  It 
was  a  great  deal  he  had  to  part  from,  and  he  went 
away,  but  he  did  not  go  away  careless.  I  should 
be  heartily  glad  if  all  my  hearers  went  away 
sorrowing  when  they  were  not  converted ;  I  should 
think  it  was  a  hopeful  sign.  He  went  away  sor- 
rowing, and  though  the  Saviour  drew  from  that 
the  moral  that  it  was  hard  for  a  rich  man  to  be 
saved,  yet  he  said  it  was  possible  with  God,  and 
why,  then,  was  it  not  possible  with  that  young 
man  ?  I  do  not  know.  There  are  some  things  to 
be  said  on  either  side,  and  where  Scripture  is 
silent  we  must  not  give  a  positive  verdict. 

But  there  is  another  question  that  I  think  is 
vastly  more  important,  and  to  me  far  more  interest- 
ing, but  to  each  one  of  you  it  is  charged  with  the 
most  momentous  consequence.  It  is  this — will 
that  young  man  that  I  have  been  talking  to  to- 
night be  saved?  And  the  young  woman  that  I 
tried  to  describe  just  now,  will  she  ultimately 
inherit  eternal  life  ?  Oh  !  may  God  grant  that  the 
answer  may  be  in  each  case — "  Yea,  Lord,  thou 
knowest  all  things;  thou  knowest  that  I  trust 
thee,  that  1  love  thee;  and  whatever  thou  callest 
me  to  give  up,  or  to  be  or  to  do  for  thy  name's 
sake,  even  all  things,    I  will  do  it."    Then  your 


LOVELY,    BUT  LACKING.  71 

decision  shall  furnish  an  unerring  clue  to  your 
destiny.  The  Lord  bless  you.  Cheer  up.  He  has 
blessed  you,  and  you  shall  be  blessed.  You  are 
saved,  and  you  shall  be  his  in  the  day  of  his 
appearing.     Amen. 


^  ^rabe  Charge. 

*  *  Exceeding  sinful. ' ' — Romans  vii,  13. 

TNTO  tbe  co-nnection  of  these  words  the  brief 
-*-  limit  of  our  time  will  not  permit  us  just  now 
to  enter.  It  was  something  like  this,  Paul  had 
an  argument  in  hand.  He  was  showing  that  the 
law  could  not  make  a  man  holy,  and  he  observes 
that  he  had  himself  found  when  the  law  came  into 
his  heart  it  excited  in  him  a  desire  to  act  contrary 
to  its  precepts.  There  were  some  actions  which 
he  would  not  have  thought  of  until  he  found  that 
they  were  forbidden,  and  then  straightway  he  felt 
a  desire  to  do  them  at  once.  To  this  a  grave 
objection  was  raised.  Did  it  not  by  implication 
make  the  law  aid  and  abet  sin  ?  Not  so,  replies 
the  apostle;  it  was  not  the  law  that  made  him  sin, 
for  the  law  is  good;  but  it  was  the  sinfulness  of 
his  heart  that  could  thus  turn  that  which  was 
good  into  an  occasion  of  evil.  He  further  showed 
that  this  was  the  very  design  of  the  law  as  given 
by  Moses  to  make  clear  how  sinful  sin  was;  the 
purpose  for  which  it  was  sent  was,  not  to  make 
men  holy,  but  to  make  men  see  how  unholy  they 
were.     It  was  not  the  cure  of  the  disease,  but  it 


A    GRAVE    CHARGE.  73 

was  the  revealer  of  the  disease  that  lurked  in  the 
constitution  of  man. 

Now,  what  I  want  to  call  your  attention  to  is, 
that  Paul  here  calls  sin  "exceeding  sinful."  Why 
didn't  he  say  "exceeding  black,"  or  "exceeding 
horrible,"  or  "exceedingly  dreadful"?  Why,  be- 
cause there  is  nothing  in  the  world  so  bad  as 
sin.  When  he  wanted  to  use  the  very  worst 
word  he  could  find,  to  call  sin  by,  he  called  it  by 
its  own  name,  and  reiterated  it:  "sin,"  "exceeding 
sinful."  For  if  you  call  sin  black,  there  is  no  moral 
excellency  or  deformity  in  black  or  white.  Black 
is  as  good  as  white,  and  white  is  as  good  as  black, 
and  you  have  expressed  nothing,  if  you  call  sin 
"  deadly,"  yet  death  in  itself  hath  no  evil  in  it  com- 
pared v/ith  sin.  For  plants  to  die  is  not  a  dreadful 
thing;  rather  it  may  be  a  part  of  the  organization, 
of  nature  that  successive  generations  of  vegetables 
should  spring  up,  and  in  due  time  should  form  the 
root-soil  for  other  generations  to  follow;  so  if  you 
call  it  "  deadly  "  you  have  said  but  little.  If  you 
want  a  word  you  must  come  home  for  it.  Sin 
must  be  named  after  itself  If  you  want  to 
describe  it  you  must  call  it  "sinful."  Sin  is 
"exceeding  sinful." 

The  text  may  suggest  a  broad  argument  and 
a  special  application.  Our  endeavor  shall  be  to 
show  you  that  sin  is  in  itself  "exceeding  sinfal"; 
and  that  there  are  some  sins  of  which  it  may  be 
said  with  peculiar  emphasis  that  they  are  "  exceed- 
ing sinful." 


74  STORM  SIGNALS. 

Sin  is  in  itself  "  exceeding  sinful." 

It  is  rebellion  acjainst  God,  and  "exceeding  sin- 
ful," because  it  interferes  with  the  just  rights  and 
prerogatives  of  God.  That  great  invisible  Spir- 
it whom  we  cannot  see,  whom  even  our  own 
thoughts  cannot  encompass,  made  the  heavens  and 
earth,  and  all  the  things  that  are.  It  was  his 
right  that  whatsoever  he  in  wisdom  and  in  good- 
ness made  should  serve  his  purpose,  and  give  him 
glory.  The  stars  do  this.  They  jar  not  in  their 
everlasting  orbits.  The  world  of  matter  does  this. 
He  speaks,  and  it  is  done.  The  sun,  the  moon,  the 
constellations  of  heaven  speak  his  praise.  Yea, 
and  the  terrestrial  forces,  even  the  billows  of  the 
sea  and  the  ravings  of  the  wind,  all  obey  his  be- 
hests. It  is  right  they  should.  Shall  not  the  pot- 
ter make  of  the  clay  what  he  wills  ?  Shall  not  he 
who  uses  the  adze  fashion  what  he  chooseth  for  his 
own  pleasure  ?  You  and  I,  favored  in  our  creation 
— not  inanimate  clods,  not  worms,  having  sensa- 
tions only,  without  intellect;  we  who  have  been 
favored  with  thought,  emotion,  affection,  with  a 
high  spiritual  existence — aye,  with  an  immortal 
existence, — we  were  especially  bound  to  be  obe- 
dient to  him  that  made  us.  Ask  your  conscience, 
do  you  not  feel  that  God  has  a  right  of  proprietor- 
ship in  you  ?  Ask  yourselves,  if  you  make  or  pre- 
serve anything,  and  call  it  your  own,  because  it 
is  your  own,  do  you  not  expect  it  to  answer  your 
end  or  do  your  bidding?  Wherefore  have  you 
forgotten  him  that   made  you  ?     Why  have  you 


A    GRAVE    CHARGE.  75 

spent  your  powers  and  faculties  for  anything 
but  his  glory  ?  Ah,  it  is  '*  exceeding  sinful " 
when  the  crown-rights  of  him  upon  whose  will 
we  exist  are  ignored,  or  imprudently  contravened ! 
Yet  according  to  the  part  we  take  in  sin  we 
trample  on  his  edicts,  and  set  at  nought  his 
jurisdiction. 

How  exceeding  sinful  is  this  rebellion  against  such 
a  God !  Muse  on  his  attributes,  and  consider  his 
majesty,  for  is  he  not  infinitely  powerful,  wise, 
all-sufficient,  glorious,  and  as  it  were  the  sum  of  all 
perfection  supremely  good  ?  He  is  good  to  the  full 
extent  of  goodness.  He  is  a  God  whose  character 
is  matchless.  Not  like  Jupiter,  to  whom  the 
heathens  ascribe  every  vice ;  nor  like  Juggernaut, 
the  bloody  god  of  Hindustan.  He  is  a  pure  and 
holy  God  whom  we  worship ;  Jehovah,  glorious  in 
holiness,  fearful  in  praises.  Now  it  is  conceivable 
that  were  God  some  vast  being  who  had  a  right 
naturally  to  our  service ;  yet  if  his  character — (for- 
give, great  God,  the  supposition!) — were  severe 
without  pity,  rigorous  without,  clemency,  harsh 
without  forbearance,  there  would  be  some  pretence 
why  daring  spirits  should  lead  a  rebellion  against 
the  oppressor.  But  our  Father,  our  God,  the  great 
Shepherd-King — who  shall  frame  an  excuse  when 
we  for  a  single  moment  revolt  against  him,  or  lift 
a  finger  against  his  will?  It  were  heaven  to  serve 
him.  The  angels  will  tell  you  this:  the  highest 
bliss  is  to  do  his  bidding.  The  perfect  spirits  all 
proclaim  this.     Ah  !  sin  is  base  indeed,  a  rebellion 


76  STORM   SIGNALS. 

against  monarch's  gentlest  sway,  an  insurrection 
against  parent's  tenderest  right,  a  revolt  against 
peerless  benignity!  Oh!  shame  on  thee,  Sin  I 
Thou  art  "exceeding  sinful."     Indeed  thou  art ! 

What  an  aggravation  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin  is 
this :  tliai  it  'rebels  against  Jaivs,  every  one  of  luldcJi  is 
just!  The  table  of  the  ten  commandments  con- 
tains not  one  commandment  but  what  is  founded 
upon  the  essential  principle  of  right.  If  a  law  were 
proclaimed  in  England  which  violated  the  princi- 
ples of  equity,  to  break  that  law  might  be  the  high- 
est duty;  but  when  the  laws  of  our  country  are 
just  and  right,  it  is  not  only  an  oiFence  against  the 
natural  power  of  the  State,  but  an  offence  against 
the  understanding  and  conscience  of  rectitude  when 
a  man  breaks  such  a  statute.  God's  laws  have  not 
only  the  supreme  sanction  of  Divine  authority,  but 
they  have  also  this  recommendation,  that  they  are 
all  harmonious,  and  adapted  to  the  relations  of 
our  being.  Was  it  not  the  State  of  Massachu- 
setts that  at  first  passed  a  resolution  when  they 
were  about  to  make  statutes,  that  they  would  be 
governed  by  the  laws  of  God  until  they  found  time 
to  make  better  ?  Will  th-ey  ever  improve  upon  the 
model  ?  They  may  try  to  mend,  but  they  are  more 
likely  to  mar,  who  tamper  w4th  the  standard  of 
equity  which  has  been  revealed  from  heaven.  The 
law  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good.  Kightly  under- 
stood, it  forbids  that  which  is  naturally  evil  and 
commends  that  which  is  essentially  good.  Oh,  sin ! 
thou  art  sinful  indeed  that  thou  shouldst  dare  to 


A    GRAVE    CHARGE.  77 

revolt  against  that  which  in  itself  is  right  and  just, 
virtuous  and  true. 

Moreover,  brethren — and  this  may  touch  some  of 
us  to  the  quick — sin  is  "  exceeding  sinful,"  because  it 
is  antagonistic  to  our  oivn  interest,  a  mutiny  against 
our  oion  ivelfare.  Selfishness  is  a  strong  principle  in 
us  all.  That  which  is  good  for  our  own  welfare, 
and  personally  advantageous,  should  be  regarded 
with  tenacious  attachment,  and  were  we  wise  would 
be  pursued  with  strong  enthusiasm.  Whenever 
God  forbids  a  thing  we  may  rest  assured  it  would 
be  dangerous.  God's  commands  are  just  like  those 
notices,  more  suggestive  of  kindly  warning  than  of 
stern  prohibition,  which  we  see  upon  the  park  wa- 
ters in  the  days  of  frost,  "Dangerous."  God  sim- 
ply tells  us  that  such  and  such  a  thing  is  fraught 
with  peril,  or  it  leads  to  destruction.  What  he 
permits  or  commends  will,  if  not  immediately,  yet 
in  the  long  run,  be  in  the  highest  degree  conducive 
to  our  interests.  God  doth  but,  as  it  were,  consult 
our  wellbeing  and  prosperity  when  he  gives  us  a 
law.  Does  not  it  seem  vicious  indeed  that  a  man 
should  recklessly  dare  to  slight  himself  in  order  to 
sin  against  his  Maker  ?  God  saith  to  thee  "  Do  not 
thrust  thine  arm  in  the  fire."  Nature  saith  "  Do  not 
do  it."  If  you  slight  the  caution  you  will  soon  rue 
the  consequence.  And  yet  when  God  saith,  "Do 
not  commit  fornication  or  adultery,  do  not  lie,  do  not 
steal ;"  when  he  saith,  "  Draw  near  to  me  in  prayer, 
love  me,"  these  commands  are  in  themselves  as 
naturally  wise  as  the  injunction  not  to  thrust  thine 


78  STORM  SIGNALS. 

hand  into  the  fire,  or  the  counsel  to  eat  and  drink 
wholesome  food  when  hunger  and  thirst  require. 
Yet  we  spurn  these  commands:  like  a  child  that 
is  bidden  not  to  drink  of  the  poison  cup  and 
will  drink  of  it:  like  a  boy  that  is  refused  the 
edged  tool  lest  he  cut  himself,  and  he  will  cut 
himself,  not  believing  in  his  father's  wisdom,  but 
confident  of  his  own  judgment.  Because  the  cup 
looks  sweet  it  must  be  harmless,  because  the 
edged  tool  glitters  it  must  be  a  proper  plaything. 
Know  it,  man,  when  thou  sinnest  thou  dost  cut  and 
tear  thyself;  who  but  a  madman  would  do  that  ? 
If  thou  neglectest  to  do  the  right  thou  dost  neglect 
to  feed  thyself  with  that  which  nourishes,  and  to 
clothe  thyself  with  that  which  is  comely  !  Who 
but  an  idiot  would  lend  himself  to  such  folly? 
Yet  such  idiots,  and  such  madmen,  hath  sin  made 
us;  and  therefore  it  is  "exceeding  sinful." 

Sin,  if  we  rightly  consider  it,  is  an  upsetting  of  the 
entire  order  of  the  universe.  In  your  family  you  feel 
as  a  father  that  nothing  can  go  smoothly  unless 
there  is  a  head  whose  discretion  shall  regulate  all 
the  members.  If  your  child  should  say,  "  Father, 
I  am  determined  as  one  of  this  family  that  what- 
ever your  will  is  I  will  resist  it,  and  whatever  my 
will  is  I  will  abide  by  it,  and  always  carry  it  out  if 
I  can."  What  a  family  that  would  be  !  How  dis- 
organized !  What  a  household  !  might  we  not  say, 
what  a  hell  upon  earth  !  There  sails  to-morrow  a 
ship  from  the  Thames  under  command  of  a  captain, 
wise  and  good,  who  understands  the  seas;  but  he 


A    GRAVE    CHARGE.  79 

has  scarcely  reached  the  Nore  before  a  sailor  tells 
him  he  shall  not  obey,  that  he  does  not  intend 
either  to  reef  a  sail  or  to  do  anything  aboard  the 
vessel  that  he  is  bidden.  "Put  the  fellow  in 
irons !"  Everybody  says  it  is  right.  Or  a  passen- 
ger coming  up  from  the  saloon  informs  the  captain 
that  he  does  not  approve  of  his  authority,  and 
throughout  the  whole  of  the  voyage  he  intends  to 
thwart  him  all  he  can.  If  there  is  a  boat  within 
hail  put  that  fellow  on  shore,  and  do  not  be  partic- 
ular if  he  lands  in  a- muddy  place;  but  get  rid  of 
him  somehow.  Everybody  feels  it  must  be.  You 
might  as  well  scuttle  the  ship,  cut  holes  in  her  sides, 
as  tolerate  for  a  moment  that  the  rightful  central 
authority  should  be  unshipped,  or  that  every  man 
should  determine  to  do  what  is  right  in  his  own 
eyes.  The  happiness  of  everybody  on  board  that 
vessel  will  depend  upon  order  being  kept.  If  one 
man  do  this  and  another  do  that,  you  might  almost 
as  well  be  shut  up  in  a  cage  with  tigers  as  be  in 
such  a  vessel.  Now,  look  at  this  world,  it  is  but  a 
floating  ship  on  a  larger  scale,  and  say,  who  ought 
to  be  captain  here  but  he  that  made  it?  His 
mighty  hand  alone  can  grasp  that  awful  tiller. 
Who  can  steer  this  gigantic  vessel  over  the  waves 
of  Providence — who  but  he  ?  And  who  am  I,  and, 
my  hearer,  who  are  you,  that  you  say,  "  I  will  ignore 
the  Lord  High  Admiral;  I  will  oppose  the  Captain; 
I  will  rebel  against  him  "  ?  Why,  if  all  do  as  you 
do,  what  is  to  become  of  the  whole  vessel,  what 
of  the  whole  world?     Disorder  once  introduced, 


80  STORM  SIGNALS. 

confusion,   sorrow,  dismay,  and   disaster  will   be 
sure  to  follow. 

If  you  want  proof  that  sin  is  exceedingly  sinful, 
see  ivhat  it  has  done  already  in  the  ivorld.  Lift  up 
your  eyes  and  survey  that  lovely  garden  where 
every  beautiful  creature  both  of  bird  and  beast, 
and  every  flower  of  unwithering  loveliness,  and 
everything  that  can  delight  the  senses,  are  to  be 
discovered  in  the  sunlight.  There  are  two  perfect 
beings,  a  man  and  a  woman,  the  parents  of  our 
race.  Enters  there  sin,  the  flowers  are  forthwith 
withered,  and  a  new  wildness  has  seized  upon 
the  beasts,  the  ground  brings  forth  her  thorns 
and  thistles,  and  the  man  is  driven  out  in  the 
sweat  of  his  face  to  earn  his  daily  bread.  Who 
withered  Eden?  Thou  didst,  accursed  sin!  thou 
didst  it  all !  See  there, — but  can  you  bear  the 
sight  ? — clouds  of  smoke,  rolling  pillars  of  dust,  the 
sound  of  clarion,  the  yet  more  dreadful  boom  of 
cannon;  hark  to  the  shrieks  and  cries;  they  fly; 
they  are  pursued;  the  battle  is  over!  Walk  over 
the  field.  There  lies  a  mangled  mass  of  human 
bodies,  cut  and  torn,  riddled  with  shot,  skulls 
splintered  with  rifle  balls,  dabbled  pools  of  blood. 
Oh !  on  such  a  scene  only  a  fiend  could  gaze  with 
complacency.  Who  did  all  this?  Whence  came 
wars  and  fightings  but  from  your  own  lusts  and 
from  your  sins?  Oh,  sin,  thou  art  a  carnage- 
maker  !  Sin,  thou  dost  cry — "  Havoc,"  and 
straightway  they  let  loose  the  dogs  of  war ! 
There   had   been   naught  of  this   hadst  thou   not 


A    GRAVE    CHARGE.  81 

come.  But  the  spectacle  multiplies  on  our  vision. 
All  over  the  world  you  have  but  to  wander  and 
you  see  little  hillocks  more  or  less  thickly  scattered 
everywhere.  Could  you  analyze  the  dust  that 
blows  along  the  street  and  interrogate  every  grain, 
it  would  probably  tell  you  it  was  once  a  part  of 
the  body  of  some  man  who  in  generations  past 
died  painfully  and  rotted  back  to  mother  earth. 
Oh,  the  world  is  scarred  with  death.  What  is  this 
earth  to-day,  but  a  sad  Aceldema — a  field  of  blood, 
a  vast  cemetery?  Death  has  worm-eaten  the 
world  through  and  through.  All  its  surface  bears 
relics  of  the  human -race.  Who  slew  all  these? 
who  wrought  this  mischief?  Who  indeed  but 
sin  ?  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth 
death. 

I  scarcely  dare  ask  you  to  follow  me,  nor  if  you 
could  follow  would  I  venture  to  lead  the  way, 
across  the  stream  that  parts  the  land  of  mortals 
from  the  regions  of  the  immortals.  Should  you, 
on  the  venturous  wings  of  imagination  dare  the 
flight  to  a  land  that  is  full  of  confusion  and  with- 
out any  order,  what  horror  would  seize  you ! 
Athwart  that  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  ye 
might  look  on  the  gloomy  region  of  wretched 
souls,  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  their  fire 
is  not  quenched.  How  could  you  dare  to  peer  into 
that  dismal  pit  that  hath  no  bottom,  that  place 
wherein  spirits  accursed  of  God  are  put  away  for- 
ever and  forever  from  all  light  of  hope  and  res- 
toration 1     But  you  shudder  at  the  mention,  even 


82  STORM  SIGNALS. 

as  I  shrink  back  terrorstricken  at  the  thought  of. 
that  place  where  God's  wrath  burns  hke  a  furnace, 
where  the  proud  that  do  wickedness  are  as  stub- 
ble, where  the  nations  that  forget  God  forever 
are  consumed.  Who  lit  that  fire?  Where  is  he 
that  kindled  it  ?  It  is  sin  that  did  it  all.  No  man 
is  consigned  there  except  for  sin.  No  man  that 
ever  breathed  was  ever  cast  away  except  as  a 
punishment  most  just  for  sin  that  was  most  griev- 
ous.    Sin  is  indeed  "exceeding  sinful." 

Not  even  now  have  I  reached  the  climax,  nor 
must  I  venture  the  description.  The  worst  phase 
is  neither  death  nor  hell.  But  on  Calvary's  tree 
the  Lord  himself  who  loved  us,  and  came  to  earth 
to  bless  us,  proved  the  sinfulness  of  sin  when  sin 
nailed  him  to  the  tree  and  pierced  his  side,  and 
sinners,  rejecting  him  with  many  a  jibe  and  sneer, 
exclaimed,  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign 
over  us."  In  the  agonies  of  Jesus,  in  the  shame 
and  spitting,  in  the  woes  and  anguish  that  he  en- 
dured, we  read  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  written  as 
in  capital  letters,  that  even  the  blind  might  see. 
Oh!  sin,  murderer  of  Christ,  thou  art  "exceed- 
ing sinful." 

My  time  has  failed  me,  or  I  had  meant  to  have 
enlarged  upon  some  particular  sins  that  are  exceed- 
ing SINFUL  ABOVE  ANY  ORDINARY  TRANSGRESSION. 

Of  this  kind  are  sins  against  the  gospel.  I  will 
just  give  you  a  catalogue  of  aggravations  on 
which  I  cannot  amplify,  that  every  one  here  who 
is  honest  with  himself  may  search  and  see  whether 


A    GRA  VE    CHARGE.  83 

he  be  not  verily  guilty.  To  reject  faithful  messen- 
gers sent  from  God,  loving  parents,  earnest  pastors, 
diligent  teachers — to  slight  the  kind  message  that 
they  bring  and  the  yearning  anxiety  that  they 
feel  for  us,  is  "exceeding  sinful."  To  resist  the 
gracious  gospel  which  talks  to  us  only  of  mercy, 
and  pardon,  and  adoption,  of  redemption  from  hell 
and  exaltation  to  heaven — to  reject  such  glad  tid- 
ings of  great  joy  to  our  woe-begone  race  is  *'  ex- 
ceeding sinful."  To  set  at  naught  the  dying 
Saviour,  whose  only  motive  in  coming  to  earth 
must  have  been  love,  whose  wounds  are  mouths 
that  preach  his  love,  whose  death  is  the  solemn 
proof  of  love — to  disparage,  to  neglect,  to  ignore 
him,  this  is  "  exceeding  sinful."  To  play  false  to- 
wards him  after  having  made  a  profession  of  your 
attachment  to  him ;  to  draw  near  to  his  table  and 
then  run  riot  with  the  ungodly ;  to  be  baptized  in 
his  name  and  yet  to  be  perfidious,  dishonest,  un- 
righteous, this  is  "  exceeding  sinful."  To  be  num- 
bered with  his  church  and  yet  to  be  in  alliance 
with  the  world ;  to  wear  the  badge  of  disciples  and 
yet  play  the  part  of  traitors,  this  is  "  exceeding 
sinful."  To  sin  against  light  and  knowledge;  to 
sin,  knowing  better;  to  sin  against  conscience; 
to  trample  convictions  under  foot;  to  do  violence 
to  one's  better  self;  to  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit,  to 
make  light  of  his  admonitions,  warnings,  prompt- 
ings, invitings, — this  is  '*  exceeding  sinful."  To  go 
on  sinning  after  you  have  smarted ;  to  grow  reck- 
less when  your  way  is  hedged  up ;  to  push  onward 


84  STORM  SIGNALS. 

to  hell,  as  if  riding  a  steeple-chase  over  post  and 
bar,  gate  and  stile,  hedge  and  ditch,  this  is  "  ex- 
ceeding sinful." 

Some  of  you  are  "  exceeding  sinful."  Oh  how  I 
have  pleaded  with  you !  I  have  cried  to  you  to 
come  to  Jesus.  1  have  warned  many  of  you  again 
and  again.  If  1  am  called  to  make  answer  at  the 
judgment  bar,  I  must  say  "  Amen  "  to  the  condem- 
nation of  multitudes  among  you.  I  shall  be  obliged 
to  confess  that  you  did  know  better — that  some  of 
'^you  drink  when  you  know  how  pernicious  it  is; 
that  some  of  you  swear  when  you  know  how  foul 
it  is;  that  some  of  you  are  dishonest  when  you 
know  how  base  it  is.  Some  of  you  sin  with  such 
a  high  hand  I  scarcely  can  account  for  your  com- 
ing to  this  Tabernacle  again  and  again  and  again. 
You  like  to  hear  my  voice,  and  yet  you  cling  to 
your  sins,  your  sins  that  will  surely  damn  you. 
Let  me  be  clear  of  your  blood:  I  will  not  mince 
matters  with  you,  or  talk  with  you,  as  if  you  were 
all  saints  when  I  know  you  are  not,  and  as  if  you 
were  all  going  to  heaven,  when,  alas!  many  of  you 
are  still  swiftly  spreading  your  wings  to  fly  down- 
^^ward  to  the  pit.  Oh  !  may  God  arrest  you,  or 
otherwise  the  brightness  of  the  light  in  the  face  of 
which  you  sin  will  make  your  guilt  the  plainer 
and  the  heavier;  and  the  warnings  you  hear  will 
make  your  condemnation  the  more  overwhelming. 

But  why  must  it  come  to  this?  Why  will  you 
die  ?  Why  are  you  set  on  sin  ?  Why  love  ye 
mischief?     I  see  often  in  the  gaslight  of  my  study 


A    GRAVE    CHARGE.    •  85 

poor  gnats  come  flying  in  if  the  window  be  but 
ajar,  and  how  they  dash  against  the  flame,  and 
down  they  fall,  but  have  scarcely  recovered 
strength  before  up  they  fly  again  unto  their  de- 
struction. Are  you  such?  Are  you  mere  insects, 
without  reason,  without  wit,  without  knowledge  ? 
Oh,  you  are  not,  else  you  were  excusable.  Come 
to  my  Saviour,  poor  souls !  He  is  still  waiting  to 
receive  you.  A  prayer  will  do  it.  Breath  the 
prayer.  A  broken  heart  he  will  not  despise.  A 
look  at  him  will  do  it.  A  faint  glance  at  Jesus 
pleading  for  you  will  do  it.  Holy  Spirit,  make 
them  give  that  glance.  Oh !  by  thy  irresistible 
power  constrain  them  now  to  look  and  live.  Oh  ! 
it  shall  be.  God  be  thanked,  it  shall  be.  You 
shall  look  to-night,  and  God  shall  have  the  glory; 
and  though  you  be  "  exceeding  sinful,"  yet  shall 
you,  through  the  precious  blood,  be  fully  forgiven, 
and  exceeding  grateful  for  the  great  forgiveness 
which  Jesus  brings. 


SEoes  to  dome ! 

'•  One  woe  is  past;  and  behold,  there  come  two  woes  more  here- 
after.'"— Revelation  ix.  12. 

WITH  the  particular  context  of  this  small  sen- 
tence I  have  no  intention  to  meddle  this 
evening.  I  am  not  an  interpreter  of  unfulfilled 
prophecy;  I  leave  that  for  those  who  have  time 
and  talent  for  such  researches.  Doubtless  these 
words  w^ere  spoken  of  old  by  the  angel  that  ap- 
peared to  John  the  Divine.  After  he  had  lifted 
the  curtain  of  futurity,  and  shown  the  terrible 
things  that  God  would  do  in  the  earth,  he  ex- 
plained to  John:  "One  woe  is  past;  and  behold, 
there  come  two  woes  more  hereafter."  To  my  own 
apprehension,  while  reading  this  in  private,  it 
seemed  just  such  an  utterance  as  the  angel  of  God 
might  address  to  the  soul  of  the  ungodly  when  he 
leaves  the  body.  "  Death  is  over,"  saith  the  angel. 
*'One  woe  is  past;  and,  behold,  there  come  two 
woes  more  hereafter."  Thou  hast  passed  through 
the  Jordan,  but  thou  art  to  pass  through  two 
streams  deeper  still;  thou  hast  passed  through 
the  woes  of  death,  but  behold  there  comes  a  judg- 
ment, and  then  comes  a  second  death:  "One  woe 


WOES    TO    COME!  87 

is  past;  and,  behold,  there  come  two  woes  more 
hereafter." 

Very  solemnly  and  earnestly,  then,  let  me  make 
a  few  observations  concerning  the  woe  that  is  sup- 
posed to  be  passed  after  the  sinner  is  dead ;  after 
which  I  will  briefly  notice  the  two  woes  that  are 
'to  come  hereafter. 

The  woe  which  is  supposed  to  be  passed  is  the 
woe  of  death.  Death  to  the  righteous  has  lost  its 
sting,  but  to  the  wicked  death  has  all  its  terrors. 
Its  horrors  are  not  diminished  by  anything  that 
Christ  hath  done ;  yea,  rather,  death  gathers  more 
cause  of  dismay;  for  the  very  Cross  itself  may  fill 
the  obdurate  heart  with  consternation.  When  the 
sinner  dies  impenitent,  having  rejected  the  mercy 
of  Christ,  deatli  is  woe  indeed.  Let  me  show  you 
in  what  respect  death  is  a  woe  to  the  ungodly. 
On  the  eve  of  dissolution  the  wicked  man  often 
has  fierce  temptations.  Lying  upon  his  dying  bed 
he  casts  his  eye  back  over  the  panorama  of  life, 
and  remembers  w^hat  he  has  been;  he  hears  the 
church  bell  of  every  Sabbath  ringing  again;  he 
thinks  of  the  many  times  he  has  broken  the  Lord's 
day.  Lying  there  he  remembers  the  many  ser- 
mons he  has  heard,  the  many  warnings  he  has 
had,  and  how  they  have  all  been  forgotten.  In 
these  hours  memory  is  very  strong, — it  has  great 
power  of  vision,  as  with  a  lightning  flash  it  brings 
before  the  dying  man  the  starting  point  of  his  child- 
hood; the  earnest  exhortations  of  a  pious  father 
in  full   many  an   instance  ring  their  clear  notes 


88  STORM   SIGNALS. 

afresh  in  his  ears;  or  he  may  remember  how  he 
was  then  carried  in  his  arms  up  to  the  sanctuary, 
and  how  he  was  admonished  not  in  riper  age  to 
forsake  its  hallowed  floor.  Anon  turning  upon  his 
sick-bed,  he  seems  to  hear  the  sobbings  of  a  fond 
mother  as  she  was  wont  in  days  of  yore  to  kneel 
by  his  bedside  imploring  God  in  earnest  prayer, 
bedewed  with  tears,  that  her  child  might  be  saved. 
Memory  brings  back  everything,  but  to  him  it  is 
no  blossom-spring  of  joy;  far  otherwise  is  it,  for 

"Remembrance  wakes  with  all  her  busy  train: 
Swells  at  his  breast,  and  turns  the  past  to  pain." 

it  tells  him  of  all  the  sins  he  had  committed;  it 
reminds  him  of  things  which  he  had  hoped  were 
forgotten;  it  revokes  sins  of  revelry,  concerning 
which  he  had  said,  "  Let  these  be  forgotten  and 
blotted  out  of  the  book  of  my  remembrance  for- 
ever." He  thinks  of  those  moments  when  he  had 
rebelled  against  his  Maker,  or  even  blasphemed 
his  name;  oh,  God,  what  a  woe  this  must  be  to  a 
dying  sinner  simply  to  look  back  on  all  his  sins  I 
Memory  is  no  liar.  Glancing  at  the  black  cata- 
logue, it  seems  to  say — Look  there,  man,  look  at 
the  mercy  you  have  slighted,  at  the  solemn  warn- 
ings you  have  trampled  under  foot,  at  the  op- 
portunities you  have  needlessly  wasted.  As  the 
wretched  man  lies  there  writhing  in  his  pain,  this 
is  one  of  the  worst  woes  that  he  feels.  Memory 
sticks  daggers  into  his  conscience,  crying  all  the 
while,  "  It  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and 


JVOES    TO    COME!  89 

Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  thee." 
Death  to  the  sinner  is  a  woe  again  in  another 
sense, — it  warns  him  now  that  he  has  to  leave  all 
his  earthly  joys  forever.  Sinner,  I  see  thee  lying 
on  thy  bed,  and  thou  art  panting  for  thy  breath; 
thy  heaving  lungs  are  struggling  for  air  so  that 
thou  canst  scarcely  breathe.  Come,  take  a  last 
look  at  all  thy  joys,  for  thou  shalt  never  know  an- 
other; kiss  thy  harlot  on  the  cheek,  for  all  thy  sins 
thou  must  now  forsake  forever:  thou  wouldst  not 
give  them  up  at  the  warning  of  the  minister,  and 
canst  not  shake  them  off  now  with  all  the  convul- 
sions of  thy  conscience.  Come,  rich  man,  lean  upon 
thy  hony  arm,  and  look  out  of  thy  window  upon  thy 
broad  acres,  for  thou  shalt  never  see  them  again. 
Come,  drunkard,  drink,  drink — for  this  is  thy  last 
draught;  take  a  last  farewell  of  all  thy  joys,  thy 
festive  pleasures,  thy  garish  lusts,  thy  bewitching 
vanities,  thy  deceitful  hopes;  bid  a  last  farewell, 
*'a  long  farewell  to  all  thy  greatness,"  for  now  thou 
goest  into  the  land  of  contempt  and  misery,  agony 
and  death — yea,  into  a  place  of  unutterable  depths 
of  agony.  Well  may  it  be  said  that  death  is  a  woe 
to  the  sinner.  Death,  again,  is  a  woe  to  the  un- 
godly man,  if  he  be  really  awakened  at  the  last 
hour — and  many  such  there  be — for  conscience 
comes  and  tells  the  dying  sinner  that  it  is  now  all 
over  with  him  forever;  it  is  too  late  for  him  to  be 
saved.  One  of  my  predecessors,  Mr.  Benjamin 
Keach,  has  left  on  record  an  account  of  a  man  that 
had  been  a  trouble   to    liis   church, — for  he    had 


90  STORM  SIGNALS. 

backslidden, — and  his  cries,  shrieks,  and  tears,  at 
the  very  prospect  of  death,  were  enough  to  make 
one's  hair  turn  white  and  stand  upon  end.  That 
poor  wretched  man  seems  to  have  had  a  foretaste 
of  perdition  before  he  entered  into  its  fire ;  and  so 
it  is  ofttimes  with  the  wicked:  thou  hast  had  thy 
harvest;  tliy  summer  is  ended;  but  thou  art  not 
saved;  thou  hast  been  warned,  but  tliou  shalt  not 
be  warned  again ;  the  Hps  that  said,  "Come  unto 
me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I 
w411  give  you  rest,"  shall  say,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed, 
into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels;''  and  all  the  while  conscience  says  this  is 
just — I  knew  my  duty  and  I  did  it  not;  I  knew  it 
was  my  duty  to  repent,  but  I  steeled  my  heart 
against  God,  and  I  would  not  forsake  my  sins;  I 
turned  my  back  upon  the  cross  to  dance  in  a  merry 
circle  downwards  to  the  pit.  This  shall  make 
death  woeful  indeed,  when  it  shall  be  hurled  into 
the  mind;  thou  knewest  thy  duty,  but  thou  didst 
it  not.  *'  Woe  unto  thee,  Capernaum,  -^thou  hast 
been  exalted  to  heaven,  but  thou  shalt  be  cast 
down  to  hell,  for  if  the  mighty  works  that  have 
been  done  in  thee  had  been  done  in  Tyre  and 
Sidon,  they  would  have  repented  long  ago  in  sack- 
cloth and  ashes."  Death  is  a  woe  indeed.  I  never 
wish  to  stand  by  the  deathbed  of  any  who  die 
in  their  sins;  this  is  a  dreadful  woe  indeed,  to 
be  wrapped  in  the  black  winding-sheet  of  guilt. 
I  have  seen  the  eyes  starting  from  the  sockets ;  I 
have  seen  the  throat  dried  up  like  a  potsherd;  I 


WOES    TO    COME!  91 

have  heard  the  cries  of  one  man  in  death  whom  I 
visited.  The  scene  comes  up  before  me  at  the 
present  moment  as  I  saw  him  rise  in  his  bed  and 
shriek,  "  0  God,  I  will  not  die,  there  is  no  mercy 
for  me."  He  begged  of  us  to  pray  for  him,  and 
yet  he  knew  that  our  prayers  were  of  no  avail. 
"  I  have  had  mv  seasons,"  said  he,  "  but  I  can't 
repent;  I  shall  die  in  a  short  time,  and  I  shall  soon 
be  in  hell."  "  Water,"  said  he,  "  give  me  water." 
Yet  again  he  cried,  "  0,  God,  I  cannot  die,  1  will 
not  die,"  and  this  was  a  prelude  to  his  departure, 
for  he  shortly  afterwards  expired  in  desperate 
agony.  Death  is  indeed  a  woe  to  such  a  man  as 
that.  And  you,  my  hearers,  if  you  die  without 
faith  in  Christ,  your  death  must  be  a  woe  as  terrible 
as  ever  filled  the  heart  or  blanched  the  cheek  with 
terror.  Yet  this  is  only  a  small  part  of  the  suffer- 
ings. The  man  is  dead;  there  lies  his  corpse;  his 
friends  say  that  it  was  a  happy  release  for  him 
from  his  pain ;  the  spirit  leaves  the  body,  hoping, 
perhaps,  that  its  pains  are  over,  till  coming  into 
the  confines  of  another  world,  it  meets  a  commis- 
sioned angel  with  brandished  sword,  who  cries, 
"  One  woe  is  passed;  and,  behold,  there  come  two 
woes  more  hereafter."  Oh,  how  those  dismal  aug- 
uries must  appal  the  hapless  spirit,  unclothed,  be- 
wildered !  So  does  the  angel  proclaim  it,  as  with 
a  voice  of  thunder."  One  woe  is  passed ;  and,  be- 
hold, there  come  two  woes  more  hereafter." 

Of  'these  two  woes   that  loom    in  the  future,  I 
would  now  briefly  but  solemnly  speak.     The  first 


92  STORM  SIGNALS. 

woe  of  the  man  who  dies  in  his  sins  is  the  woe  of 
judgment;  that  is  terrible  indeed.  What  a  day- 
shall  that  be — a  day  of  wrath,  a  day  of  fire — when 
the  last  great  assize  shall  be  held  !  When  a  man 
is  to  be  tried  for  his  life,  there  must  be  a  solemnity 
about  every  preparation — the  seat  of  the  judge, 
the  muster  of  the  jurors,  the  formalities  of  the 
court,  and  the  opening  of  the  books  must  be  full  of 
gloomy  interest.  Scarce  can  a  prisoner  stand  in 
the  docks  to  be  tried  for  his  life  by  his  fellowman 
without  trembling;  at  least,  it  is  a  wonder  if  it 
should  be  so.  But  conceive  the  great  assize — the 
graves  are  opened  !  What  horrors  shall  seize  hold 
upon  the  wicked  at  that  moment !  Men  and 
women  start  up  from  their  tombs  wrapped  in  their 
winding-sheets.  The  long  buried  dead  stand  upon 
the  hillocks  that  were  heaped  over  their  graves; 
the  sea  gives  up  her  mariners,  the  earth  is  filled 
with  sinners;  there  is  scarce  a  spot  without  a  foot 
to  tread  upon  it !  What  a  solemn  awe  will  rest 
upon  every  heart  at  that  moment,  "  When  every 
eye  shall  look  up  for  his  coming,  who  shall  judge 
the  world  in  righteousness,  and  his  people  with 
equity !  "  Sinner,  I  see  thee  there.  Is  this  the 
judgment?  I  see  you  standing  by  the  side  of  the 
righteous.  I  hear  you  imploringly  call,  "  Hide  me, 
cover  me,  embrace  me,  let  me  be  seated  with  you." 
But  I  hear  the  righteous  answer,  "It  is  too  late; 
now  your  state  is  fixed."  And  there  you  stand 
trembling  with  unutterable  dismay.  At  last  a 
piercing  cry  is  heard,  and,  lo,  a  great  white  cloud, 


WOES    TO    COME!  93 

and  on  it  is  seated  a  throne;  he  is  come — he  whose 
head  is  white  like  snow,  and  his  hair  like  pure 
wool — he  comes,  he  comes, 

"A  sudden  trembling  shakes  the  ground;" 

the  earth  shakes,  the  heavens  are  on  fire,  and  the 
moon  becomes  a  clot  of  blood,  and  there  he  sits; 
and  now,  poor  sinner,  I  hear  you  cry,  as  you  watch 
the  face  of  him  who  sits  upon  the  throne.  Yes, 
'tis  he,  the  crucified  Man  of  Nazareth.  What 
means  that  shriek?  There  is  the  Christ  whom 
I  rejected;  there  is  Jesus  who  was  preached  so 
earnestly  to  me  on  earth;  there  is  the  Saviour 
whom  my  mother  loved;  there  is  the  Son  of  God 
in  whom  my  father  trusted;  there  is  the  King 
Eternal;  he  is  come. 

**  He  comes,  lie  comes  to  judge  the  world  ! 
Aloud  the  archangel  cries; 
And  thunders  roll  from  pole  to  pole, 
And  lightnings  cleave  the  skies." 

Oh,  what  confused  howling  there  will  be,  or 
rather  what  a  chorus  of  anguish,  when  the  wicked 
shall  cry,  •'  Rocks  hide  us,  mountains  on  us  fall ! 
Hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  who  sitteth  upon  the 
throne,  for  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come, 
and  who  shall  be  able  to  stand !"  And  now  your 
turn  is  come !  You  have  stood  there  while  one 
after  another  has  received  his  doom.  The  book  is 
opened,  and  oh,  what  will  you  say,  when  he  shall 
begin  to  read  your  sins!  Says  he,  on  such  a  day 
thou  didst  break  my  laws.     "  Sinner,"  said  he,  "  I 


94  STORM  SIGNALS. 

have  wooed  thee  with  love  divine,  and  sent  my 
minister  to  thee,  and  now  I  read  thy  sentence — 
depart  from  me.  Your  minister  exhorted  you  to 
beheve  in  Christ.  Do  you  not  remember  that  on  a 
Sunday  night  my  Spirit  was  upon  your  minister? 
He  prayed  you  in  my  stead  to  be  reconciled  to 
God,  but  ye  would  have  none  of  it.  I  called,  and 
you  refused ;  I  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man 
regarded;  I  will  laugh  at  your  calamity,  and  mock 
when  your  fear  cometh."  I  think  I  see  your 
horror — no  tongue  can  tell  it  forth;  thy  ribs  are 
creaking;  thy  brain  is  reeling;  thy  heart  is  melt- 
ing like  wax  in  the  midst  of  thy  bowels,  as  he 
uttereth  the  sentence,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed,  into 
everlasting  fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels."  There  is  no  appeal.  You  go  away,  you 
must  sink  into  the  pit  which  is  bottomless  for  ever 
and  ever.  If  any  of  you,  my  dear  friends,  suppose 
that  I  like  to  preach  on  this  subject,  I  assure  you 
that  you  misunderstand  me.  I  love  to  speak  of 
the  everlasting  love  of  God.  I  never  feel  so  much 
at  home  as  when  I  am  speaking  of  the  covenant  of 
grace.  Painful^  however,  as  the  heavy  tidings  are, 
to  deliver  them  to  you  is  a  part  of  my  ministry. 
When  they  are  laid  upon  my  heart  I  cannot  be  so 
unfaithful  to  my  soul  as  to  withhold  them.  I 
know  that  in  the  last  great  day  I  must  give  an 
account;  and  if  I  warn  you  not,  and  ye  perish, 
your  blood  will  be  required  at  my  hands.  My 
eyes  overflow  with  tears  when  considering  the 
manner  in  which  I  should  address  you,  and  when  I 


WOES    TO    COME!  95 

stand  face  to  face  with  you  forewarning  each  un- 
converted man  of  his  impending  danger,  I  cannot 
hide  my  emotion.     Baxter  preached — 

"  As  though  he  ne'er  might  preach  again, 
A  dying  man  to  dying  men." 
My  hearers,  you  read  your  Bibles,  you  are  not 
infidels;  I  am  telling  you  facts  which  you  your- 
selves believe.  I  beseech  you  think  of  them:  you 
don't  despise  the  Bible,  but  you  neglect  it.  Oh,  do 
not  put  these  things  away.  I  conjure  you  by  the 
living  God,  the  righteous  Judge;  not  by  the  feeble 
words  I  speak,  but  by  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  but 
a  little  while — a  very  little  while  with  some  of  us — • 
and  this  life  must  be  over,  and  then  shall  the  real- 
ities of  eternity  begin.  Oh,  my  hearer,  bethink 
thee  thou  must  die,  and  thou  must  stand  before 
the  Judge.  Thou  must  be  in  heaven  or  hell 
before  many  more  years  have  run  their  rounds, 
and  can  you  be  angry  with  a  fellow-creature  for 
warning  you — for  speaking  of  these  terrible 
things  in  love  ?  Oh,  I  beseech  you  to  flee  from 
the  wrath  to  come!  Who  can  tell  the  terrors  of 
the  day  of  judgment?  Who  can  describe  the 
two  woes  to  come  when  this  life's  fitful  fever  is 
o'er  ?  Yet  certain  it  is  that  after  the  woe  of 
judgment  there  comes  the  woe  of  hell.  Oh, 
what  a  woe  is  that  in  which  all  the  woes  of  the 
lost  are  condensed !  Can  you  bear  to  see  a  fellow- 
creature  in  pain  ?  The  faceache  or  the  toothache 
draws  forth  my  sympathies.  We  cannot  bear  to 
see  a  fellow-creature  in  agony.     But  how  shall  I 


96  STORM   SIGNALS. 

attempt  to  describe  the  pains  of  hell  ?  You  cannot 
feel  them  here,  bless  God  for  it.  There  is  no  pain 
on  earth  strong  enough  to  be  compared  with  the 
pains  of  hell.  Napoleon — a  man  who  had  perhaps 
the  hardest  of  all  hearts — one  day  rode  across  the 
battlefield ;  his  horse  trod  upon  a  poor  wounded 
man  just  ready  to  die,  and  the  poor  man  rose  up,  and 
cried,  "  Oh,"  at  which  Napoleon  shrieked  too,  and 
cried,  "Oh  God,  what  pains  a  man  may  suffer." 
Could  you  and  I  put  our  ear  to  the  grating  of  the 
world  of  spirits  for  a  moment  or  two  we  should 
say,  "  Oh  God,  what  pains  a  man  may  suffer ! " 
You  cannot  compare  the  pains  of  this  life  with  the 
agonies  to  be  endured  hereafter.  Could  all  the 
misery  that  ever  startled  the  keepers  of  our  hospi- 
tals be  conceived,  it  could  not  convey  the  least 
idea  of  the  pains  of  the  spirits  that  are  doomed  to 
dwell  in  eternal  fire  and  everlasting  burning.  The 
woe,  however,  will  act  its  terrible  part  on  the  soul. 
The  memory  aghast, — hope  and  fear,  thoughts  and 
imaginations,  conscience  and  judgment,  all  will 
be  racked,  every  one  be  stretched  on  a  bed  of 
fire,  every  nerve  strained  to  its  utmost,  every 
vein  made  a  road  for  the  hot  feet  of  pain  to 
travel  on.  Jesus  Christ,  the  most  loving  of 
all  preachers,  preached  the  most  terribly  of  hell. 
He  calls  it  a  pit  without  a  bottom.  He  spoke 
of  it  as  a  place  "Where  their  worm  dieth  not, 
and  their  fire  is  not  quenched."  Imagine  not, 
therefore,  that  I  can  speak  too  seriously  of,  or 
portray  too   vividly,   the   doom   of  the   ungodly; 


IVOJSS    TO    COME!  97 

but  I  dread  the  subject,  and  1  feel  it  a  relief  to 
leave  it. 

Oh,  sinners  !  in  a  little  while,  unless  you  repent, 
ye  will  know  more  of  hell  than  the  strongest  imag- 
ination could  paint,  or  the  most  powerful  orator 
could  describe.  There  is  but  a  little  between  you 
and  death,  and  then  there  shall  be  but  a  little  be- 
tween you  and  that  place  of  torment.  Many  of  you 
are  hanging  over  the  mouth  of  hell  by  a  solitary 
plank,  and  that  plank  is  rotten  !  0  think,  when 
you  come  into  the  place  of  torment,  what  will  you 
say  then  as  you  lie  in  the  mighty  heat  ?  You  will 
cry,  '*  Oh,  God,  was  I  foolish  enough  for  a  little 
merriment,  or  a  little  worldly  gain,  or  a  little  praise 
of  wicked  men,  to  be  lost  forever  ?  Was  1  fool 
enough  to  bring  myself  here  for  ever  and  ever  ?  " 
Do,  I  beseech  you,  stop  and  think  of  it.  Picture 
yourself  in  it,  and  what  you  will  think  of  it  when 
you  are  cast  there.  Before  the  "  one  woe"  comes 
upon  thee  stop,  so  that  the  "  two  woes"  may  never 
be  thine,  if  perad  venture  thou  may  est  be  saved 
from  the  wrath  to  come.  Could  I  speak  with  more 
tender,  thrilling  persuasiveness  I  would.  But  the 
text  itself  rings  with  shriller  notes  than  any  words 
of  comment  1  can  utter;  "One  woe  is  past;  and, 
behold,  there  come  two  woes  more  hereafter." 
Will  not  an  angel's  voice  persuade  you  to  seek  the 
Lord  with  all  your  hearts  ?  What  arguments,  then, 
shall  I  use  V  The  argument  of  love  !  Sinner,  my 
heart  yearns  over  thee.  What  would  I  give  to  see 
you  saved  ?     1  have  sometimes  felt  as  if  I  could 


98  STORM   SIGNALS. 

be  cut  in  pieces,  if  you  might  be  saved  by  my 
martyrdom.  Oh,  souls,  you  little  know  how  the 
godly  pray  over  you !  There  are  some  of  us  who 
cannot  sleep  by  night  for  thinking  of  you.  We 
should  be  praying  for  mercy  for  ourselves,  but  our 
voice  is  checked,  and  we  begin  to  pray  for  you; 
and  shall  our  voice  be  heard  in  vain  ?  Think  again, 
I  beseech  you,  of  One  who  feels  for  you  more  than  we 
do,  Jesus,  he  who  wept  over  Jerusalem.  When  he 
beheld  the  city,  wherefore  did  he  weep?  Because 
he  knew  that  they  would  not  be  saved.  Thank  God 
there  are  not  many  in  this  assembly  who  are  not 
converted,  if  you  are  what  you  profess  to  be;  and 
yet  there  are  some,  I  think.  I  hear  him  lift  up  his 
sweet  voice  and  say,  "  Why  will  ye  die,  oh,  house 
of  Israel  ?  "  Sinner,  will  you  reject  your  mercies? 
Will  you  shut  the  gate  of  mercy  on  yourselves,  and 
unbolt  the  bars  of  despair  that  you  may  enter  into 
the  dungeon  of  woe,  and  be  fastened  there  forever? 
I  think  I  hear  him  take  that  solemn  oath  again, 
"  As  1  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  turn  unto 
me."  Then  I  see  him  stretch  out  his  arms,  and  I 
hear  him  cry,  with  the  tears  running  down  his  blessed 
cheeks,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  1  will  give  you  rest."  "  Whoso- 
ever Cometh  unto  me,  1  will  in  no  wise  cast  out.'* 
And  as  you  turn  away  and  reject  him,  I  see  him 
coming  to  you,  and  crying,  "  Sinner,  come !  "  and 
even  to-night,  though  he  is  not  visible  to  your  mor- 
tal eyes,  you  may  hear  him  crying,  Come — 


WOES    TO    COME!  99 

*'  From  the  Mount  of  Calvary, 
Where  the  Saviour  deigned  to  die, 
What  melodious  sounds  I  hear, 
Bursting  on  my  ravished  ear  ! 
Love's  redeeming  work  is  done, 
Come  and  welcome,  sinner,  come. " 

If  that  argument  of  love  does  not  move  you, 
what  response  will  you  give  to  the  argument  of 
fear  ? 

*'  If  your  ears  refuse 

The  language  of  his  grace, 
Your  hearts  grow  hard,  like  stubborn  Jews, 

That  unbelieving  race, 
The  Lord  in  vengeance  dress' d. 
Will  lift  his  hand  and  swear. 
Ye  that  despise  my  promised  rest 
Shall  have  no  portion  there. " 

Eeject  Christ,  and  your  damnation  is  doubly 
sure ;  refuse  the  gospel,  and  destruction  is  your  cer- 
tain and  most  righteous  doom. 

**  How  they  deserve  the  deepest  hell 
That  slight  the  joys  above  ! 
What  chains  of  vengeance  must  they  feel 
Who  slight  the  bands  of  love  !  " 

Oh,  if  you  reject  Christ  when  he  comes  to  you  in 
love,  then  you  will  find  that  he  knows  how  to 
smite  as  well  as  to  woo.  His  love  is  great,  but 
spurn  him  and  his  jealousy  is  as  cruel  as  the  grave. 
Should  you  set  your  love  on  the  prince  of  this 
world,  and  reject  the  Prince  of  Life,  he  will  say: 
They  despised  me  when  I  courted  them  with  my 
kindness;  now  shall  they  taste  the  resentment  of 
incensed   love,    and   feel  the   pangs   of  outraged 


100  STORM   SIGNALS. 

mercy.  Oh,  what  a  dreadful  thing  is  the  wrath 
of  the  Lamb  !  My  hearer,  if  thou  hast  one  desire 
towards  Christ,  do  not  be  cast  down;  Christ  never 
was  belli iid-hand  with  thee.  Thou  art  saved  if 
thou  art  willing  to  be  saved.  Do  not  think  hard 
thoughts  of  my  loving  Master;  believe  that  he  is 
able  to  save  thee ;  believe  more  than  that,  believe 
that  he  has  saved  thee.  Cast  thyself  at  the  foot  of 
the  cross;  have  done  with  questionings  and  com- 
plainings. Though  thou  dost  feel  so  vile  and 
wicked,  come  as  a  humble  suppliant  to  him  who  is 
alone  able  to  save.  Smite  on  thy  breast  and  pray, 
'*  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  May  many, 
very  many  of  you  seek  the  Lord  with  broken  hearts, 
and  so  shall  you  find  him  and  be  found  of  him,  for 
none  shall  ever  seek  him  in  vain. 


X 


3r?}e  Sinner*^  ©nig  ^lternatt&e> 

**  Now  therefore  come,  and  let  us  fall  unto  the  host  of  the  Syrians: 
if  tJiey  save  us  alive,  we  shall  live;  and  if  they  kill  us,  we  shall  but 
die.''' — II  Kings  vii.  4. 

OUTSIDE  of  the  gates  of  Samaria  you  might 
have  seen  sundry  temporary  sheds  or  huts, 
hastily  built,  but  suffered  to  endure  till  they  were 
thoroughly  decayed,  in  the  last  extremity  of  filth, 
and  never  visited  by  any  except  by  those  unhappy 
persons  who  were  doomed  to  reside  in  them.  In 
one  of  these  huts  are  four  miserable  beings,  gaunt, 
and  lean,  and  thin,  with  that  sharpness  of  eye 
and  visage  which  is  ever  the  effect  of  protracted 
hunger.  These  are  lepers,  loathsome  by  disease, 
and  emaciated  by  privation.  They  cannot  sleep, 
though  it  is  past  the  dead  of  night.  The  sentinel 
on  the  walls  has  just  proclaimed  midnight. 
Wakened  from  their  little  slumber,  they  find  it 
impossible  to  return  to  it  again,  for  the  pangs  of 
hunger  prevent.  They  hold  as  it  were  a  miniature 
council  of  war,  and  the  wiser  among  them  pro- 
pounds, Avith  the  unanimous  assent  of  the  rest,  an 
alternative.  "Why  stay  we  here  to  die?  If  we 
go  into  the  city,  even  should  we  be  suffered  to 


102  STORM  SIGNALS. 

remain,  yet  famine  has  arisen  to  so  great  a  pitcb 
that  we  must  perish  there;  while  if  we  sit  here  it 
is  quite  certain  that  we  shall  pine  away ;  let  us  fall 
unto  the  camp  of  the  Syrians."  There  is  a  little 
hope  to  cheer  them  or  a  fell  despair  to  drive  them 
as  they  resolve  to  sally  forth  from  their  wretched 
quarters.  The  Syrians,  maybe  they  thought,  are 
dainty  men  of  war,  and  they  will  push  us  away  with 
their  sword-points,  and  soon  end  our  miseries.  Per- 
haps, in  their  estimate,  death  by  sword  was  prefer- 
able to  death  by  famine.  At  any  rate,  in  any  case, 
say  they,  we  can  but  die.  Let  us  take  the  desper- 
ate alternative.  Let  us  select  that  which,  though 
it  require  the  greatest  boldness,  has  yet  some 
lingering  chance  of  success.  They  all  listen; 
they  assent;  they  arise.  They  perceive  a  streak  of 
dawn  upon  the  sky;  they  find  their  way  to  the 
Syrian  camp ;  the  men  have  fled :  they  enter  a  tent 
and  feast;  having  satisfied  themselves  they  grow 
dainty  and  they  select  the  most  luscious  viands 
from  the  tables:  nay,  they  have  now  time  for 
thinking  of  enriching  themselves,  and  they  take, 
first,  this  golden  and  then  that  silver  ornament, 
and  they  hide  these  away.  But  the  thought  strikes 
them,  "  Here  we  have  bread  and  corn  in  abundance. 
This  is  a  season  of  common  distress.  What  though 
the  people  of  Samaria  forgot  us,  and  thrust  us  out 
of  the  city,  it  were  an  unworthy  requital  even  for 
the  lepers  to  forget  their  fellow-men.  Let  us  go 
back  and  tell  of  our  discovery,  that  the  poor  be- 
sieged city  may  be  relieved."     They  do  so.     Good 


THE    SINNER'S    ONLY  ALTERNATIVE.       103 

tidings  give  great  joy  to  those  who  tell  as  well  as 
those  who  hear.  The  famished  crowds  pour  out 
of  Samaria,  and,  according  to  the  word  of  the  man 
of  God  they  are  filled  with  bread  to  the  full.  Thus 
you  have  the  narrative  before  you.  Let  us  base 
upon  it  a  sort  of  argument  which  we  hope  may  be 
found  useful  to  many  inquiring  souls  here  present. 
Some  of  you  have  an  alternative  not  dissimilar  to 
that  we  have  described.  May  they  be  enabled  to 
follow  the  instinct  of  self-preservation,  and  imitate 
these  poor  lepers  in  their  actions;  and  afterwards 
may  it  be  your  joyful  privilege  to  deliver  to  others 
a  message  as  cheering  as  that  which  these  lepers 
carried. 

I.  Some  of  you  have  an  alternative  presented  to 
your  consciences.  Time  was  when  you  were  care- 
less about  eternal  things.  That  time  has  passed. 
You  can  look  back  but  a  few  weeks  and  remem- 
ber when  the  Sabbath  was  to  you  a  day  of  rev- 
elry, when  the  house  of  God  was  utterly  neglected, 
when  the  Bible  was  a  book  which  you  would  not 
have  read  if  you  had  not  been  flogged  to  it,  and 
when  prayer  was  a  duty  which  you  utterly  de- 
spised. But  now  your  conscience  has  been  some- 
what awakened.  Though  not  thoroughly,  still 
partially,  roused  up,  you  begin  to  perceive  that  the 
Scripture  is  true,  that  we  have  gone  astray  like 
lost  sheep,  that  our  iniquities  do  prevail  against 
us,  and  that  our  righteousnesses  are  filthy  rags. 
You  have  heard  the  gospel  preached,  I  do  not 
know    where — you    may    have    heard   it    in    the 


104  STORM   SIGNALS. 

cathedral,  or  you  may  have  heard  it  in  the 
theater;  we  bless  God  most  heartily  if  you  have 
heard  it  anywhere.  But  having  listened  to  that 
Word,  Satan  has  interposed,  and  he  has  said  to 
you,  '*  Christ  will  not  receive  such  sinners  as  you 
are;  the  grace  of  God  was  not  intended  for  men 
who  have  degraded  themselves  as  you  have ;  there 
may  be  hope  for  other  men,  but  there  is  none  for 
you;  the  gate  of  mercy  for  you  is  fast  closed  and 
sealed,  and  it  has  been  said  of  you,  '  He  that  is 
filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still;  he  has  disobeyed  his 
God,  let  him  receive  his  penalty.' "  Well,  now,  you 
perceive  that  you  are  in  just  this  particular  state, 
that  you  have  a  choice  of  two  things  before  you ; 
you  can  sit  still,  but  then  you  must  perish;  you 
can  go  to  Christ,  and  your  fears  tell  you  that  you 
will  perish  then.  This,  however,  at  any  rate,  your 
conscience  may  say  to  you,  *'  You  can  but  die, 
whereas  if  you  go  not  to  Christ  you  must  die." 
Even  should  you  believe  in  him  you  think  you 
might,  after  all,  perish;  but  if  you  do  not  believe 
in  him  then  there  is  no  hope.  Should  you  repair 
now  to  him  in  prayer  your  fears  tell  you  that  he 
may  repel  you,  that  he  may  say,  "  Get  you  gone ! 
You  that  once  cursed  me,  what  right  have  you  to 
expect  my  favor?  You  who  have  scorned  my 
grace  a  hundred  times,  and  defied  my  law,  what 
do  you  here  on  your  knees  seeking  my  mercy? 
Begone,  thou  ungrateful  wretch,  and  perish  in  thy 
sins."  But  still  there  is  this  presented  to  your 
mind,-  that  if  you  perish  there  you  do  but  perish. 


THE    SINNER'S    ONLY  ALTERNATIVE.       105 

for  it  is  quite  certain  that  you  must  perish  where 
you  are.  Well,  come,  let  me  try  and  work  out  this 
question  for  you.  Sitting  down  by  your  side,  as 
one  of  the  leprous  men  with  his  fellow,  let  us  talk 
this  question  over.  Now,  you  know,  my  brother 
and  my  friend,  that  should  you  die  as  you  are  it  is 
absolutely  certain  that  you  must  perish.  Do  not 
listen  to  what  the  Evil  One  now  says,  "  Perhaps  it 
is  not  true;  ye  shall  not  surely  die."  You  know, 
every  one  of  you,  that  the  Bible  is  the  Book  of  God. 
If  there  be  a  man  here  who  doubts  its  being  God's 
Word,  I  will  not  even  except  him;  I  can  hardly 
believe  the  honesty  of  his  doubts  when  the  truth 
of  Scripture  is  being  so  perpetually  confirmed  by 
all  the  discoveries  that  are  made  by  those  who 
travel  in  the  land  which  gave  it  birth.  I  do  not 
believe  him  to  be  honest  in  this  age.  Infidelity 
may  have  been  honest  once,  but  in  this  age  of  light 
I  believe  it  is  an  imposture.  You  believe — you 
must  believe — even  if  you  reject  the  Word  of  God, 
you  must  believe  that  God  is  just.  If  there  be  a 
God  he  must  punish  men  for  sin.  How  can  there 
exist  a  moral  government  if  sin  shall  go  unpun- 
ished, if  virtue  and  vice  shall  bring  the  same  end 
to  men  ?  Conscience,  fallen  though  it  be,  and  no 
longer  like  God's  candle  in  the  soul,  yet  hath  some 
twinkling  sparks  left  which  do  assure  men  that 
God  must  punish  sin.  Now,  supposing  that  you 
do  receive  the  Word  of  God  as  being  true,  you 
know  that  the  unregenerate  can  never  see  the  face 
of  God;  that  the  unwashed — those  who  have  never 


106  STORM  SIGNALS. 

been  cleansed  from  sin — can  never  stand  before 
the  Holy  One,  for  there  shall  by  no  means  enter 
into  heaven  anything  that  defileth.  About  your 
future  fate  there  is  no  question.  There  is  not  the 
shadow  of  a  doubt  that  if  you  live  and  die  in  the 
state  in  which  you  are  now,  the  flame  must  be 
your  everlasting  portion.  On  the  other  hand,  look 
at  the  other  side  of  the  alternative.  There  is,  at 
least,  some  hope;  even  your  poor,  trembling  heart 
admits  that  there  is  some  hope — that  if  you  seek 
mercy  you  may  obtain  it.  I  know  that  there  is 
not  only  hope,  but  certainty,  v  Jesus  casts  out  none 
that  come  to  him,  and  he  is  willing  to  receive  the 
vilest  of  the  vile.  But  I  put  the  question  now  as 
your  unbelief  puts  it;  it  is  not  even  to  you  an  ab- 
solute certainty  that  Christ  will  reject  you — is  it  ? 
It  is  not  quite  certain  that  if  you  pray  to  him  he 
will  refuse  to  hear  your  prayer.  It  is  not  quite 
certain  that  if  at  this  very  hour  the  tear  of  peni- 
tence should  stream  down  your  cheeks,  God  would, 
nevertheless,  refuse  to  forgive  you.  At  least,  it 
does  not  admit  of  positive  proof  that  if  you  were 
to  trust  the  blood  of  Christ  you  would  perish. 
Mark,  now,  I  am  only  putting  it  as  you  put 
it.  So  far  from  putting  it  so  myself,  were  I 
speaking  as  I  feel,  I  would  affirm  in  God's  name 
again,  and  again,  and  again,  that  if  you  come 
to  him  through  Christ  he  will  in  nowise  cast 
you  out.  But  put  it  in  your  way,  and  even 
then  does  it  not  seem  to  be  the  wisest  thing  to 
say,— 


THE    SINNER'S    ONLY   ALTERNATIVE.      107 

**  If  I  perish  I  will  pray, 

And  perish  only  there  "  ? 

Look  at  the  questiou  for  a  moment  in  another 
light.  It  is  certain  that  if  you  perish  as  you  now 
are,  you  will  perish  without  pity  and  without 
mercy.  The  law  under  which  you  are  convicted 
knows  nothing  about  forgiveness.  Condemned 
already  because  you  are  under  the  law,  the  law 
provides  no  sacrifice  for  sin.  If  "  they  who  sinned 
under  Moses'  law  perished  without  mercy,  of  how 
much  sorer  punishment" — that  is  an  awful  passage 
— -''  of  how  much  sorer  punishment  shall  he  be 
thought  worthy  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the 
Son  of  God  ? "  If  you  perish  without  seeking 
mercy  at  the  hand  of  Christ,  there  must  be  no 
mercy  for  you;  but  rigorous,  unabated,  absolute 
justice  must  be  your  portion.  But  now,  do  you 
not  feel  that  even  if  you  could  perish  after  coming 
to  God  through  Christ,  yet  you  would  not  perish 
without  having  some  ray  of  pity  ?  Would  there 
not  be  at  least  this  consolation  for  you — "  I  did 
what  God  counseled  me;  I  did  come  to  him  and 
ask  for  mercy ;  I  did  plead  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ,  and  yet  he  rejected  me,"  and  do  you  not 
think  that  this  would  be  a  balm  to  you  ?  But  if 
you  perish  now  you  will  have  ringing  in  your  ears 
forever — "You  heard,  of  Christ,  but  you  believed 
not  on  him ;  you  lived  in  the  light  of  the  gospel, 
but  you  shut  your  eyes  to  it;  Christ  was  preached 
in  your  streets,  and  you  refused  him;  you  would 
have  none   of  his   warnings,   but  you   put   your 


108  STORM   SIGNALS. 

fingers  in  your  ears  and  ran  on  to  destruction." 
Should  you  perisli  seeking  mercy,  you  would  be 
able  to  say,  "  1  did  seek;  I  did  knock;  I  did  pray; 
J  did  trust;  I  did  try;  I  did  yield  my  heart  to  God; 
and  yet  I  perished."  And  oh  !  soul,  if  such  a 
perishing  were  possible,  though  we  are  sure  it  is 
not,  yet  it  were  preferable  to  perishing  without 
excuse,  and  without  the  shadow  of  extenuation. 
For  your  own  sake,  then,  I  say,  choose  that 
alternative,  and  let  me  now  take  hold  of  your 
hand  and  lead  you  to  him  who,  with  arms  out- 
stretched, hangs  upon  his  cross,  that  he  may  give 
pardon  to  the  guilty,  life  to  the  dead,  and  salvation 
to  the  lost. 

Yet  further,  you  ought  to  remember  that  all 
those  who  have  continued  in  a  state  of  nature 
have,  without  exception,  perished.  Not  one,  mark, 
not  one,  however  high  in  station,  however  excel- 
lent in  morality,  however  profound  in  learning, 
however  lofty  in  fame,  has  ever  been  able  to  pass 
the  threshold  of  heaven  except  through  the  atoning 
blood  and  meritorious  righteousness  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  In  the  black  list  of  the  unregenerate 
there  is  no  exception  to  their  condemnation.  But 
take  the  other  side,  and  at  least  we  can  assure  you 
from  our  own  case  that  there  are  exceptions  to  the 
rule  that  any  should  perish  who  put  their  trust  in 
Christ.  Even  supposing  that  some  perish  who  put 
their  trust  in  him,  which  is  not  true,  yet  there  are 
some  who  do  not.  Certainly  there  are  some  who 
in  this  life  receive  the  pardon  of  their  sins,  and 


THE    SINNER'S    ONLY  ALTERNATIVE.       109 

know  it,  and  who  in  death  are  cheered  with  the 
prospect  of  a  glorious  immortality.  Why  think, 
Saul  was  led  to  repentance,  and  yet  he  says  he  was 
the  chief  of  sinners.  Others  in  this  day,  who  had 
no  more  right  to  mercy  than  you  have  now,  sought 
and  found  it,  and  there  are  hundreds  in  this  con- 
gregation, ay,  and  thousands  too,  who,  if  this  were 
the  proper  season,  could  at  a  signal  rise  and  say, 
"This  poor  man  cried  and  the  Lord  heard  him, 
and  delivered  him  from  all  his  fears."  Well,  then, 
if  God  has  to  your  knowledge  saved  some  who 
have  come  to  him  through  Christ — mark,  I  say  he 
saves  all — then,  at  any  rate,  as  there  is  no  excep- 
tion to  the  other  rule,  and  there  are  some  to  this, 
it  were  wisest  and  best  for  you  to  adopt  the  lan- 
guage of  that  hymn — 

♦*  I'll  to  the  gracious  King  approach, 
Whose  scepter  mercy  gives; 
Perhaps  he  may  command  my  touch, 
And  then  the  suppliant  lives. 

•'Perhaps  he  may  admit  my  plea 
Perhaps  may  hear  my  prayer; 
But  if  I  perish  I  will  pray, 
And  perish  only  there. 

•*  I  can  but  peri  h  if  I  go; 
I  am  resolved  to  try: 
For  if  I  stay  away  I  know 
I  must  forever  die. 

*'  But,  should  I  die  with  mercy  sought, 
When  I  the  King  have  tried, 
That  were  to  die,  delightful  thought ! 
As  never  sinner  died  !  " 


110  STORM   SIGNALS. 

Nay,  my  frieiid,  not  one  ever  died  thus.  You 
would  be  the  first  that  perished  after  that  manner. 
Oh!  take  this  alternative,  and  as  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  quickened  you  and  made  you  feel  your  need 
of  a  Saviour,  I  pray  that  the  same  blessed  Spirit  4> 
may  lead  you  to  plunge  into  the  stream,  siuk  or 
swim — that,  whether  you  perish  or  are  saved,  you 
may  come  and  say,  "Thy  wounds,  0  Jesus,  shall 
be  my  hiding-place:  thy  blood  shall  be  my  wash- 
ing; thy  righteousness  shall  be  my  clothing;  thou, 
and  thou  alone,  shalt  be  my  all  in  all." 

II.  We  pass  on  to  notice  that  the  cogitation  of 
these  men  ended  in  action.  I  wish  the  like  were 
true  of  all  of  you.  How  many  resolves  have  been 
strangled  in  this  house  of  prayer !  How  many 
good  thoughts  have  been  murdered  in  those  pews ! 
Look,  see,  can  you  not  find  their  blood  upon  your 
own  skirts  ?  Many  a  time  that  tear  which  betok- 
ens the  first  rising  emotion  has  been  wiped  away, 
and  the  emotion  with  it.  May  it  not  be  so  to- 
night, but  oh !  may  God  grant  that,  like  the  lepers, 
we  may  put  into  action  that  which  we  shall  think 
over,  and  accomplish  that  which,  by  the  help  of 
God  the  Holy  Spirit,  we  shall  be  enabled  to  resolve 
upon. 

Undoubtedly  the  action  of  the  lepers  was  hold. 
Cowardice  would  have  sat  still.  Cowardice  would 
have  said,  "  Well,  it  is  true  we  shall  perish  if  we 
sit  here,  but  still  we  will  not  go  just  yet;  we  are 
very  hungry,  but  we  may  bear  it  another  hour," 
and  thus  only  an  extreme  pinch  would  have  driven 


THE    SINNER'S    ONLY  ALTERNATIVE.       Ill 

them  out.  The  thought  of  the  sword,  and  that 
sensation  which  the  mind  can  sometimes  give  to 
the  body  when  it  imagines  the  keen  edge  of  the 
cold  steel  as  it  shall  pierce  the  flesh,  might  have 
kept  them  sitting  still.  But  no.  They  said,  "  We 
will  risk  it.  It  is  a  desperate  case.  We  will  cast 
all  upon  this  one  deed;  for  better  or  for  worse,  for 
life  or  for  death,  we  will  go  at  once  into  the  camp." 
So  said  and  so  done.  Now,  it  seems  a  very  bold 
thing  to  you,  my  unknown  but  trembling  hearer, 
to  think  of  going  to  Christ  by  faith.  "  Why,"  say 
you,  "I  have  not  the  impudence  to  do  it:  look 
at  what  I  have  been."  Perhaps  some  of  you  can 
speak  of  immoralities,  others  of  you  can  speak  of 
the  gospel  despised,  of  light  abused,  and  of  privi- 
leges neglected,  a  neglect  which  has  rendered  your 
guilt  the  more  heinous,  though  outwardly  it  may 
have  sheltered  you  from  reproach;  and  you  say, 
"  No,  I  cannot;  I  have  not  the  face  to  go  to  Christ; 
I  am  too  black,  too  filthy,  too  naked;  I  cannot 
cover  my  sores;  I  cannot  hide  the  foul  leprosy 
which  is  starting  from  my  gaunt  face,  and  gleam- 
ing in  livid  whiteness  from  my  brow.  I  could  not 
go;  I  dare  not  go."  Well,  do  you  recollect  that 
hymn  of  Hart's  that  we  sometimes  sing  ?— 

"Venture  on  him,  venture  wholly; 
Let  no  other  trust  intrude ; 

None  but  Jesus 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 

Oh !  venture  on  him  !     Though  it  seems  impossi- 
ble, yet  God  hath  said  it,  and  God  can  do  impos- 


112  STORM  SIGNALS. 

sibilities.  Oh !  thou  blackest  of  the  black,  thou 
vilest  of  the  vile,  trust  him  to  pardon  thee,  and  he 
can  doit.  It  surpasses  thy  faith,  does  it?  Man, 
'tis  God  that  promiseth:  judge  him  not  according 
to  thyself;  measure  not  his  ability  with  thy  line; 
fathom  not  the  depths  of  his  grace  with  a  short- 
lined  plummet.  Believe  him,  honor  him  by 
believing  that  even  such  an  one  as  thou  art  may 
find  pardon,  and  may  find  it  now.  I  recollect  John 
Bunyan,  in  his  "  Grace  Abounding,"  says  there  were 
times  when  his  sins  seemed  so  great,  and  his  hor- 
ror of  them  so  terrible,  that  he  felt  he  must  go  to 
Christ;  *'and,"  saith  he,  "though  1  sometimes  used 
to  think  of  Christ  as  of  one  who  stood  with  a  pike 
in  his  hand  to  push  me  back,  yet  my  terrible  ne- 
cessities sometimes  came  upon  me  with  such  force 
that  I  would  fain  have  run  even  upon  the  very 
pikes  sooner  than  endure  my  sin."  Sinner,  run  on 
the  pikes,  and  thou  wilt  find  that  there  is  no 
sword  or  pike  in  Christ's  hands,  but  when  thou 
thinkest  that  thou  art  about  to  run  upon  the  hal- 
berts  he  will  at  once  receive  thee,  press  thee  to  his 
bosom,  and  say,  "  I  have  blotted  out  thy  sins  like 
a  cloud,  and  like  a  thick  cloud  thine  iniquities." 
Oh !  sinner,  if  thou  thinkest  my  Master  to  be  a 
hard  Master,  if  thou  thinkest  it  too  bold  a  thing 
to  come  to  him,  thou  dost  not  know  him.  I  once 
thought  him  to  be  such  an  one  as  myself  For 
years  I  thus  slandered  him,  till  my  heart  was  driv- 
en to  despair  and  my  soul  chose  strangling  rather 
than  life.     I  said  it  could  not  be  that  Christ  could 


THE    SINNER'S  ^ONLY  ALTERNATIVE.       113 

ever  forgive  such  an  one  as  I;  I  wrote  bitter  things 
against  him,  as  well  as  against  myself,  till  at  last, 
when  I  could  not  help  it,  when  I  could  stand  it  no 
longer,  with  the  rope  about  my  neck  as  if  prepared 
to  receive  my  doom,  I  came  into  his  presence,  and 
I  dared  to  look  at  him,  and  oh,  that  one  look  !  My 
soul  at  this  hour  renews  its  transports  at  the  re- 
membrance of  the  change  that  came  over  my  spirit 
the  moment  it  learned  to  believe  in  Jesus  !  'Twas 
gone;  the  burden  of  a  life  was  gone;  five  years  of 
agony  were  forgotten  as  a  small  moment,  and  my 
soul  could  say,  "  I'm  forgiven ;  I'm  forgiven."  Then 
I  could  shout  with  joy  unspeakable,  because  the 
love  of  God  was  shed  abroad  in  my  heart  Oh ! 
that  I  could  but  be  the  means — God  only  can  do 
it;  we  can  do  nothing  of  ourselves — oh,  that  he 
would  but  make  me  the  means  of  bringing  one 
soul  to  try  my  Master !  I  am  sure  you  would  find 
him  so  good  that  you  would  say,  "The  half  has 
ne'er  been  told."  I  have  never  been  able  to  tell 
the  thousandth  part  of  his  love.  1  have  tried  to 
tell  of  his  mercy,  but  oh,  I  have  made  a  poor  daub 
where  there  should  have  been  a  fine  picture  of  a 
Prince,  who  has  every  virtue  in  his  face,  and  love 
streaming  from  his  eyes  of  compassion.  Soul,  lost 
soul,  try  him.  Troubled  soul,  risk  all  to-night. 
Do  a  bold  thing,  and  put  thy  trust  in  him.  Like 
the  woman  who  stole  a  cure,  so  do  thou  come  be- 
hind him  and  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment.  As 
the  dog  under  the  table,  without  license,  eats  the 
crumbs,  so  do  you.    Though  you  think  it  is  against 


114  STORM  SIGNALS. 

the  law  and  against  license,  dare  to  believe.  Dare 
to  trust  him.  He  will  be  better  than  thy  faith,  and 
thou  shalt  find  that  thou  dost  not  trust  without  a 
warrant. 

But  while  these  lepers  did  a  bold  thing,  I  pass 
on  to  notice  tliai  they  did  it  unanimously.  It  is  not 
said  that  three  of  them  went,  but  that  the  other 
said,  "No,  I  will  not  go  yet."  It  does  not  say  that 
two  said,  "  When  we  have  a  more  convenient  sea- 
son we  will  go."  It  was  a  mercy  for  them  that 
they  were  all  hungry,  for  if  they  had  not  been  they 
would  not  have  gone.  It  was  probably,  a  great 
mercy  for  them  that  they  were  all  lepers,  or  else 
they  would  not  have  been  decided,  and  would  never 
have  dared  to  go.  AYhat  a  mercy  it  is  for 'you, 
sinner,  to  know  that  you  are  a  sinner  !  What  a 
blessing  it  is  that  you  have  not  yet  got  that  morti- 
fication of  the  conscience  which  is  premonitory  of 
eternal  death!  You  do  feel;  you  feel  now,  as  if 
you  were  shut  out.  Oh!  I  thank  God  for  it;  be- 
cause now  that  you  seem  to  be  shut  out  of  Israel, 
it  may  be  you  will  begin  to  go  to  Israel's  Christ, 
and  find  mercy  and  help,  and  hope  in  him.  Ah  I 
you  will  not  all  go  to  him  to-night.  Would  to 
God  that  ye  might !  Out  of  this  congregation 
there  will  come  under  our  notice,  perhaps  (our 
faith  is  in  God  that  it  shall  be  so),  some  dozen,  or 
some  score,  who  will  say,  "That  night  I  went  to 
Christ;  I  dared  not  go  before,  but  that  night  I  said 
'I'll  venture  on  him;  I'll  trust  him.'"  "But  what 
are  they  among  so  many?"     While  we  bless  God 


THE    SINNER'S    ONLY  ALTERNATIVE.       115 

that  we  have  so  many  seals  to  our  ministry,  what 
a  sorrowful  reflection  it  is  that  such  multitudes 
come  into  this  house  who  go  out  unsaved !  Oh, 
there  are  many  of  you  who  can  say,  "  The  harvest 
is  past,  and  the  summer  is  ended,  and  we  are  not 
saved."  It  is  not  because  there  is  no  gospel 
preached.  "Is  there  no  balm  in  Gilead?  Is 
there  no  physician  there  ?  Why,  then,  is  not  the 
health  of  the  daughter  of  thy  people  recovered? 
saith  the  Lord.  No,  no;  we  sow  much,  but  we 
reap  little,  compared  with  what  our  hearts  desire. 
Where  stands  there  the  man  or  the  woman  here 
who  intends  to  sit  down  and  die  ?  Well,  if  you  do 
choose  it,  choose  it  deliberately.  I  would  have  you 
to-night,  if  God  shall  help  you,  make  some  choice. 
I  know  you  will  not  make  the  right  one  unless  he 
chooses  for  you ;  but  if  you  yourself  make  the  wrong 
choice,  do  it  deliberately,  and  solemnly.  Say  to- 
night— man,  I  wish  you  would  say  it  if  you  mean 
it,  for  then  I  hope  you  would  soon  reverse  it — say, 
*'  I  mean  to  take  the  pleasures  of  this  world;  I  mean 
from  this  time  forward,  to  live  without  God  and 
without  Christ."  Mark,  you  may  as  well  add,  "  I 
mean  to  die  and  be  damned,"  for  that  must  go 
with  it.  Take  the  whole,  if  you  dare  take  any 
part,  let  your  damnation  warrant  be  signed  and 
sealed.  "No,"  say  you,  "God  forbid,  not  so,  not  so." 
Why  not?  had  you  not  better  make  that  league 
with  death,  and  that  covenant  with  hell,  than  be 
as  some  of  you  are,  indifferent  and  careless  ?  This 
is  the  fault,  the  folly,  the  infatuation  of  our  church- 


116  STORM  SIGNALS. 

goers,  and  of  our  chapel-goers.  When  we  once 
get  the  outside  world  in  to  hear  a  sermon  they 
listen  with  attention.  If  they  are  impressed,  it 
often  happens  that  the  impression  is  saving.  It  is 
far  otherwise  with  you  who  are  used  to  sermons, 
who  go  from  place  to  place  to  listen  to  this  man 
and  to  that,  till  full  often  you  come  to  think  that 
preaching  is  a  Sunday  diversion  intended  to  amuse 
you  !  How  often  you  come  to  hear  us  as  you 
would  go  to  see  an  actor,  that  you  may  spend  your 
time,  and  be  able,  when  the  question  is  asked, 
"  Have  you  heard  Mr.  So-and-so  ?  "  to  say,  "  Yes, 
1  heard  him  on  such  an  occasion  !"  Sirs,  do  you 
think  we  preach  for  your  entertainment,  or  to 
court  your  criticism  upon  our  talents?  Oh  !  you 
do  not  know  us  if  you  think  thus  lightly  of  our  sin- 
cerity. Is  it  such  a  fine  thing  to  make  a  display 
of  ourselves  before  you?  Is  it  so  flattering  to  our 
vanity  that  we  should  have  your  eyes  fixed  on  us? 
God  knoweth  I  would  sooner  break  stones  on  the 
road  than  be  a  minister  if  it  were  not  for  the  hope 
of  winning  souls.  I  know  of  no  life  that  has  more 
trouble  in  it:  I  know  of  no  calling  in  the  world 
that  brings  more  awful  despondency  of  spirit  upon 
any  man's  mind  than  my  ministry  does  on  me. 
May  God  deliver  me  from  the  oppressive  weight  if 
he  does  not  win  souls  by  the  eff'ectual  working. 
I  would  renounce  my  charge,  for  all  the  profit  it 
brings  me  in,  and  all  the  honor  it  ever  gives  me. 
It  were  not  worth  the  labor  of  thinking  or  the 
languor  of  talking  if  sinners  were  not  saved,  and 


THE    SINNER'S    ONLY  ALTERNATIVE.       117 

souls  reclairaed,  and  God  glorified.  Oh !  I  do  pray 
you,  sirs,  shake  off  this  indifference.  If  you  mean 
to  engage  in  Satan's  service  be  prepared  to  take 
his  pay;  if  you  take  his  pleasures  make  up  your 
minds  to  let  him  have  the  reversionary  interest  in 
your  soul.  Look  forward  to  making  your  bed  in 
hell;  be  ready  to  lie  down  in  everlasting  torments; 
or  else,  1  adjure  you  by  the  laws  of  God,  before 
whom  I  stand,  embrace  that  other  alternative,  and 
fly  to  him  who  will  in  no  wise  cast  you  out. 

Bear  with  me  while  I  remind  you  again  that  the 
action  of  the  lepers  was  also  instantaneous.  They 
said,  "  We  will  go,"  and  at  once  they  went.  Many 
say,  "  I  go,  sir,"  but  they  go  not.  We  can  all  of 
us  remember  times  before  our  conversion  to  God 
when  we  have  been  impressed  under  solemn  ser- 
mons, and  some  of  you  can  recollect  how  you  have 
made  haste  home,  and  have  gone  upstairs,  and 
have  shut  the  door  and  prayed ;  but  idle  conversa- 
tion dissipated  the  serious  impression.  And  how 
many  more  there  are  who,  while  their  hearts  have 
been  searched  under  the  Word,  have  said,  "  Please 
God  to  spare  me  another  day,  I'll  think  over  those 
things."  But  where  are  you  now  ?  There  is  a 
gray-headed  man  over  there.  Just  let  him  sharp- 
en his  memory,  and  recall  the  story  of  the  past 
a  little.  When  he  was  a  little  boy  his  mother  had 
hopes  of  him,  and  when  he  was  but  a  lad  he  was 
looked  upon  by  all  who  knew  him  as  being  a 
Timothy;  and  now  he  is  an  old  Demas  with  his 
silver   hairs,   and   perhaps    with    the   silver   coins 


118  STORM  SIGNALS. 

which  he  got  by  forsaking  God  and  loving  this 
present  world,  for  the  root  of  the  matter  was  not 
in  him.  Venerable  man,  in  thy  lioary  age  recall 
that  vow  of  thy  ruddy  youth,  that  vow  registered 
in  heaven,  that  vow  which  thou  hast  so  deliberately 
broken.  There  are  men  here,  too,  in  the  high  tide  of 
business,  who,  when  they  were  more  tender  of  heart 
and  less  hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of  riches  or 
the  chills  of  misfortune,  resolved  and  re-resolved 
to  change  their  course,  yet  are  they  still  the  same. 
If  you  would  put  down  your  resolves  in  your 
pocket-books,  and  keep  the  old  ones,  so  that  you 
could  look  back  with  bitter  stings  of  repentance 
you  might  then  say,  "  This  vow  was  made  in  the 
strength  of  the  flesh,  and  therefore  it  has  been 
broken,  but  its  sin  rests  upon  my  soul."  These  fam- 
ished lepers  went  instantly.  There  is  no  being 
saved  except  it  be  done  at  once.  We  must  go  to 
Christ,  not  with  hesitant  misgiving  or  protracted 
resolving  but  with  instantaneous  submission.  As 
justification  by  faith  is  an  instantaneous  gift,  so  the 
faith  that  saves  is  doubtless  an  instantaneous  act. 
Believe  in  Christ;  trust  Christ,  and  oh  !  do  it  now. 
That  done,  thou  art  saved.  The  lepers  went  in- 
stantly, and  they  found  satisfaction  instantly.  God 
grant  that  you  may  go  instantly  too.  In  one 
word,  a  positive  plea  for  present  pardon  will  pro- 
cure you  perfect  peace. 

Oh  how  ivell  they  loere  all  of  them  retoarded  for 
what  they  did.  Not  one  of  them  perished.  They 
were  all  saved ;  not  one  came  back  empty-handed ; 


THE    SINNER'S    ONLY  ALTERNATIVE.       119 

they  were  all  enriched.     Nor  shall  one  of  you — my 

life    for   yours — not   one   of   you    seeking   mercy 

through  Christ  shall  be  refused  it.     You  shall  all  be 

blessed,  all  adopted,   all  saved,   who  are  by  th. 

Spirit  of  God   led  to  put  your  trust  in  Christ  at 

this  welcome  moment. 

III.  These  lepers  no  sooner  found  what  was  good 

for  themselves  than  they  straightway  went  off  to 

tell  it  to  others.     And  if  you  have   found  Christ, 

after  you   are  sure  you  have  received   him,   and 

have  rejoiced  in  him  for  a  little  season,  and  fed 

upon  him,  and  enriched  yourselves  by  him  as  your 

hidden  treasure,  it  behoves  you  to  go  and   tell  to 

others  of  his  grace,  and  your  joy.     This  gospel  is 

not  to  be  stifled.     '*  Oh  !  but  I  cannot  preach,"  say 

you.     Try,  brother  1     "  But  1  have  not  the  gift  of 

utterance,"  you  say  again,  *'  I  have  tried."     Write 

a  letter,  brother !  speak  a  word  for  Christ  anyhow. 

"Tell  it,  unto  sinners  tell, 
That  you  are  saved  from  death  and  hell." 

Why,  I  cannot  make  out  how  some  people  keep 
the  secret.  I  cannot  easily  keep  any  secret  to  my- 
self, especially  if  it  be  a  benefit  for  anybody  to 
know  it,  and  I  am  sure  I  cannpt  keep  this  one. 
No  sooner  does  that  secret  get  into  the  soul  of  a 
man  that  it  wants  to  burn  its  way  out.  You  recol- 
lect John  Bunyan  says  he  wanted  to  tell  the  very 
crows  on  the  plowed  land  about  it.  And  I  think 
it  will  be  the  same  with  you.  If  you  have  got  the 
secret  into  your  heart,  you  will  want  to  tell  it  to  your 
fellow-workman.     Perhaps  you  are  employed  be- 


120  STORM  SIGNALS. 

hind  the  counter,  then  surely  you  will  want  to  be 
telling  it  in  the  evening,  after  the  shop  is  shut, 
to  some  that  are  in  the  common  room  with  you. 
If  you  are  a  husband,  you  will  never  be  content  till 
you  have  told  it  to  your  wife  and  family;  and  if  you 
are  a  mother,  I  am  sure  you  will  be  eager  to  make 
it  known  to  your  children.  It  is  a  great  and  holy 
lire,  that  will  burn  and  not  smoulder.  There  was 
a  spark  once  that  got  into  the  stubble,  and  the 
Angel  of  Discretion  was  there,  and  he  said,  "  Spark, 
lie  still,  lie  still,  lie  still ;  if  you  begin  to  consume, 
the  next,  and  then  the  next,  will  get  alight,  and 
perhaps  the  whole  threshing-floor  will  be  in  a 
blaze,  and  then  the  homestead,  and  then  the  vil- 
lage." But  preach  as  he  might,  the  fire  would 
burn,  and  the  Angel  of  Discretion  had  well-nigh 
burned  his  wings  before  he  had  turned  to  flee. 
And  so  there  be  some  in  our  churches  who  are 
very  angels  of  prudence.  "  Young  men,"  say  they, 
*'  don't  speak  too  soon ;  don't  attempt  to  do  it  till 
you  are  duly  qualified."  My  dear  sirs,  if  God  has 
communicated  to  any  man  the  secret  of  salvation 
by  grace  he  cannot  help  telling  it;  and  if  the  Lord 
has  touched  a  man's  tongue  with  a  live  coal,  he 
will  burn  as  well  as  the  coal.  If  the  new  life 
has  been  given  to  him,  it  must  find  its  way  out, 
and  be  the  means  of  conveying  that  life  to  others. 
What  a  mass  of  men  there  are  constantly  attending 
this  tabernacle !  I  suppose  -two-thirds  of  this 
general  congregation  consist  of  men.  What  a 
noble  staff  of  men  we  have,  then,  who,  if  converted 


THE    SINNER'S    ONLY  ALTERNATIVE.       121 

themselves,    might  be   apostles   of  Christ   to   the 
church   and   to    the   world !     Sirs,    do   you   know 
Christ,  and  have   you   held  your  tongues  ?     Take 
care  that  before  .the  great  tribunal   you   are  not 
charged  with  the  ruin  of  your  fellow-men !     You 
/young  men  of  ability,   trained  in   our   grammar- 
(  schools,  and  educated  in  our  colleges,  it  is  too  often 
\  a  lamentable  fact  that  if  you  join  the  church  you 
.feel  as  if  you  had  only  to  give  it  your  name,  but 
'not  your  abilities.     If  a  man  joins  a  rifle  corps 
he  attends  drill,  and  throws  himself  into  it,  and 
endeavors  to  promote  the  interests  of  the  corps; 
but  if  he  joins  the  church,  it  is  as  much  as  you  can 
,  do  to  get  him  to  drill  once  a-year,  and  he  seems  to 
have  nothing  to  do  except  to  "  stand  at  ease."     Oh, 
i    sirs,  when  you  join  the  church  I  hope  you  give  us 
yourselves.     If  you  do  not,  I  pray  you  withhold 
your  names.     Up!  up!  in  the  name  of  God,  up  and 
at  the  evils  of  the  times !     Up,  and  tell  to  starving 
London  what  the  lepers  told  to  starving  Samaria 
— that  there  is  bread  to  be  had.     Do  you  say,   •'  I 
am  a  sinner  myself"  V     Your  leprous  lips  will  not 
spoil  the  message  if  you  have  but  tasted  and  han- 
dled this  truth.     Do  you  say,  "  I  am   unworthy  "  ? 
Ah  !  but  he   who  took   away  your  un worthiness 
took   away   the  disability  which   that   unworthi- 
ness  involved.     You  are  not  worthy  to  be  called 
God's  son  by  nature,   but  by  grace  you  may  be 
worthy  to  be  his  ambassador.     My  poor  friend  over 
there,  you  often  weep  because  you  cannot  do  more  for 
Christ.     Take  courage;  do  all  you  can.     If  you  can- 


122  STORM   SIGNALS. 

not  speak  to  thousands,  be  content  to  speak  to  one ; 
and  if  you  cannot  bring  hundreds  to  Christ,  be 
satisfied  if  now  and  then  you  can  lead  a  mourner 
to  him. 

My  dear  hearers  (and  especially  you,  the  mem- 
bers of  this  church),  if  you  have  obtained  mercy,  I 
beseech  you  in  the  bowels  of  Christ,  by  the  com- 
passionate heart  of  your  dying  Kedeemer,  by  that 
hope  which  you  have  that  he  will  shortly  come,  be 
ye  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season;  preach  the 
truth  and  teach  it,  knowing  that  your  labor  shall 
not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  Oh,  that  at  the  dav 
of  Christ  many  sheaves  may  be  brought  into  the 
eternal  garner  through  your  being  stirred  up  to 
labor  by  the  ministry  in  this  house  of  prayer. 
—To  thee,  unpardoned  soul,  I  have  spoken  at 
length,  and  God  knows  how  truly  from  my  heart. 
This  last  word  in  thine  ear  ere  thou  passest  those 
curtains  to  go  down  yonder  steps — it  may  be  that 
there  is  a  solemn  spot  in  this  house  of  prayer  to- 
night. I  am  told  that  just  under  the  dome  of  St. 
Paul's  Cathedral  there  is  the  mark  of  a  workman's 
hammer,  and  it  is  said  that  years  ago  one  who  was 
engaged  in  the  roof  fell  down  and  there  met  his 
death.  It  is  the  place  where  a  soul  departed,  where 
a  man  died.  I  do  not  know  where  it  is,  but  it  may 
be  that  there  is  a  solemn  spot  here  to-night  where 
a  soul  will  be  lost  forever.  Maybe  the  moment 
has  come  when  the  wax  upon  the  soul's  death- 
warrant  shall  grow  cold,  when  it  shall  say  in  its 
heart,  "  I  will  have  none  of  these  things,"  and  when 


THE    SINNER'S    ONLY  ALTERNATIVE,      123 

God  shall  say,  "  Thou  shalt  have  none  of  them ;  1 
will  let  thee  alone;  thy  conscience  shall  never  be 
troubled  again ;  thou  shalt  go  through  life  in  peace, 
thou  shalt  go  to  thy  death  with  carelessness;  only 
in  hell  shalt  thou  ever  open  thine  eyes."  God 
grant  that  it  be  not  so,  but  I  feel  as  if  it  would  be 
so  with  some  of  you,  unless  sovereign  and  irresis- 
tible grace  should  decide  otherwise,  and  then,  to- 
night, there  will  be  a  spot  in  this  house  of  prayer 
where  a  soul  will  be  born  to  God.  What  man  is 
he  that  just  now  gives  his  heart  to  Christ  ?  Are 
there  none  of  you  ?  Must  I  go  back  to  my  Master 
with  no  joyful  tidings  ?  Is  there  no  heart  here 
that  says: — 

**  I'll  go  to  Jesus,  though  my  sins 
Have  like  a  mountain  rose; 
I  know  his  courts,  I'll  enter  in 
Whatever  may  oppose  ?  " 

Are  there  none  ?  Great  God,  looking  down  from 
heaven  !  Are  all  hearts  hard  ?  Are  there  none 
that  will  come  ?  Perhaps  it  is  so,  for  we  are 
feeble.  Oh,  Spirit  of  God,  come  down  now;  now, 
in  this  solemn  moment,  now,  break  the  heart  with 
thy  hammer;  now  cut  and  wound  by  thy  sword; 
now  heal  and  bind  up  with  thy  holy  ointments, 
now,  at  this  solemn  moment.  I  say  no  more,  but 
may  it  be  so,  and  with  him  I  leave  it.     Amen. 


**Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by  ?  behold,  and  see  if 
there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow,  which  is  done  unto  me, 
wherewith  the  Lord  hath  afflicted  me  in  the  day  of  his  fierce 
anger, ^^ — Lamentations!.  12. 

THIS  was  the  lamentation  of  Jeremiah.  As  he 
saw  the  desolation  of  the  beloved  city,  as  he 
marked  the  cruelties  inflicted  by  the  invaders  upon 
Jewish  youth,  and  children,  and  maidens,  and  as 
he  foresaw  the  long  years  of  bitterness  reserved 
for  the  captives  in  Babylon,  he  felt  as  if  he  were  a 
peer  in  the  realm  of  misery — indeed  peerless.  He 
stands  foremost,  a  very  emperor  of  grief,  a  king  of 
sighs  and  tears.  "  Behold  and  see,"  saith  he,  "  if 
there  were  ever  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow,  which 
is  done  unto  me." 

But  may  there  not  have  been  griefs  as  great  as 
those  of  Jeremiah  ?  Is  the  language  that  flows 
from  his  lips  strictly  accurate  ?  Like  most  of  the 
periods  which  flow  from  abundant  grief,  is  there 
not  some  exaggeration  here  ?  If  we  take  the 
words  out  of  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah,  and  put  them 
into  the  mouth  of  Jesus;  if  we  suppose  them  to  be 
spoken  by  him  as,  hanging  on  the  cross,  he  did 


A    JEREMIAD.  ;25 

bear  the  wrath  of  God  for  ns,  then  is  th€  e  no 
hyperbole,  no  exaggeration.  The  words  may  be 
read  as  they  stand,  and  stand  as  we  read  them,  and 
their  fullest  weight  shall  not  outweigh  the  truth. 
This  evening  two  things  challenge  our  atten- 
tion— an  earnest  expostulation — '*Is  it  nothing  to 
you,  all  ye  that  pass  by?"— and  a  solemn  ques- 
tion— "  Behold,  and  see,  was  there  ever  sorrow  like 
unto  my  sorrow,  which  is  done  unto  me  ?  " 

I.    First,  AN  EARNEST  EXPOSTULATION. 

The  Son  of  God  has  become  incarnate.  He  be- 
came man  out  of  love  to  men;  but  men  loved  him 
not,  and  though  in  him  was  every  perfection,  they 
hunted  and  hounded  him  to  death.  The  story  is 
told  four  times  over  by  inspired  authority  in  this 
Book,  but  the  mass  of  mankind  feel  no  concern  in  it. 
I  come  here  to-night,  and  I  say  to  many  of  you — 
Does  not  the  story  of  Jesus  at  all  interest  you  ? 
You  heard  it  read  just  now;  did  it  fall  flat  and  stale 
upon  your  ears  ?  Did  you  say  to  yourselves,  "  It 
is  dry  work  to  listen  to  that;  there  is  nothing  there 
to  strike  the  attention;  if  I  had  taken  up  a  news- 
paper and  had  read  of  some  recent  murder  my  wits 
would  have  been  all  awakened,  but  in  the  hearing 
of  this  death  of  Christ  I  feel  not  at  all  stirred." 
Well,  then,  I  ask  you.  Why  is  this  ?  Why  is  it  so  ? 
If  there  is  anything  in  all  the  world  that  ought  to 
interest  a  man  it  is  the  death  of  Christ.  Yet  do  I 
find  men,  learned  men,  spending  year  after  year  in 
sorting  out  butterflies,  beetles,  and  gnats,  or  in 
making  out  the  various  orders  of  shells,  or  in  dig- 


126  STORM  SIGNALS. 

ging  into  the  earth  and  seeking  to  discover  what 
strange  creatures  once  floundered  through  the 
boundless  mire,  or  swam  in  the  vast  seas;  I  find 
men  occupied  with  things  of  no  sort  of  practical 
moment,  and  which  to  me  do  not  seem  so  wonder- 
fully enchanting;  yet  the  story  of  God  himself,  who 
deigned  to  become  a  man,  and  as  a  man  suffered, 
and  bled,  and  died,  is  thought  to  be  too  small  a 
trifle  for  intelligent  minds  to  dwell  upon  it.  O 
reason !  where  art  thou  gone  ?  0  judgment ! 
whither  art  thou  fled?  Men-spend  their  strength 
on  trifles,  but  on  God  incarnate  they  turn  their 
backs. 

It  is  strange  that  even  tlie  sufferings  of  Christ 
should  not  attract  the  attention  of  men,  for  gener- 
ally, if  we  hear  any  sad  story  of  the  misfortunes  of 
our  fellow-creatures,  we  are  interested.  The  news- 
paper is  accounted  more  tha*n  usually  interesting 
which  contains  full  particulars  of  shipwrecks,  the 
blowing  down  of  houses,  murders,  shootings,  kill- 
ings, and  I  do  not  know  what.  Everybody  has  felt 
that  he  could  read  such  a  paper  as  that  because  it 
concerned  his  fellow-men — what  they  had  lost 
and  what  they  had  suffered.  Every  one  stops 
to  hear  the  tale  of  the  ancient  mariner;  even 
the  wedding  guest  is  held  while  he  with  the 
earnest  eye  tells  how  he  suffered  on  the  wide, 
deep,  stagnant  sea.  And  yet  this  story  of  a 
man  who  came  to  our  earth  with  no  motive  but 
love,  and  lived  here  to  do  nothing  but  good,  and 
yet  was  so  despised  and  rejected  as  to  be  nailed  to 


A    JEREMIAD,  127 

a  cross,  and  there  made  to  die  in  the  midst  of  jeers, 
and  sneers,  and  pains,  and  agonies  unknown,  this 
does  not  interest  men  !  I  marvel,  and  yet  I  marvel 
not,  at  the  strange  indifference  of  tkis  age  to  the 
wonders  of  Calvary.  How  is  it  earth  does  not 
stretch  out  her  hands  and  say,  "  Come  and  tell  us 
of  the  God  that  loved  us,  and  came  down  to  our 
low  estate,  and  suffered  for  us  men  and  for  our  sal- 
vation "  ?  How  is  it  that  the  crowds  of  this  great 
city  do  not  come  and  besiege  our  houses  and  say — 
"  Tell  us  yet  again  this  strange,  mysterious  story  of 
the  sufferings  of  the  perfect  Son  of  God  "  ?  It  ought 
to  interest  us,  if  nothing  more.  Is  it  nothing  to  you, 
however  ?  Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by  ? 
And  should  it  not  be  more  than  interesting  ? 
Should  it  not  exdte  our  admiration  ?  You  cannot 
read  of  a  man  sacrificing  himself  for  the  good  of 
his  fellow-creatures  without  feeling  at  once  that 
you  wish  you  had  known  that  fine  fellow,  and  you 
feel  instinctively  that  you  would  do  anything  in 
the  world  to  serve  him  if  he  still  lives,  or  to  help 
relatives  left  behind  if  he  has  died  in  a  brave  at- 
tempt. Who  does  not  esteem,  though  you  never 
knew  him,  the  good  man  at  Bethnal  Green,  who 
perished  some  time  ago  in  the  explosion  at  the 
firework  manufactory  ?  He  rushed  in  to  seek  to 
rescue  others,  and  was  found  at  last  a  handful  of 
ashes ;  bewailed  by  a  weeping  wife  •!  One  felt  at 
once,  "  There  is  a  man  there  who  had  a  soul  beat- 
ing beneath  his  ribs ! "  But  is  no  admiration  to 
be  given  to  the  Son  of  God,  who  left  a  throne  of 


128  STORM   SIGNALS. 

glory  without  bound,  and  came  here  below  to 
poverty,  to  shame,  to  a  life  of  contempt  and  toil, 
ind  then  gave  himself  up  voluntarily  to  a  death 
vhich  never  could  have  been  inflicted  upon  him  if 
he  had  not  given  himself  up  to  die  ?  Jesus  Christ 
had  no  motive  in  suffering  but  the  good  of  men. 
Nothing  selfish  ever  crossed  his  soul.  Oh,  men 
and  brethren,  it  w^as  pity  that  ruled  his  heart, 
pity  and  only  pity;  and  while  we  set  up  our  statues 
in  reverence  of  men  who  have  loved  their  fellow- 
men,  and  speak  of  siich  and  such  a  man  as  "a 
great  philanthropist,"  is  it  nothing  to  you  that  Jesus 
should  die  for  men  ?  shall  this  greatest  of  all  philan- 
thropists, this  first  the  chiefest  of  lovers  of  the  race 
of  men,  be  altogether  forgotten  ?  I  would  admire 
him  if  he  had  not  saved  me.  If  I  had  no  share  in  his 
blood  I  think  I  should  love  him.  The  life  of  Christ 
enchants  me;  the  death  of  Christ  binds  me  to  his 
cross.  Even  were  I  never  washed  in  his  blood, 
and  were  myself  cast  away  into  hell,  if  that  were 
posvsible,  I  still  feel  I  must  admire  him  for  his  love 
to  others.  Yea,  and  I  must  adore  him,  too,  for  his 
Godlike  character,  his  superhuman  love  in  suffer- 
ing for  the  sons  of  men.  But  why,  why  is  it  that 
such  a  Christ,  so  lovely  and  so  admirable,  is  for- 
gotten by  the  most  of  mankind,  and  it  is  nothing 
to  them  ? 

Now,  my  dear  hearers,  there  are  some  of  you  to 
whom  I  might  put  this  question  very  closely. 
You  have  heard  about  Jesus  very  often.  This 
pulpit  is  always  ringing  with  his  name.     And  you 


A    JEREMIAD.  129 

have  admired  what  Jesus  did ;  I  know  you  have,  and 
if"  any  spoke  ill  of  him,  you  would  be  very  grieved, 
and  3^ou  would  be  among  the  first  to  defend  his 
name;  and  yet — and  yet — is  that  all  ?  Are  you  al- 
ways going  to  be  interested,  and  to  admire,  and 
are  you  never  going  further  ?  Is  it,  after  all,  to 
come  to  this,  that  it  is  nothing  to  you  that  Jesus 
should  die  ?  Have  you  no  interest  in  that  death, 
no  part,  no  lot  in  the  salvation  which  that  death 
brings  to  the  sons  of  men  ?  I  am  afraid  with 
some  of  you  it  will  be  so  all  j^our  days.  How 
many  years  have  I  preached  to  some  of  you  ?  And 
if  those  past  years  have  not  brought  you  to  Christ, 
is  there  any  reason  to  believe  that  more  years  to 
come  will  do  it  ?  Nay,  I  fear  that  with  some  of 
you  the  harvest  is  past,  and  the  summer  is  ended, 
and  you  are  not  saved.  There  was  a  time  when 
this  voice  did  seem  to  cut  into  your  sohl,  and  the 
truth  that  was  uttered  awakened  your  conscience, 
but  it  is  all  nothing  to  you  now.  You  could  go  to 
sleep  under  the  sound  of  it,  and  your  soul  does 
sleep  under  the  sense  of  it.  What,  will  you  aban- 
don hope  ?  Have  you  resolved  to  be  lost,  with  the 
light  of  life  beaming  before  you  ?  Have  you  de- 
termined that  you  will  never  look  to  him  who  is 
lifted  up  to  save  you  from  the  serpent's  bite? 
Shall  Christ,  the  water  of  life,  never  be  tasted  by 
your  lips?  Do  you  elect  to  perish  of  thirst? 
Shall  this  bread  of  life  be  never  eaten  ?  Do  you 
choose  rather  to  starve  than  to  come  to  him  ?  No, 
you  tell  me  you  hope  it  will  be  otherwise  one  of 


130  STORM   SIGNALS. 

these  days.  Ah  !  but  I  have  no  hope  of  you  for  any 
day  but  to-day,  and  I  wish  you  to  know  that  pro- 
crastination is  of  all  things  fatal.  I  would  sooner 
that  you  resolved  to  be  damned  than  that  you  only 
said,  "  To-morrow,  to-morrow,"  for  if  to-day  you 
resolved  upon  your  ruin,  you  might  be  startled 
at  the  resolution,  and  you  might  be  led  to  see  your 
folly  and  awakened  to  amend  your  steps,  but  if 
you  always  say  "  To-morrow,  to-morrow,"  it  will 
be  the  will-o'-the-wisp  that  will  tempt  you  into  the 
fatal  morass,  where  souls  have  been  lost  by  tens  of 
thousands,  as  yours  will  be. 

Oh !  wherefore  should  I  have  to  be  always  com- 
ing on  the  same  errand  into  this  pulpit  to  say  over 
and  over  and  over  again  to  you  that  Jesus  died, 
and  that  if  you  trust  him  you  shall  live?  Why 
should  it  need  to  be  repeated  thus  ?  Great  God  of 
patience,  such  a  story  as  this  ought  to  be  accepted 
of  the  heart  at  once.  If  thou  bearest  with  men 
who  reject  it,  we  may  well  bear  with  them  too ;  but 
oh  !  we  pray  thee  let  them  not  go  too  far  with  thy 
long-suffering,  nor  venture  too  much  upon  thy 
patience,  lest  thou  lift  thy  hand  and  swear  in  thy 
wrath  that  they  shall  not  enter  into  thy  rest,  be- 
cause th.^.y  had  the  gospel,  but  they  counted  not 
themselves  to  be  worthy  of  it. 

One  thing  1  would  say  to  you,  to  all  of  you  to 
whom  it  seems  as  yet  to  be  nothing  that  Jesus 
should  die,  I  can  assure  you  that  personally  to  me 
it  is  something  that  he  should  die.  It  is  more  than 
something;   it  is  everything,  and  I  will   tell  you 


A    JEREMIAD.  131 

why.  It  is  much  to  me  that  Jesus  died,  for  I  knew 
I  slew  him.  I  sang  those  verses  just  now,  and  I 
sang  them  with  some  bitterness  of  soul.  I  was 
forced  to  feel: 

*''Tis  I  have  thus  ungrateful  been." 

If  it  were  not  that  I  had  sinned,  as  one  of  the  race, 
there  had  been  no  need  for  Christ  to  die,  but  as  it 
was  sin  that  pierced  and  nailed  him,  I  had  a  share 
in  his  death.  But  then  I  knew  another  thing,  that 
by  that  death  I  am  delivered  from  the  very  guilt 
that  put  him  to  death.  I  have  looked  to  him,  and 
I  am  forgiven.  Fleming  tells  us  in  a  book  of  his 
that  a  great  culprit  had  been  condemned  to  be 
hanged  at  Ayr.  He  had  been  a  very  great  of- 
fender, but,  while  he  lay  in  prison,  God  granted 
him  repentance,  and  he  was  heard  to  say  continu- 
ally as  they  took  him  to  the  scaffold,  "  Oh  !  but  he's 
a  great  forgiver !  Oh  !  but  he's  a  great  forgiver  !  " 
and  I  have  often  felt  as  if  I  could  stand  and  cry, 
yea,  even  dance  and  say  it,  "  Oh,  but  he's  a  great 
forgiver  !  Oh  !  but  he's  a  great  forgiver  !  "  My 
innumerable  sins  confessed  to  him,  were  blotted 
out  each  one,  and  peace  and  joy  bestowed  where 
all  was  fear  and  trembling  before.  Now,  there  are 
hundreds  in  this  house  that  could  say  the  same. 
If  I  were  to  ask  it,  and  this  were  the  proper  time, 
there  are  thousands  here  who  could  rise  and  say, 
"  I  too  can  say  that  it  is  much  to  me  that  Jesus 
died,  for  though  I  slew  him,  yet  by  his  death  I 
live,  and   by  the    blood   which    I    drew   from  his 


132  STORM   SIGNALS. 

veins,  I  have  been  washed  and  made  white." 
Well,  if  it  is  so  much  to  us,  we  do  sincerely  wish, 
oh,. unconverted  ones!  that  Christ  were  as  much  to 
you,  for  we  do  think  he  ought  to  be;  we  do  desire 
that  he  sliould  be;  we  pray  that  he  may  be,  and 
we  tremble,  even  to  horror,  lest  after  all  he  should 
not  be;  for  if  Christ  be  nothing  to  you,  it  will  be  a 
hard  dying  for  you,  a  wretched  exit,  the  bed  shall 
be  of  iron,  and  the  pillow  shall  be  cold  as  ice;  and 
it  will  be  hard  passing  into  a  disembodied  state;  it 
will  be  heart-rending  to  come  before  God;  it  will 
be  grim  and  doleful  for  you  at  the  again-rising, 
in  the  day  of  the  resurrection,  when  the  trumpet 
sounds,  and  the  sepulchres  are  burst  open,  and 
your  body  linked  to  your  soul  again,  shall  stand 
before  the  flaming  throne  of  Christ.  It  will  be  ap- 
palling for  you,  more  terrible  than  tongue  can  tell, 
throughout  eternity !  An  eternity  without  Christ ! 
An  eternity  without  Christ!  "Nothing  to  you, 
nothing  to  you,"  you  say  now,  but  how  will  it  be 
when  conscience  shall  remind  you  in  eternity, 
*'  You  heard  of  Christ,  but  you'said  he  was  nothing 
to  you;  you  listened  to  earnest  admonitions,  but 
you  said  they  were  nothing  to  you."  How  will  this 
stir  the  fire?  How  will  this  fan  the  flame ?  How 
will  this  prick  your  conscience  and  vex  your  spirit, 
that  Jesus  died,  and  inestimable  mercies  dropped 
from  the  cross,  pardons  sealed  with  blood  were 
distributed  freely  upon  Calvary  and  broken  hearts 
were  healed,  and  sins  were  forgiven,  and  the  dead 
were  raised,  and  the  lost  were  saved ;  but  it  was  all 


A    JEREMIAD.  133 

nothing  to  yon,  nothing  to  you.  Oh  !  before  death 
comes — and  he  is  on  his  way  to  some  here  pres- 
ent, on  his  way  to  meet  them  soon — before  death 
comes  on  the  pale  horse  with  hell  following  at  his 
heels,  I  beseech  you,  as  you  love  your  souls,  look 
to  the  Crucified,  and  be  not  satisfied  till  you  can 
say,  "  He  is  everything  to  me;  I  slew  him,  but  he 
saved  me;  I  look  to  him,  and  I  live." 

May  God  bless  this  admonition,  and  my  heart 
shall  be  glad  indeed  if  he  will  but  do  it.  Oh,  how 
little  can  I  do  for  you  unconverted  ones,  how  little 
can  I  do  for  you  !  When  I  sometimes  get  a  shake 
of  the  hands  from  some  of  you,  and  you  say,  "  Well 
I  have  been  hearing  you  for  years,  sir,  but  I  am 
not  couA^erted,"  I  look  hopefully  upon  you,  but  I 
cannot  help  when  I  get  away,  reproaching  myself 
in  part  and  saying,  "  Have  I  preached  to  these 
people  as  1  ought  to  do?"  You  cause  me  to  wake 
up  at  night  to  weep  for  you,  and  to  ask  myself 
again  and  again,  "  What  more  can  I  say  ?  How 
shall  I  put  it?  With  what  force  and  power  can  I 
deliver  it,  if  perhaps  I  may  reach  their  hearts  "  ? 
Oh,  I  trust  you  may  yet  be  brought,  and  God  shall 
be  praised  and  glorified  world  without  end ! 

II.  Now   let   us   change   to   a  second   point — a 

SOLEMN    QUESTION. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  represented  here 
as  bidding  men  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto 
his  sorrow,  which  is  done  unto  him.  Truly  the 
siifferings  of  Jesus  toere  altogether  unique;  they  stand 
alone.     History   or   poetry    can    find    no    parallel. 


134  STORM  SIGNALS. 

There  were  never  any  sufferings  which  could 
match  his,  and  never  was  such  an  illustrious  suf- 
ferer put  to  such  boundless  shame.  He  was  the 
eye  of  heaven,  the  very  sun  and  star  of  the  bright 
world.  It  was  the  seraph's  bliss  to  do  him  homage.  *. 
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  was  he,  and  the 
government  was  upon  his  shoulders,  and  his  name 
was  called  Wonderful,  the  Counselor,  the  Mighty 
God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace. 
All  the  hallelujahs  of  eternity  rolled  up  at  his  au- 
gust feet.  But  he  was  despised  and  rejected  of 
men,  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief, 
and  we  hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  him;  he  was 
despised  and  we  esteemed  him  not.  They  spat 
into  his  face;  they  plucked  off  his  hair;  they  blind- 
folded liim;  they  smote  him  with  their  fists;  they 
gave  him  a  felon's  death,  and  then  stood  by  and 
mocked  his  prayers,  and  made  jests  about  his  groans 
and  pangs.  Never  was  one  so  high  brought  so 
low.  "  Behold,  and  see  if  ever  there  were  sorrow 
like  unto  my  sorrow,  which  is  done  unto  me." 
Never  one  so  innocent,  never  one  so  falsely  accused. 
He  had  done  no  evil;  he  was  no  rival  of  Cassar. 
He  said  his  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world.  In- 
stead of  doing  evil  he  had  done  boundless  good. 
His  meat  and  drink  were  to  do  God's  will.  His 
delight  was  to  help  the  poor,  to  feed  the  hungry, 
to  heal  the  sick.  He  was  all  gentleness,  all  good- 
ness, and  generous  beyond  degree.  From  both  his 
hands  he  scattered  bounties  lavishly  amongst  the 
graceless  sons  of  men,   and  yet  they  said  he   was 


A    JEREMIAD.  135 

guilty  of  sedition  and  blasphemy.  He  seditious! 
He  a  blasphemer!  Lying  could  go  no  further; 
suborned  witnesses  could  not  be  made  to  agree.  The 
lie  was  too  massive  even  for  those  to  compass  who 
were  willing  to  have  compassed  it.  Oh  !  was  ever 
grief  like  his  !  exonerated  yet  condemned  !  adjudged 
to  be  without  fault,  yet  delivered  up  to  his  direst 
foes  !  treated  as  a  felon,  put  to  death  as  a  traitor; 
immolated  on  a  gibbet  which  bore  triple  testimony 
to  his  innocence  by  its  inscription.  The  tragic 
drama  never  reached  a  plot  so  deep.  The  majestic 
odes  of  prophecy  never  told  a  fact  more  clearly. 
He  suffered,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  for  he  did  no 
sin,  neither  was  deceit  found  in  his  lips ! 

In  our  Saviour's  death  there  were  aggravations 
of  an  extraordinary  kind.  Before  he  actually  came 
to  die,  that  dreadful  night  in  Gethsemane  had 
broken  his  already  emaciated  frame.  There  he 
sweat,  as  it  were,  great  drops  of  blood  falling  to  the 
ground.  In  two  or  three  cases  other  persons  have 
sweat  drops  of  blood,  but  they  invariably  died. 
Our  Saviour  did  this,  and  yet  lived.  Oh,  how  was 
the  bitterness  of  his  soul  expressed  in  that  awful 
overflow  which  fell  upon  the  soil  of  that  garden  ! 
Then  remember,  he  was  led,  deserted  by  his 
friends,  without  any  comfort  from  his  God,  to  be 
tried  by  Herod,  by  Pilate,  by  Caiaphas;  to  be 
scourged,  beaten,  probably  several  times,  with 
rods  and  scourges.  God  forsook  him.  "  My  God, 
my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me" — was  his  cry 
in   the   very   depth   of  his  agony.     With  none  to 


136  STORM   SIGNALS. 

pity,  no  one  to  administer  comfort,  forsaken  utterly, 
our  Saviour  died,  with  accessories  of  sorrow  that 
were  to  be  found  in  no  other  decease  than  that 
which  was  accomplished  at  Jerusalem. 

Still,  the  singularity  of  his  death  lies  in  another 
respect.  There  was  never  sorrow  like  unto  the 
sorrow  which  was  done  unto  Christ,  because  all  his 
sorrow  luas  home  for  others.  Whatever  you  and  I 
may  suifer  we  deserve  it,  and  directly  or  indirectly, 
we  may  trace  it  to  the  fact  that  we  are  sinners. 
But  he  was  spotless,  innocent,  and  pure.  In  him 
was  no  sin,  and  neither  suffering  nor  death  could 
lawfully  have  been  exacted  of  him  had  he  not  been 
made  the  substitute  for  his  people.  Behold,  and 
see  if  there  was  ever  sorrow  like  unto  his  sorrow. 
He  bears  the  sin  of  many;  he  is  numbered  with  the 
transgressors.  He  stands  vicariously  to  endure 
tormenting  griefs  which  never  could  have  fallen 
to  his  lot  had  it  not  been  that  he  was  a  surety,  and 
stood  in  his  people's  stead. 

Now,  I  want  your  close  attention  for  one  minute. 
Question — What  was  it  that  Christ,  as  substitute, 
had  to  endure?  Answer — Although  it  may  not 
have  been  precisely  what  we  have  to  endure,  it  must 
have  been  something  equivalent  thereto.  And 
what  ought  any  one  sinner  to  have  suffered  ?  In- 
terminable misery  in  hell.  What,  then,  must  have 
been  the  pangs  which  in  Christ's  case  were  accepted 
as  an  equivalent  for  the  countless  agonies  of  one 
sinner  ?  Howbeit  Christ  died,  not  for  one  sinner, 
but  for  tens  of  thousands,  for  multitudes  whom  no 


A    JEREMIAD.  137 

man  can  number.  Think,  then,  my  brethren,  what 
must  have  been  the  crushing  blows  which  Jehovah 
laid  on  him  when  those  strokes  were  inflicted  to 
satisfy  divine  justice  for  the  sins,  the  crimes,  the 
transgressions  of  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand 
of  those  for  whom  he  suffered.  Of  course,  it  were 
not  possible  for  him  to  have  endured  such  penance, 
even  for  one  soul  of  man,  if  he  had  not  been  God. 
His  Godhead  gave  him  an  infinite  capacity,  and 
infused  a  boundless  degree  of  compensation  into 
all  the  pangs  he  bore.  You  have  no  more  idea  of 
what  Christ  suffered  in  his  soul  than  you  have, 
when  you  take  up  in  a  shell  a  drop  of  sea- water, 
power  to  guess  from  that  the  area  of  the  entire 
boundless,  bottomless  ocean.  What  Christ  suffered 
is  utterly  inconceivable.  We  are  not  at  liberty  to 
think  of  him  as  dying  as  another  dies.  His  was  a 
vast  soul,  so  great  a  soul  that  it  seemed  to  have  all 
souls  within  it,  and  it  had  the  capacity  for  suffering 
what  all  souls  might  bear,  and  the  whole  of  the 
vast  nature  which  God  had  given,  that  wondrous 
nature  which  he  himself  also  essentially  possessed, 
was  put  forth  to  make  an  atonement  for  human  sin. 
*'  Behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto 
my  sorrow,  which  is  done  unto  me." 

It  is  time  to  pause  a  little.  Instead  of  talking 
any  more,  let  us  sit  down  in  meditation  at  the  foot 
of  the  cross,  and  look  up.  'Tis  the  King;  'tis  the 
King,  but  he  is  crowned  with  thorns.  It  is  the 
Prince  of  glory,  but  he  is  stripped  naked  to  his 
shame.     It  is  the  Ancient  of  eternal  days,  but  he 


138  STORM   SIGNALS. 

bows  his  head  to  die.  He  is  God  all  sufficient,  yet 
he  cries,  "I  thirst."  He  is  the  angels'  darling,  but 
he  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men.  He  filleth 
the  courts  above  with  honor;  his  presence  gilds 
heaven  with  light,  yet  there  npon  the  cross  he  is 
covered  with  shame  and  shrouded  in  darkness. 
Hushed  are  the  songs,  the  anthems,  and  choruses 
of  celestial  choirs;  and  all  the  music  that  greets 
his  ears  is  that  of  his  own  sighs,  and  cries,  and 
groans.  Was  ever  grief  like  thine  ?  Needless 
question;  needless  question;  all  but  shameful  ques- 
tion ;  for  were  all  griefs  that  ever  were  felt  con- 
densed into  one,  they  were  no  more  worthy  to  be 
compared  therewith  than  the  glow-v/orm's  tiny 
lamp  with  the  ever-blazing  sun. 

What  then,  beloved,  what  then  ?  If  Christ  be 
thus  alone  in  suifering,  what  then  ?  Why,  let  him 
stand  in  our  love.  High,  high,  set  up  Christ  high 
in  your  heart.  Now,  brethren  and  sisters,  you 
have  many  objects  of  your  affection,  but  oh,  lift  up 
my  Lord,  your  soul's  Bridegroom,  your  spirit's 
well-beloved!  Come  now,  if  you  have  thought 
well  of  him,  think  better  of  him.  If  you  have 
loved  him,  oh,  love  him  more.  Now,  ask  to  have 
your  heart  inflamed,  as  with  coals  of  juniper  which 
have  a  vehement  heat,  and  let  that  heart  be  all 
his  own.  Oh !  let  there  be  no  such  love  as  your 
love  to  Christ.  Let  it  pass  the  love  of  women. 
Let  it  go  beyond  a  mothers  love,  a  brother's 
afi'ection,  a  father's  tenderness.  Love  him;  you 
cannot  match  his  love  to  you ;  seek  at  last  to  let 


A    JEREMIAD.  139 

your  little  stream  run  side  by  side  of  the  mighty 
river. 

If  Christ  be  thus  alone  in  suffering,  brethren,  let 
us  seek  to  make  him,  if  we  can,  alone  in  our  ser- 
vice. It  is  not  much  we  do  for  Christ  comnared 
with  what  we  should.  Some  have  learned  to  give 
their  time,  their  labor,  and  their  substance  in  larger 
measure  than  most  people  care  to  do.  But  yet 
what  is  our  giving,  be  it  ne'er  so  costly,  for  such 
an  one  as  he  is?  We  only  give  what  we  can 
spare;  how  few  of  us  ever  pinch  ourselves  for 
him.  He  smarted  for  us,  and  gave  up  even  his 
very  garments  for  us,  but  we  do  not  come  to  that. 
In  the  olden  times  they  did,  and  saints,  and  mar- 
tyrs, and  Christian  missionaries  made  sacrifice  of 
all,  and  counted  it  no  sacrifice,  out  of  love  to  him. 
I  wish  we  had  more  Marys  who  would  break  the 
alabaster  box  of  precious  ointment  upon  his  dear 
head.  Oh !  for  a  little  extravagance  of  love,  a 
little  fanaticism  of  affection  for  him,  for  he  deserves 
ten  thousand  times  more  than  the  most  enthusiastic 
devotees  ever  dream  of  rendering. 

If  he  be  thus,  brethren,  so  far  beyond  all  others 
in  his  sorrow,  let  him  also  be  first  and  foremost 
in  our  praise.  If  ye  have  poetic  minds,  weave  no 
garlands  except  for  his  dear  brow.  If  ye  be  men 
of  eloquence,  speak  no  glowing  periods  except  to 
his  honor.  If  ye  be  men  of  wit  and  scholarship, 
oh  seek  to  lay  your  classic  attainments  at  the  foot 
of  his  cross!  Come  hither  with  all  your  talents, 
and  yield  them  to  him  who  bought  you  with  his 


140  STORM   SIGNALS. 

Mood.  Come  hither,  ye  with  much  and  ye  with 
little;  come  ye  with  hearts  so  warm  whom  he 
loved  so  well;  give  some  lively  expression  to  your 
gratitude. 

"  Dear  suffering  Lamb  !  thy  bleeding  wounds, 
With  cords  of  love  divine, 
Have  drawn  our  willing  hearts  to  thee, 
And  linked  our  life  with  thine. 

"  Our  longing  eyes  would  fain  behold 
Thy  bright  and  blessed  brow, 
Once  wrung  with  bitterest  anguish,  wear 
Its  crown  of  glory  now." 

But,  oh !  are  there  any  of  you  here  who  still 
think  nothing  of  Christ,  who  pass  by  unheeding, 
to  whom  his  sorrows  are  of  no  account  ?  Ye  will 
think  differently  another  day:  for  "  every  eye  shall 
see  him;  they  also  that  pierced  him,  and  all  nations 
shall  wail  because  of  him."  Did  ye  but  know  the 
meaning  of  this — "  Surely  he  hath  born  our  griefs 
and  carried  our  sorrows,"  your  interest  would  be 
aroused,  you  would  turn  straightway,  and  look  at 
him,  and  look  to  him,  as  a  friend,  as  your  friend, 
as  the  best  friend  a  sinner  can  see  or  know.  Oh 
that  his  sorrows  might  awaken   your  sympathies! 

"  Come,  blessed  Lord,  thy  grace  impart. 
To  warm  each  cold,  each  stolid  heart, 
Till  all  its  powers  and  passions  move 
In  melting  grief  and  ardent  love." 


i?o !  ^a ! 

"J/o,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters.'''' — ISA.  Iv.  I. 

THERE  is  a  thirst  which  is  peculiar  to  the  be- 
liever. He  can  say  with  David — ''  As  the 
heart  panteth  after  the  waterbrooks,  so  panteth 
my  soul  after  thee,  O  God.''  Delightful  thirst ! 
Would  God  we  had  more  of  it !  May  we  be  long- 
ing and  panting  after  our  God  in  that  sense  until 
we  shall  be  filled  with  his  Spirit,  and  shall  dwell 
in  his  presence  to  go  no  more  out  forever.  But  I 
wish  now  to  speak  of  another  kind  of  thirst  to  an- 
other class  of  thirsting  ones,  who  thirst  they 
scarcely  know  for  what.  They  have  a  sense  of 
unrest,  of  longing,  of  yearning,  yet  they  have  a 
very  indistinct  idea  of  what  it  is  their  souls  are 
pining  for.  It  may  be  they  will  find  out  presentl}'' 
what  it  is  their  thirst  requires.  Better  still,  if 
mayhap,  by  God's  blessing  that  thirst  shall  be 
quenched  by  their  drinking  that  living  water  of 
which  they  are  bidden  freely  to  take. 

I  shall  not  detain  you  with  a  long  preface,  nor, 
indeed,  with  a  long  discourse.  I  will  try  to  make 
each  portion  of  my  address  brief,  practical,  and 
pointed.     May  the  Holy  Ghost  make  it  effectual. 


142  STORM   SIGNALS. 

Learn  from  my  text  that  God  has  made  iilenteous 
soul-provision ;  and  tliat  to  every  thirsty  soul  this 
provisioti  is  perfectly  free  and  gratuitous. 

I.   In  the  first  place    God  has  made  an  abundant 

SOUL- PROVISION. 

We  read  here  of  "  water."  Water  has  been  pro- 
nounced the  simplest,  purest,  fittest  drink  for  all 
persons  of  all  ages  and  temperaments.  Now,  there 
is  a  thirst  in  man's  body  which  makes  him  require 
drink.  He  drinks,  and  that  thirst  is  removed. 
There  is  a  similar  thirst  in  man's  spiritual  nature. 
He  wants  something,  and  he  feels  uneasy  until  he 
gets  it.  The  grace  of  God,  which  is  proclaimed 
to  us  in  Christ  Jesus,  is  that  which  meets  the  long- 
ing of  man.  That  is  the  spiritual  water  for  man's 
spiritual  thirst.  In  the  text  the  word  is  put  in  the 
plural,  "  Come  ye  to  the  waters,"  I  suppose  to 
show  the  abundance  thereof,  as  though  there  were 
many  rivers  of  it,  so  that  none  might  fear  that 
they  should  require  more  than  was  provided. 

"  Great  God,  the  treasures  of  thy  love 
Are  everlasting  mines; 
Deep  as  our  greatest  miseries  are, 
And  boundless  as  our  sins." 

The  mercy  of  God  is  not  a  little  brook  which  can 
be  almost  drained  up  by  a  passing  ox,  but  it  is  a 
vast  river — it  is  many  rivers,  rivers  to  swim  in. 
Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth!  stand  not  back  be- 
cause ye  think  there  is  not  enough,  but  come  ye 
to  the  waters. 

Or  the  word  may  be  in   the  plural  to  signify 


HO!   HO!  143 

variety.  The  soul  wants  many  things.  Viewing 
eternity,  and  God,  and  judgment,  from  different 
points  of  view,  it  needs  manifold  and  multitudin- 
ous mercies.  They  are  all  provided,  and  the  wore 
'*  waters "  indicates  that  many  fresh  springs  of 
consolation  are  ready  for  those  who  thirst  for  all 
spiritual  blessings  as  soon  as  the  eye  sees  or  the 
ear  hears  tell  of  them.  You  need  not  fear  if  you 
want  the  pardon  of  sin,  or  the  renewal  of  your 
nature,  or  guidance  in  perplexity  or  comfort  in 
distress,  you  need  not  fear  but  what  you  shall  find 
it.  "  Come  ye  to  the  waters."  There  is  an  infinite 
variety  in  the  grace  of  God.  He  is  called  "  the 
God  of  all  grace."  All  the  grace  that  all  the  sin- 
ners that  ever  come  to  him  can  want,  they  shall 
find  stored  up  in  the  gospel  provisions  of  the  cove- 
nant of  grace.  "Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come 
ye  to  the  waters,"  for  God  has  provided  for  soul- 
needs  in  plentiful  abundance  and  endless  variety. 

Now,  are  you  thirsting  ?  It  surely  is  not  the 
mere  play  of  imagination,  but  the  sober  apprehen- 
sion of  a  fact,  that  convinces  me  there  are  persons 
here  who  are  thirsting  in  a  spiritual  sense.  Me- 
thinks  one  of  them  says,  "I  thirst,  /  thirst  to  have  my 
sins  forgiven,  and  to  he  reconciled  to  God;  I  know 
that  I  have  done  wrong;  for  me  to  plead  that  I  have 
been  innocent  would  be  to  add  a  lie  to  all  my  other 
iniquities;  I  am  sensible  in  my  inmost  heart  that  I 
have,  both  by  omission  and  commission,  trans- 
gressed the  divine  law;  I  deserve  punishment,  but 
I  would  that  by  some  means  I  might  be  put  into 


144  STORM   SIGNALS. 

the  divine  favor;  I  cannot  bear  to  think  that  God 
should  be  angry  with  me  every  day ;  once  I  hiughed 
at  this,  but  now  1  feel  its  meaning,  and  it  is  like 
an  arrow  sticking  in  my  loins.  Oh,  that  I  could 
have  my  Maker  to  be  my  friend  !  1  cannot  fight 
out  the  battle  vyith  him;  he  could  crush  me  in  a 
moment;  I  would,  therefore,  cast  down  the  weapons 
of  my  rebellion,  and  be  reconciled  to  him."  Come, 
then,  thou  thirsty  one,  come  and  have  what  thou 
wantest !  Come  and  put  thy  trust  in  Jesus,  and 
thy  sin  is  forgiven,  and  thou  art  reconciled;  for,  far 
off  as  thou  art,  thou  shalt  be  brought  nigh  by  the 
blood  of  Christ.  Dost  thou  know  how  ?  It  is 
thus — God  must  punish  sin:  thy  sin  has  incurred 
his  penalty ;  but  he  exacted  thy  debt  of  thy  Surety. 
He  punished  Jesus  for  thy  sins  which  thou  hast 
committed  if  so  be  thou  believest  in  Jesus  as  thy 
substitute.  He  endured,  that  thou  mightest  never 
endure,  the  whole  of  the  divine  wrath;  God  now, 
therefore,  can,  without  marring  his  justice,  recon* 
cile  to  himself  the  offending  sinner,  be  agreed  with 
him,  receive  him  into  friendship,  ay,  receive  him 
into  sonship,  and  adopt  him  as  his  child.  That 
troubled  conscience  of  yours  will  soon  have  peace 
if  thou  will  but  trust  in  the  bleeding  sacrifice  of 
the  Lamb  of  God  for  sinners  slain.  Put  your  hands 
upon  his  dear  head,  once  crowned  with  thorns  for 
thee,  and  thou  shalt  prove  that  God  is  thy  friend, 
and  know  that  thy  sin  is  forgiven.  Ho,  every  one 
that  thirsteth  for  pardon  and  for  reconciliation, 
come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  have  there  your  desire. 


HG!    HO!  145 

I  think  I  hear  another  say,  "  I  desire  that  self- 
same blessing,  but  I  want  something  more;  I loant 
to  conquer  the  sin  that  divelletli  in  me;  I  want  to  be 
pure  and  holy;  I  cannot  bear  to  be  in  the  future 
what  I  have  been  in  the  past;  I  feel  the  chains  of 
habit  that  bind  me;  I  want  to  snap  them  off.  I 
would  no  longer  be  an  example  of  vice;  I  want  to 
be  a  pattern  of  everything  that  is  lovely  and  of 
good  repute;  but  I  have  struggled  against  sin,  and 
it  gets  the  mastery  over  me;  I  do  for  a  time  escape, 
but  still  I  bear  my  fetters  upon  me,  and  am  dragged 
back  to  my  prison.  I  cannot  be  what  I  would;  oh, 
that  I  could  escape  from  the  power  of  sin !  "  Ah, 
thou  thirsty  one,  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  desire  as 
thou  desirest;  and  let  me  tell  thee  that  God  will 
give  thee  the  desire  of  thine  heart,  for  Jesus  died 
that  he  might  deliver  his  people  from  the  power  of 
Satan.  He  came  on  purpose  that  he  might  destroy 
the  power  of  sin  in  his  people,  and  make  them  so 
free  that  they  should  not  serve  sin,  but  become  a 
people  zealous  for  good  works.  If  thou  wilt  come 
to  Jesus,  and  simply  believe  in  him,  that  is,  rely 
upon  him,  trust  him,  his  grace  will  come  and  re- 
fine thee,  implanting  a  new  nature,  taking  away 
the  heart  of  stone,  and  giving  a  heart  of  flesh,  and 
thou  shalt  yet  put  thy  foot  upon  the  neck  of  all  thy 
corruptions;  thou  shalt  cast  them  out  by  little  and 
by  little,  and  thou  shalt  be  made  meet  to  be  a 
partaker  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light. 
Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth  for  purity  and  virtue, 
and  for  victory  over  indwelling  sin,   let  him   come 


146  STORM  SIGNALS. 

to  the  waters  that  flowed  with  the  blood  from 
Jesus'  side,  and  let  him  taste,  and  his  thirst  shall 
be  appeased  forever. 

In  some  persons  this  soul-thirst  takes  the  shape 
of  an  anxious  desire  for  perseverance  and  security. 
"I  would  like,"  says  one,  "  oh,  how  I  would  like  to 
know  myself  saved,  and  so  saved  that  I  never  can 
be  lost !  Would  that  I  could  get  on  the  rock  and 
feel  the  steadfastness  of  my  refuge,  that  1  might 
be  able  to  sing — 

"  My  name  from  the  palms  of  his  hands 
Eternity  cannot  erase: 
Impressed  on  his  heart  it  remains 
In  marks  of  indelible  grace." 

I  recollect  how  I  longed  and  panted  after  this,  for 
no  salvation  ever  seemed  to  me  to  be  worth  the 
having  that  would  not  last  me  to  the  end;  no  sign 
of  grace  within  seemed  worth  the  having,  but  a 
sign  that  could  never  be  cut  off.  The  dread 
"  peradventure"  haunted  me  lest  the  enterprise 
should  be  after  all  a  failure,  and  the  prospect  of 
final  deliverance  should  be  defeated  by  some 
superior  power  of  evil.  I  wanted  the  indwelling 
of  eternal  life,  of  that  life  incorruptible  which 
liveth  and  abideth  forever.  Now,  such  a  life  as 
this  it  is  that  we  read  of  in  the  Bible.  "  He  that 
drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him,  it  shall 
be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  unto  ever- 
lasting life."  You  who  want  security,  who  wish 
to  know  that  you  are  saved,  and  to  rejoice  in  it, 
may  well  listen  to  these  words:  "Ho,  every  one 


HO!    HO!  147 

that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters."  If  you 
come  to  Christ  for  this  blessed  satisfaction  you 
shall  have  it.  Give  yourselves  up  to  Christ  and 
you  shall  sing,  in  the  words  of  our  song, — 

**  I  know  that  safe  with  him  remains 
Protected  by  his  powier, 
What  I've  committed  to  his  hands, 
Till  the  decisive  hour." 

Yes,  be  your  thirst  for  pardon,  for  reconciliation, 
for  sanctification,  for  deliverance  from  sin,  or  for 
perseverance  and  safety,  you  shall  have  any  and 
all  these  in  the  waters  which  God  has  made  to 
flow. 

There  are  persons  in  the  world,  however,  whose 
thirst  takes  another  form.  They  have  a  thirst  for 
knoivledge.  They  want  to  know,  to  know  infallibly. 
Through  how  many  theories  some  people  wade  ! 
There  are  minds  so  naturally  inclined  for  cavil 
and  controversy,  for  reasoning  and  reconsidering, 
that  the  more  they  study  the  more  skeptical  they 
grow.  Ever  learning,  they  never  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth.  "  Oh  !  "  they  seem  to  say, 
*'  if  I  could  but  get  hold  of  something  that  was 
true,  some  fact,  some  certainty."  Well,  sir,  if  thou 
thirsteth  for  this,  let  thy  soul  be  given  up  to  a 
belief  in  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  soon  find  certainty. 
I  believe  that  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  is  so 
certain  a  truth  to  that  man  who  has  believed  it, 
that  it  is  so  verified  to  his  inner  consciousness, 
and  so  interweaves  itself  with  his  entire  being, 
that  no  proposition  of  Euclid  could  ever  be  more 


148  STORM  SIGNALS. 

demonstrable,  or  more  absolutely  conclusive.  We 
have  known  and  believed  the  revelation  that  this 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  the  Son  of  God.  We  have 
tasted,  and  felt,  and  handled  of  the  good  word  of 
life.  I  know,  and  many  here  know,  that  since  we 
have  believed  in  Jesus  we  have  come  to  live  in  an 
entirely  new  world.  We  have  broken  through  the 
veil  that  parted  us  from  a  kingdom  of  which  we 
knew  nothing,  and  we  have  been  brought  into 
this  new  kingdom,  and  live  in  it,  and  are  as  con- 
scious of  new  sensations,  and  new  emotions,  and 
new  sorrows,  and  new  joys  as  we  are  conscious  of 
the  old  sensations  which  we  possessed  aforetime. 
It  is  true,  sirs,  certainly  true.  Have  not  our 
martyrs  stood  at  the  stake  and  burnt  for  this 
truth  ?  That  is  a  stern  truth  which  a  man  will 
dare  to  burn  for.  Twisted  as  their  nerves  and 
muscles  were  upon  the  rack,  and  their  very  hearts 
searched  after  with  hot  claws  of  fire  by  their  tor- 
mentors, yet  have  they  learned  to  sing  in  the 
midst  of  anguish,  to  tell  of  present  enjoyment  and 
to  triumph  in  the  absolute  truth  of  the  doctrine 
whereof  they  were  the  witnesses.  If  you  want  to 
get  your  foot  upon  a  bit  of  rock,  to  feel  your  foot- 
ing, and  express  your  conviction,  "Now,  this  is 
true  whatever  else  is  not,"  you  must  believe  in 
Jesus  Christ.  Then  you  will  be  no  more  shifted 
about  like  an  unguided  vessel,  by  every  wind  and 
every  current,  but  you  will  be  sailing  with  the 
heavenly  Pilot  on  board,  directing  you  to  the 
haven  of  everlasting  peace. 


HO!   HO!  149 

But  there  are  those  whose  thirst  is  iliat  of  the 
heart.  It  is  not  so  much  something  to  beheve,  as 
something  to  love  which  they  want.  AVell,  my 
dear  friend,  if  you  would  have  something  worthy 
of  your  affection,  a  person  whom  you  may  love  to 
the  fullest  possible  extent,  and  never  be  deceived, 
adore  and  never  become  an  idolater,  let  me  say  to 
you,  come  ye  to  the  waters  and  drink  of  the  love  of 
Christ,  for  they  that  love  him  may  love  him  more, 
they  cannot  love  him  too  much.  He  never  dis- 
appoints any  confidence  that  is  reposed  in  him. 
His  dear,  sweet  love  which  he  poureth  into  the 
souls  of  those  that  love  him  is  a  recompense  for 
any  sorrows  they  may  have  endured  for  his  sake, 
a  recompense  that  makes  them  forget  their  wrongs 
and  woes  in  the  exceeding  weight  of  glory  which 
it  entails. 

Oh  !  did  ye  but  know  my  Master,  ye  would  fine? 
out  that  to  know  him  is  to  love  him.  All  things 
else  in  this  world  were  insignificant  in  comparisor 
with  him.  As  a  candle  is  not  to  be  compared  to 
the  sun  at  noonday,  so  the  joys  of  this  world  are 
not  worthy  to  be  mentioned  in  the  same  century 
as  the  joys  of  communion  with  Christ.  Get  this, 
and  you  shall  have  overflowing  joy !  you  shall  be 
satisfied  with  marrow  and  fatness,  and  drink  of  the 
wines  on  the  lees  well  refined. 

But  time  would  fail  me  if  I  were  to  try  to 
mention  the  different  forms  of  soul-thirst.  What- 
ever they  may  be,  God  has  provided  a  supply 
for  them  all.     Sinner,  you  cannot  want  anything 


150  STORM  SIGNALS. 

which  God  cannot  give  you;  your  soul  cannot 
crave  for  anything  but  he  can  bestow  it;  you  can- 
not be  so  soul-sick  but  he  has  a  medicine  that  will 
heal  you;  you  cannot  be  so  naked  but  he  can 
clothe  you,  nor  so  black  but  he  can  wash  you,  nor 
so  devilish  but  he  can  sanctify  you,  nor  so  near 
being  damned  but  he  can  save  you.  Christ  is  all 
in  all.  If  you  are  just  now  ready  to  die,  if  you 
have  brought  yourself  down  to  the  gates  of  the 
grave  by  your  sin,  if  you  are  suffering  in  body  the 
results  of  your  iniquities,  if  your  own  conscience 
has  pronounced  on  you  the  dread  sentence  of 
doom, — know  this,  my  Master's  arm  is  strong,  and 
long  as  well  as  strong;  he  is  able  to  reach  the 
worst,  the  vilest,  and  the  most  abandoned;  and 
when  he  once  reaches  them  he  will  never  let  go  of 
them  till  he  has  taken  them  out  of  the  miry  clay, 
and  out  of  the  horrible  pit,  and  set  their  feet  upon 
a  rock,  and  established  their  goings.  I  wish  I  had 
an  angel's  tongue,  or  could  sound  a  trumpet  that 
would  be  heard  right  round  this  world.  How 
loudly  then  would  I  proclaim  the  glad  tidings 
that  God  has  in  store  for  needy  ones  everything 
they  want !  No  sinner  needs  to  die  of  famine ;  for 
there  is  no  famine  in  this  land  of  gracej  no 
traveler  through  this  world  needs  to  die  of  thirst, 
for  the  well  is  deep,  and  it  eternally  springs  up ; 
no  sinner  needs  to  starve,  for  the  oxen  and  fatlings 
are  killed,  all  things  are  ready,  and  the  gospel 
message  is,  "  Come  ye  and  eat  of  my  supper." 
God  grant  that,  knowing  how  bountifully  all  these 


HO!    HO!  151 

things  are  provided,  we  may  none  of  us  keep  back, 
turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  general  call,  refuse  the 
special  invitation,  slight  the  grace,  or  scorn  the 
gospel. 

11.  Observe,  secondly,  that  the  gospel  provisions 

ARE  FREE  TO  ALL  THIRSTY  SOULS. 

Do  notice  the  words  of  the  text — "  Ho !  "  That 
is  like  the  cry  of  a  salesman  at  a  fair.  He  calls 
out  to  passers  by,  "  Ho  !  look !  listen  !  turn  hither  ! 
Here  is  a  bargain;  something  worth  your  atten- 
tion ! "  So  God  condescends,  as  it  were,  to  put  it 
to  those  who  are  busy  with  this  world's  cares,  its 
business  and  its  barter,  its  buying  and  selling. 
Ho !  ho  !  ho !  here  is  something  worth  your  mind- 
ing, ye  that  would  be  rich  at  little  cost,  ye  that  are 
in  want,  ye  that  are  in  need,  ye  that  would  find 
something  that  shall  exactly  meet  your  case.  Ho  ! 
— this  is  the  gospel  note;  a  short,  significant  appeal 
urging  you  to  be  wise  enough  to  attend  to  your 
own  interests.  Oh,  the  condescension  of  God ! 
that  he  should  as  it  were  become  a  beggar  to  his 
own  creature,  and  stoop  from  the  magnificence  of 
his  glory  to  cry,  "  Ho  !  "  to  foolish  and  ungrateful 
men! 

Notice  the  next  word,  "  Ho!  every  one;'"  not  some 
of  you  that  thirst,  but  every  one — you  rich  ones, 
you  poor  ones,  you  great  men,  you  little  men,  you 
old  people,  you  young  folks — "  Ho  !  every  one  that 
thirsteth."  Now,  it  does  not  say,  "  Every  one, 
except — except — except — "  No,  no.  Here  is  an 
amnesty  published  without  exception  or  exemp- 


152  STORM   SIGNALS. 

tion.  Here  is  an  invitation  given  to  every  long- 
ing-, thirsty  one,  and  not  a  single  name  struck  out. 
*'  Ho !  every  one  that  thirsteth.." 

And  then  it  is  added  ^'come."  Not  '*  make  your- 
selves ready,"  not  "  bring  your  money,"  or  '*  prove 
your  title,"  but  "  come  !  "  Come  just  as  you  are. 
The  coming  is  believing,  trusting.  Believe,  trust, 
then,  while  you  are  as  you  are;  rely  upon  Christ; 
come  to  the  waters;  come  now.  Read  the  invita- 
tion for  yourselves;  it  is  written  in  the  present 
tense.  Obey  the  summons;  come,  come  at  once. 
Come.  What  though  you  have  no  money,  you 
may  come  and  take  a  drink,  for  it  is  freely  pro- 
vided for  you.  As  I  walked  over  a  long  sandy  road 
one  day  last  week,  when  the  weather  was  sultry, 
and  the  Iieat,  far  beyond  our  common  experience 
in  this  country,  was  almost  tropical,  I  saw,  a  little 
stream  of  cool  water,  and  being  parched  with  thirst 
I  stooped  down  and  drank.  Do  you  think  I  asked 
anybody's  leave  or  inquired  whether  I  might  drink 
or  not  ?  I  didn't  know  who  it  belonged  to,  and  I 
didn't  care.  There  it  was,  and  I  felt  if  it  was  there 
it  was  enough  for  me.  Nobody  was  there  to  call 
out  "  Ho  !  "  My  inward  craving  called  out  "  Ho !  " 
I  was  thirsty,  and  water  was  there  inviting  to  my 
taste.  I  noticed  after  I  had  drank  that  there  were 
two  poor  tramps  came  along,  and  they  went  down 
and  drank  in  like  manner.  I  didn't  iind  anybody 
marching  them  off  to  prison.  There  was  the 
stream.  The  stream  being  there,  and  the  thirsty 
men  being  there,  the  supply  was  suited  to  their 


HO!    HO!  153 

need,  and  they  promptly  partook  of  it.  How 
strange  it  is  that  when  God  has  provided  the  gos- 
pel, and  men  want  it,  they  should  require  some- 
body to  call  out  to  them,  "  Ho  !  ho !  ho!  "  and  then 
they  will  not  come  after  all.  Oh  !  if  they  were  a 
little  more  thirsty,  if  they  did  but  know  their  need 
more,  if  they  were  convinced  more  of  their  sin, 
then  they  would  scarcely  want  an  invitation,  but 
the  mere  fact  of  a  supply  would  be  sufficient  for 
them,  and  they  would  come  and  drink,  and  satisfy 
the  burning  thirst  within. 

Now,  although  the  gospel  provision  is  free  to  all 
thirsty  souls,  there  are  many  who  cannot  believe 
this.  Some  cannot  believe  in  it  because  they  stum- 
ble at  the  doctrines.  What  doctrine  aifrights  thee, 
dear  friend  ?  Is  it  the  doctrine  of  election  ?  Well 
now,  I  believe  the  doctrine  of  election.  I  thank 
God  I  do.  It  is  a  precious  doctrine,  and  let  me  tell 
you,  dear  friend,  that  the  doctrine  of  election  shuts 
nobody  out,  though  it  shuts  a  great  many  in. 
*'  But  I  may  not  come  and  trust  Christ."  How  do 
you  know  ?  God  says  you  may,  and  he  tells  you 
you  shall ;  in  fact,  he  says,  "  He  that  believeth  not 
is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath  not  be- 
lieved," thus  making  it  a  sin  not  to  believe;  so  you 
really  have  such  a  right  to  believe  that  it  becomes 
even  your  duty.  Whatever  the  doctrine  of  elec- 
tion may  be,  or  may  be  meant  to  be,  we  will  not 
talk  of  that  just  at  present,  for  it  is  quite  certain  that 
it  cannot  contradict  any  plain-practical  direction  of 
Scripture.     Here  is  a  plain  text,  which  no  one  can 


154  STORM   SIGNALS. 

gainsay.  "  Whosoever  believeth  in  him  is  not  con- 
demned." If,  then,  you  believe  on  Jesus  Christ, 
you  are  not  condemned,  election  or  no  election. 
But  let  me  tell  you,  if  you  believe  in  Christ  you 
are  one  of  his  elect,  and  it  is  because  he  elected 
you  that  you  come  to  believe  in  him;  it  is  because 
he  chose  you  that  you  are  led  to  desire  him  and 
made  to  accept  him.  Let  not  that  doctrine  ever 
terrify  you,  or  provoke  your  distrust,  for  if  yon 
rightly  understand  the  revelation,  it  is  rather  a 
finger  beckoning  to  Christ  than  a  specter  that 
should  intimidate  you,  or  drive  you  away  from 
him. 

Then  your  spirit  of  legality  will  tell  you  that  the 
gospel  is  not  free  to  you.  AVhy  not  ?  Oh  !  be- 
cause you  are  not  fit  to  receive  it.  This,  I  say, 
is  a  spirit  of  legality,  and  is  clearly  contrary  to  the 
gospel.  There  is  no  fitness  wanted  to  receive 
Christ.  You  see  men  go  to  wash.  What  is  the 
fitness  for  washing?  Why,  to  be  dirty,  and  that 
is  no  fitness.  All  the  fitness  a  sinner  can  have  for 
Christ  is  simply  to  need  Christ.  If  you  are  empty 
you  are  fit  for  Christ,  and  he  will  come  and  heal 
you.  If  you  are  poor  you  are  fit  for  Christ  to 
make  vou  rich;  he  that  is  sick  is  fit  for  a 
physician ;  he  that  is  needy  is  fit  for  pity ;  he 
that  is  guilty  is  fit  for  mercy.  I  beseech  you  get 
rid  of  that  pestilent  and  soul-destroying  idea  of 
fitness  for  Christ.  You  cannot  come  to  God  as  you 
are,  but  you  may  come  to  the  Saviour  as  you  are. 
All  black  and  unwashed  you  may  come  and  wash 


HO!    HO!  155 

in  the  fountain  which  he  has  opened.  Let  nothing 
then,  by  way  of  legality,  make  you  think  that  the 
gospel  provisions  are  not  free  to  you. 

But  what  if  your  unbelief  should  tell  you  that 
the  provisions  of  grace  are  not  for  you  because  you 
have  been  such  a  great  sinner  ?  Did  not  Jesus 
come  into  the  world  to  save  the  very  greatest  of 
sinners?  "  All  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall 
be  forgiven  unto  men."  You  may  have  soared 
as  high  as  the  mountains  in  your  sin,  but  God's 
flood,  like  that  of  Noah,  can  go  over  the  tops  of 
all  your  iniquities.  Do  not  limit  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel  by  your  unbelief.  Believe  him,  and  you 
shall  be  forgiven,  even  though  you  were  worse 
than  you  are. 

Ah,  brethren !  whatever  the  devil  may  say,  and 
whatever  your  irritated  conscience  may  say 
against  the  freeness  of  God's  mercy,  I  tell  you  sol- 
emnly it  is  as  free  to  every  thirsty  one  as  the 
drinking  fountain  in  the  street  corner;  as  free  as 
the  air  that  blows  over  the  mountain  and  into 
the  valleys;  free  to  every  lung  that  breathes. 
So  free  is  the  mercy  of  God.  God  stints  not  his 
mercy  when  men  need  it.  Be  they  but  thirsty,  let 
them  but  long  for  it,  and  they  shall  have  it.  If 
there  be  any  diflSculty  it  is  on  their  part,  not  on 
God's  part.  You  are  not  straitened  in  him ;  you  are 
straitened  in  yourselves.  Oh!  guilty  sinners,  if  ye 
find  not  mercy  it  is  not  because  God  is  unwilling 
to  give,  but  because  you  will  not  trust  him,  be- 
cause you  will  not  think  that  he  can  save  you. 


156  STORM   SIGNALS. 

The  prodigal  never  could  have  believed  his  father's 
heart  to  be  so  kind  as  it  was,  had  he  not  tried 
and  proved  it.  Come  and  try  my  Master's  heart. 
I  tell  you  he  will  blot  out  your  sins  like  a  cloud, 
and  your  transgressions  like  a  thick  cloud.  Only 
do  rest  on  him,  and  you  shall  find  him  better 
than  ever  you  dreamed  him  to  be.  As  for  my 
words,  they  cannot  set  him  forth.  They  fall  flat 
to  the  ground.  May  you  be  brought  to  try  him, 
and  you  will  be  safe  to  find  that  he  is  a  mighty 
Saviour. 

The  provisions  of  grace  must  be  free  to  thirsty 
ones,  ivliy  else  were  they  provided  ?  Wherefore 
should  there  be  a  Saviour  for  sinners  if  God  will 
not  give  salvation  to  sinners  ?  Why  those  wounds, 
why  that  bloody  sweat,  why  that  thorn  crown, 
why  those  expiring  throes,  if  still  God  will  not  re- 
ceive sinners?  The  dying  Saviour  is  the  best  an- 
swer to  the  cavilings  of  unbelievers.  He  must  be 
willing  to  forgive  who  spared  not  his  own  Son. 
If  the  gospel  were  not  free  to  thirsty  ones,  where- 
fore is  it  published  ?  If  it  were  not  meant  for  you, 
why  are  we  bidden  to  tell  it  you,  and  to  continue 
sounding  it  in  your  ears?  If  it  were  meant  for  a 
few  in  a  corner,  why  publish  it  in  the  streets  ? 
Why  gather  the  crowds  together,  as  we  are  bound 
to  do,  and  find  out  those  in  the  highways  and 
hedges,  with  a  mandate  to  compel  them  to  come 
in?  Why  do  all  this  if  God  intends  to  bar  the 
door  in  their  faces?  The  very  fact  that  the  gospel 
is  preached  to  the  sinner  is  God's  love -token  that 


HO!   HO!  157 

he  will  accept  you  if  you  will  come  to  him.  Why 
a  mercy-seat?  Why  are  you  allowed  to  pray,  why 
are  you  bidden  to  pray,  if  God  will  not  hear  ? 
This  were  a  mockery  of  which  you  cannot  accuse 
God,  that  he  should  encourage  a  sinner  to  pray 
with  no  intention  of  hearing  him.  Let  me  ask  you 
again — how  is  it  that  others  have  found  God's 
mercy  so  free  when  they  have  come  and  trusted 
Christ?  Why  that  multitude  in  heaven,  all  once 
as  guilty  as  you  are,  but  all  having  washed  their 
robes  in  the  precious  blood  ?  Why  those  on  earth 
who  have  found  peace?  They  had  naught  to  re- 
commend them  any  more  than  you  have.  They 
will  all  tell  you  that  they  came  just  as  they  were, 
in  all  their  rags  and  beggary,  and  Jesus  did  not 
reject  them.  No,  glory  be  to  his  name,  he  received 
us  freely.  Come,  then  fellow  sinners,  come  !  May 
the  eternal  spirit  draw  you  now.  Even  now  come 
ye  to  the  waters.  Though  you  have  no  money 
and  no  price,  and  no  goodness,  come  and  rest  in 
Jesus  and  find  everlasting  life.  "  Ho,  every  one 
that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters."  That  is  my 
message.  There  is  your  welcome.  Come;  do 
come.  So  my  errand  will  speed.  So  your  souls 
will  be  blest.  So  God's  name  will  be  glorified. 
Amen. 


^  Caution  for  $mmk  $aute. 

**  When  Ephraini  saw  his  sickness,  and  yudah  saw  his  wounds 
then  went  Ephraini  to  the  Assyrian,  and  sent  to  King  Jareb:  yet 
could  he  not  heal  you,  nor  cure  you  ofyourwound.''^ — HoSEA  v.  13. 

THERE  is  a  tendency  in  the  heart  of  man  to 
want  something  to  look  at  rather  than  some- 
thing to  trust  to.  The  children  of  Israel  had  God 
for  their  King,  and  a  glorious  King  he  was. 
Where  else  was  there  found  such  impartial  justice, 
such  tender  compassion  for  the  poor,  or  such  per- 
fect righteousness  in  every  statute  that  was  or- 
dained, and  every  sentence  that  was  enforced  ? 
But  they  said,  "  Nay,  let  us  have  a  king  whom  we 
can  see — a  king  whose  pomp  and  magnificence 
shall  dazzle  our  senses,  though  he  take  our  sons  to 
be  his  bondslaves,  and  our  daughters  to  be  his  con- 
fectionaries.  Let  us  have  a  king,  that  we  may  see 
the  gaudy  glitter  of  his  crown  with  our  eyes,  and 
hear  the  sovereign  mandate  of  his  throne  with  our 
ears."  God  granted  them  that  request.  Their  sole 
allegiance  was  due  to  that  almighty  King  whose 
superlative  glory  admitted  of  no  natural  simili- 
tude. The  Lord  Jehovah  was  the  God  of  Israel — a 
God  ever  ready  to  forgive  their  sins,  to  hear  their 


A    CAUTION  FOR    SIN-SICK   SOULS.  159 

prayers,  and  seek  their  welfare.     But  the  children 
of  Israel  said,  "Not  so;  let  ns  make  a  king  to  judge 
us,  like  all  the  nations:  and  let  us  set  up  gods,  after 
the  fashion   of  the   Gentiles,   that  our  hands  can 
handle,  and  that  our  eyes  can  behold.     Let  us  have 
blocks  of  wood  and  stone.     Let  us  have  the  carved 
images  of  the  heathen."     Neither  would  they  rest 
till  they  had  set  up  for  themselves  in  every  high 
place  gods  that  were  no  gods.     For  this  the  Lord 
chastised  them.     He  gave  up  their  lands  to  famine, 
and  their  habitations  to  the  spoiler.     He  brought 
enemies  from  far  countries  to  lay  them  waste,  so 
that  the  state  became  sick,  and  the  whole  nation 
impoverished.     Then  the  people  of  Ephraim  opened 
their   eyes   and    looked   to   their   condition.     But 
when   Judah   saw   himself  to    be   wounded   what 
course  did  he  pursue  ?     There  was  God  ready  to 
help    him    when   he   returned   to    his   allegiance. 
There  was  Jehovah  ready  to  heal  all  his  distresses, 
to  give  him  back  all  he  had  laid  waste,  and  to  restore 
to  him  everything  that  the  spoiler  had  taken.     But 
no  1  the  arm  of  Jehovah  was  not  enough  for  Judah; 
Judah  must  rely  upon  a  force  that  could  look  im- 
posing with  its  array.     "  Oh  !  "  said  the  people,  "let 
us  send  to  the  king^  of  Assyria,  and  let  him  furnish 
us  with  tens  of  thousands  of  soldiers,  and  aid  us 
with  his  mighty  men,  so  we  shall  be  safe.     Thus 
will  our   state   recover   itself"     But   if  they   had 
trusted    in    God,    my    brethren,    how    secure    they 
would  have  been !     Mark  what  God  did  for  them 
in   the   days  of  Hezekiah.     Their   enemies   came 


160  STORM   SIGNALS. 

upon  them  in  great  numbers.  Hezekiah  prayed 
before  the  Lord.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  night 
God  sent  forth  the  blast  of  his  nostrils,  and  they 
were  utterly  destroyed.  When  the  men  of  Judah 
arose  early  in  the  morning,  behold  they  were  all 
dead  corpses !  As  often  as  they  trusted  in  God 
they  found  immediate  succor,  and  their  enemies 
were  put  to  confusion.  But  not  so  was  their  heart 
stayed  in  its  confidence.  No ;  the  unseen  arm  they 
cannot  rely  upon.  They  must  have  men  and  men's 
devices.  They  must  have  something  they  can  see. 
Unless  they  have  the  spear,  and  the  sword,  and  the 
shield  of  the  Assyrian  state  they  can  feel  no  sense 
of  security.  "  They  went  to  the  Assyrian  king, 
they  sent  to  King  Jareb,  yet  could  he  not  heal 
them,  nor  cure  them  of  their  wound."  How  fool- 
ish they  were  to  hope  he  would,  for  as  soon  as  they 
sent  their  ambassadors  to  the  king  of  Assyria,  he 
flattered  himself  while  he  spoke  to  them,  "  Oh,  you 
want  help,  do  you  ?  I  will  send  you  some  soldiers 
to  help  you."  Remember  their  houses  had  been 
stripped  of  all  the  gold  and  silver  they  contained 
to  give  a  present  to  the  king  of  Assyria.  '*  I  will 
send  my  soldiers  to  help  you,"  said  he  to  them;  and 
then  he  whispered  to  himself,  "After  they  have 
helped  you,  they  shall  help  themselves."  And  so 
they  did.  When  they  had  come,  and  for  a  little 
while  had  fought  for  the  people  of  Israel,  and  set 
them  free,  then  they  turned  round  upon  them,  and 
carried  them  captive,  and  spoiled  them  of  all  they 
had.     This  comes  of  trusting  in  man.     "Cursed  is 


A    CAUTION  FOR   SIN-SICK  SOULS.  161 

he  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm ; 
but  blessed  is  he  who  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  and 
whose  God  the  Lord  is." 

Looking  at  this  fallacy  of  a  nation  as  illustrative 
of  a  common  tendency  of  mankind,  and  using  my 
text  as  the  picture  of  a  sinner  in  a  certain  peculiar 
state  of  mental  anxiety,  I  shall  observe,  first,  tlie 
sinner  s  partial  discovery  of  Ms  lost  estate;  secondly, 
the  lorong  means  tvhich  he  takes  to  he  cured  of  his  evil; 
after  which  I  will  endeavor  to  direct  you,  as  God 
shall  enable  me,  to  the  right  means  of  folding  healing 
and  deliverance  through  the  atonement  and  obedi- 
ence of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

We  have  in  our  text  somewhat  of  a  picture  of 
the  sinner  when  he  has  partially  discovered  his 
lost  estate.  Mark,  it  is  but  a  partial  discovery. 
Ephraim  felt  his  sickness,  but  he  did  not  know 
the  radical  disease  that  lurked  within.  He  saw 
the  local  ailment,  but  was  ignorant  of  the  organic 
derangement  that  played  on  his  vitals.  He  only 
perceived  the  symptoms;  he  was  uneasy,  he  felt 
pain;  but  the  discovery  did  not  go  deep  enough  to 
show  him  that  he  was  actually  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins.  He  saw  his  sickness,  and  Judah  saw 
his  wound.  Yes,  he  saw  his  wound;  it  smarted; 
and  therefore  his  eye  was  drawn  to  the  spot.  But 
he  did  not  know  how  deep  it  was;  he  did  not  know 
that  it  had  pierced  to  the  heart,  that  it  was,  in  fact 
a  deathblow;  that  the  whole  head  was  sick,  that 
the  whole  heart  was  faint,  and  that  from  the  crown 
of  the  head  even  to  the  sole  of  the  foot  it  was  all 


1G2  STORM  SIGNALS. 

wounds  and  bruises,  and  putrefying  festering  sores. 
There  was  but  a  partial  discovery  of  his  lost  estate. 
How  many  men  there  are  who  have  got  just 
far  enough  to  know  there  is  sometliing  the  matter 
with  them  ?  They  little  reck  that  they  are  totally 
ruined,  though  they  do  feel  that  it  is  not  all  quite 
right  with  them.  They  are  conscious  that  they 
are  not  perfect — not  even  up  to  their  own  low 
standard  of  rectitude;  hence  they  begin  to  be  un- 
easy, albeit  they  still  seem  to  think  they  can  make 
themselves  better,  and  that  by  degrees  of  reforma- 
tion and  daily  prayer  they  will  become  superior  to 
what  they  are.  They  have  not  yet  learned  the 
doctrine  of  the  Fall,  the  deep  depravity  of  man- 
kind, the  total  perversion  of  the  human  heart; 
they  have  only  got  so  far  as  some  modern  ministers, 
who  speak  of  man  as  being  a  little  marred,  but  not 
entirely  broken;  as  having  had  a  fall,  and  become 
somewhat  damaged,  and  rather  spoiled,  as  to  out- 
ward beauty,  though  not  altogether  ruined,  or  in- 
capable of  raising  himself  up  and  recovering  his 
strength.  In  fact,  the  fashionable  phrase  that  has 
been  recently  coined  is,  "  the  lapsed  state  of  men." 
Depend  upon  it,  when  men  use  latinized  words  to 
express  their  meaning  they  do  not  mean  much. 
The  fall  of  man  is  full  and  entire;  and  when  people 
frame  certain  phrases  of  rather  uncertain  signifi- 
cance instead  of  talking  honest  English,  they  show 
a  disposition  to  dispense  with  the  bare  facts.  I 
know  there  are  some  sinners  brought  so  far  as  to 
find  themselves  undone,  and  to  feel  convinced  that 


A    CAUTION  FOR    SIN-SICK  SOULS.  163 

unless  some  change  takes  place  they  are  not  fit  for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  they  have  not  yet 
seen  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  of  their  de- 
pravity broken  up :  they  have  not  been  taken  into 
the  chambers  of  imagery,  and  shown  the  abomina- 
tions of  their  own  hearts.  They  still  cling  wnth 
some  hope  to  their  own  devices.  However,  I  would 
remark  that  even  this,  though  it  be  but  a  partial 
discovery  of  their  state  by  nature,  is  not  without 
its  good  efiects.  When  a  man  gets  thus  far,  the 
first  good  sign  in  him  is  that  he  cannot  speak 
against  religion.  While  he  is  at  peace  with  him- 
self, he  calls  religious  men  hypocrites.  He  can 
rail  at  the  things  of  God,  and  despise  and  trample 
them  under  foot.  But  the  man  who  is  like  Eph- 
raim  in  our  text  will  not  be  very  anxious  to  find 
fault  with  others;  his  philosopher's  tongue  has 
been  plucked  out,  and  he  is  now  a  little  more 
gentle  in  his  speech,  as  he  sighs  for  something  in 
religion  that  he  would  like  to  have.  *'  Oh,"  says 
he,  "  I  do  not  find  fault  with  the  good  folks  who 
are  always  praying  and  singing  now.  Would  to 
God  I  could  become  like  they  arej  Would  that  I 
had,  as  they  have,  an  interest  in  the  blood  of 
Christ !  "  So  far,  so  good.  Such  men,  again,  are 
generally  thoughtful.  I  have  known  many  a  man 
who,  before  he  came  into  this  state,  was  a  very 
dare-devil,  and  never  thought  anything  with  regard 
to  his  soul  and  eternity;  yet,  when  brought  to 
know  his  sickness  and  his  wounds,  he  has  become 
not  only  thoughtful  but  serious,  until  some  of  his 


104  STORM   SIGNALS. 

former  companions  have  remarked  it,  and  called 
him  ''  Old  Sober  Sides,"  or  some  such  epithet,  and 
laughed  him  out  of  countenance.  They  tell  him  he 
is  a  saint.  The  man  says,  "  I  wish  what  you  are 
saying  was  true."  They  tell  him,  "You  are  be- 
ginning to  be  religious."  "  Yes,"  he  says,  "  I  wish 
I  were  really  so."  Som-e  man  once  called  me  a 
saint  as  I  went  along  the  street,  and  I  turned 
round  and  said  I  wished  I  could  make  him  prove  his 
words.  I  would  like  to  be  one  certainly.  Such  is 
the  condition  of  a  man  when  he  begins  to  discover, 
though  it  be  but  partially,  his  lost  estate.  He  is 
thoughtful;  he  cannot  laugh  as  he  did;  he  does 
not  now  shut  his  eyes,  and  throw  the  reins  upon 
the  neck  of  his  lusts,  and  let  them  rush  madly  on 
down  to  the  pit;  but  he  tries  to  curb  them,  and 
hold  them  in  with  bit  and  bridle,  for  he  knows 
that  all  is  not  right  within  him.  Such  a  man,  too, 
has  another  good  trait,  another  hopeful  feature  in 
his  case — that  he  begins  to  attend  to  the  things 
that  belong  to  the  peace  of  his  soul.  You  see  him 
now  coming  into  the  house  of  God — be  it  chapel 
or  church — to  hear  the  word  preached.  He  never 
cared  for  that  before.  He  worked  so  hard  all  the 
week  that  he  was  not  able  to  go  out  on  a  Sunday; 
but  now  he  feels  he  must  go.  He  must  be  by  the 
side  of  Bethesda's  pool.  Even  though  the  angel 
stir  not  the  water,  he  feels  a  kind  of  satisfaction 
while  he  is  lying  at  the  edge  of  the  healing  pool. 
He  longs  to  be  saved,  and  therefore  he  is  found  in 
the  way,    hoping  that  God  may  meet  with   him. 


A    CAUTION  FOR    SIN-SICK   SOULS.  165 

Such  a  man,  too,  you  will  find,  takes  no  pleasure 
in  sin.  If  he  is  asked  by  his  worldly  companions 
to  go  into  the  haunts  of  vice,  where  once  he  went, 
even  should  he  go,  he  comes  away  and  says,  "  It 
was  the  dullest  evening  I  ever  spent:  no  enjoy- 
ment whatever  does  it  yield  me.  God  has  turned 
the  sweet  wine  of  my  memory  into  bitter  gall. 
Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity.  I  can  find  no 
comfort  in  sensual  pleasures." 

Have  I  been  depicting  the  state  of  one  who  is 
here  present  V  I  hope  1  have,  and  I  pray  God  that 
what  I  shall  be  able  to  say  will,  by  the  influence  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  be  instrumental  in  leading  such  an 
one  to  the  true  remedy  for  his  soul. 

But  when  the  man  is  thus  partially  aroused  to 
know  his  lost  estate,  he  usually  betakes  himself 
to  the  wrong  means  for  deliverance.  "Then  went 
Ephraim  unto  Assyria,  and  sent  to  King  Jareb."  A 
sinner  when  he  finds  himself  lost  usually  at  first 
thinks,  "  I  will  make  myself  better,  I  will  be  dili- 
gent in  religious  observances,  I  will  attend  to  every 
ceremony,  I  will  keep  my  tongue  from  evil  and  my 
lips  from  speaking  guile ;  I  will  restrain  my  steps 
from  evil  haunts,  my  hands  from  evil  deeds,"  and 
so  he  thinks  within  himself  that  all  his  sins  will 
be  forgiven,  and  that  he  shall  have  rest  for  the 
sole  of  his  foot.  Be  it  known  once  for  all  that  all 
this  is  a  vain  and  useless  effort  to  work  out  a 
radical  cure  in  the  soul  of  man.  All  that  man  can 
do  apart  from  faith  in  the  blood  and  righteousness 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  utterlv  in  vain.     Let  him  do  his 


166  STORM   SIGNALS. 

best,  and  strive  to  the  very  uttermost,  not  one 
inch  has  he  proceeded  on  the  road  to  heaven;  he 
hath  done  inisciiief  instead  of  doing  anything 
meritorious;  he  hath  pulled  down  instead  of  hav- 
ing built  up.  0,  ye  that  are  hoping  now,  while 
ye  are  under  conviction,  that  you  will  get  relief 
by  doings  of  your  own,  let  me  remind  you  that 
you  are  undertaking  a  long  task  which  will  tax 
your  endurance.  These  men  in  our  text  went  a 
very  long  way  to  the  king  of  Assyria;  it  was  a 
wearisome  journey  they  took,  while  God,  who  was 
near  at  hand,  was  forgotten.  How  long  do  you 
suppose  it  would  take  you  to  work  out  your  own 
salvation  by  your  own  good  works  ?  Why,  my 
friends,  ye  may  bend  your  knees  till  your  joints 
grow  stiff,  and  ye  may  work  till  there  is  no  flesh 
upon  your  bones,  and  ye  may  weep  till  there  is  no 
moisture  in  your  body  from  which  to  draw  a  tear, 
and  ye  may  persevere  incessantly  in  every  exercise 
of  body  and  mind,  trying  fresh  postures  and  tri- 
fling with  fresh  problems;  but  still  pursuing  with- 
out progress  till  you  find  yourselves  not  half  a 
league  nearer  eternal  life  than  when  you  left  the 
life  of  sin  you  used  to  like. 

'*  Not  the  labor  of  my  hands 
Can  fulfill  the  law's  demands. 
Could  my  zeal  no  respite  know, 
Could  my  tears  forever  flow, 
All  for  sin  could  not  atone ; 
Thou  must  save,  and  thou  alone." 

If  a  criminal  sliould  get  it  into  his  head  that  he 
would  climb  up  to  the  stars  by  going  up  the  steps 


A    CAUTION  FOR    SIN-SICK  SOULS.  167 

of  a  tread-mill,  he  would  be  about  as  rational  as 
when  a  poor  sinner  thinks  of  getting  to  heaven  by 
his  works.  Tread,  tread,  tread;  up,  up,  up;  but 
never  one  inch  higher.  As  old  Matthew  Wilks 
used  to  say,  you  might  as  well  hope  to  sail  to 
America  on  a  sere  leaf  as  hope  to  go  to  heaven  by 
your  own  doings.  This  is  not  the  way,  man ;  and 
run  never  so  fast  in  it,  if  it  is  not  the  right  road,  it 
will  not  bring  you  to  the  right  end.  If  a  man  take 
a  road  to  the  right,  and  wants  to  go  to  the  left,  he 
may  run  as  fast  as  a  race-horse,  he  will  but  lose  his 
labor,  and  find  out  that  he  is  a  fool  for  his  pains. 
And  it  is  not  only  a  very  long  task,  but  it  is  a  very 
expensive  one.  If  you  would  have  salvation  by 
the  works  of  the  law,  you  must  give  body  and 
soul  up,  all  you  have — hope  and  joy  and  comfort 
included.  I  used  to  live  near  some  persons  who 
regularly  attended  mass  early  every  morning,  and 
I  noticed  how  straight  they  used  to  look  down  the 
face.  I  thought  they  had  good  reason  to  be 
gloomy  if  they  were  trying  to  reach  heaven  by 
their  own  righteousness.  It  is  enough  to  put  any 
man  out  of  countenance  if  he  has  to  stand  before 
God  and  justify  himself  We  might  put  our  hands 
upon  o-ur  loins,  and  roll  in  the  dust  in  despair,  if 
we  have  no  hope  but  in  our  own  deserts.  Go  and 
look  for  cooling  streams  in  the  arid  desert;  cast 
about  for  fresh  water  to  drink  in  the  midst  of  the 
sea;  seek  shelter  on  the  mountain  top  where  the 
hurricane  is  spending  its  fury,  and  then  crave  for 
comfort  in  the  law.     Go  and  visit  Sinai,    ye  that 


108  STORM   SIGNALS. 

seek  to  be  saved  by  your  works.  Look  at  it, 
shrink,  tremble,  and  despair.  Behold,  the  moun- 
tain is  altogether  on  a  smoke  while  God  proclaims 
the  law  !  If  it  melted  like  wax  of  old,  how  much 
more  now,  after  you  have  broken  the  command- 
ments and  incurred  the  penalty — now  that  God 
corneth  not  to  proclaim  the  law,  but  to  execute 
his  fierce  anger  upon  the  law-breakers  !  "  Well," 
says  one,  ''  but  suppose  we  do  our  best,  will  not 
that  suffice  ? "  My  friend,  God  requireth  from 
man,  if  he  would  be  saved  by  his  works,  perfect 
obedience;  nothing  but  perfection  can  be  accept- 
able to  a  perfect  God.  One  wrong  thought,  one 
evil  desire — not  to  say  anything  of  one  wrong  act 
— will  effectually  shut  any  man  out  of  heaven,  if 
he  desireth  to  go  there  by  his  works.  That  one 
sin  at  once  puts  up  an  impenetrable  barrier  across 
that  meritorious  way  to  heaven  which  is  known  by 
the  common  name  of  "the  law."  If  thou  canst  be 
perfect,  and  hast  kept  the  precepts  from  thy  youth 
up,  and  shalt  do  so  till  thy  dying  day,  then  might 
there  be  salvation  by  works.  But  if  there  be  one 
flaw,  then  is  that  road  to  heaven  effectually  stopped 
up,  so  that  no  human  foot  can  ever  tread  it. 

And  once  more,  let  me  remind  thee,  0  man,  when 
thou  tryest  to  be  saved  by  thy  works,  thou  presum- 
est  that  thy  enemy  will  prove  thy  friend.  "  And 
who  is  my  enemy?"  sayest  thou.  Why  Moses. 
The  law  is  sworn  against  thee.  It  hath  become 
thine  enemy,  and  goest  thou  to  thine  enemy  to  help 
thee  ?     It  is  a  device  of  Satan  to  try  and  draw  poor 


A    CAUTION  FOR    SIN-SICK'  SOULS.  160^ 

sinners  away  from  the  path  of  faith  into  the  path  of 
the  law.     Remember  how  John  Bunyan  graphically 
describes  it.     Poor  Christian,  with  the  burden  on 
his  back,  is  going  to  the  wicket  gate  with  the  light 
above  it,  and  on  a  sudden  a  very  good-looking  gen- 
tleman meets  him,  and  says,^  "  It  is  a  dangerous 
journey  you  are  going,  you  had  better  turn  aside  to 
the  right  there;  there  is  a  town  there  known  as  the 
town  of  Legality,  where  lives  a  very  skillful  phy- 
sician who  will  soon  help  you  ofi'  with  your  burden ; 
and  if  he  is  not  at  home,  he  has  got  a  very  good 
lad  who  will  do  almost  as  well  as  his  master.     Go 
there,  and  you  will  soon  get  cured."     Away  went 
Christian ;  nor  had  he  gone  far  before  he  found  that 
he  had  come  to  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai,  and  the 
mountain  hung  right  over  the  way,  and  there  stood 
Christian;  and  while  he  was  looking  up,  presently 
the  mountain  began  to  shake,  the  thunder  to  roar, 
and  the  lightning  to  flash,  and  he  fell  down  upon 
his  face  and   said,    "  I  am  undone,  I  am  undone. ' 
Then  came  Evangelist  and  showed  him  the  right 
way  once  more.     Just  so,  sinner,  if  you  trust  to  the 
works  of  the  law,  you  will  have  to  cry  out,  "  I  am 
undone,  I  am  undone."     Mr.  Morality  cannot  cure 
you;   he  may  put  on  a  little  poor  man's  plaster, 
and  make  your  wound  worse,  and  tie  it  up  and 
bandage  it  a  little,  but  he  can  never  relieve  your 
pain  or  recover  your  sore.     It  will  go  on  bleeding, 
notwithstanding   all   the   balsams   he   can    apply. 
No  hand  can  heal  a  sin-sick  soul  but  the  hand  that 
wounded  it,  even  the  hand  of  God,  through  the 


170  STORM  SIGNALS, 

person  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  It  is  astonishing, 
after  all  the  gospel-preaching  in  England,  how 
deeply  rooted  is  this  constant  fallacy  of  going  to 
King  Jareb  for  cure.  Not  very  long  ago,  having 
engaged  to  preach  at  a  seaport  town,  I  arrived 
some  hours  before  night,  and,  as  I  was  standing  on 
the  river-side,  I  thought  I  should  like  to  go  down 
the  river  in  a  boat.  So,  hailing  a  waterman,  I 
went  with  him,  and  whilst  sitting  in  the  boat, 
wishing  to  talk  with  him  about  religious  matters, 
I  began  by  asking  him  about  his  family :  he  told 
me  that  the  cholera  had  visited  his  place,  and  that 
he  had  lost  no  less  than  thirteen  of  his  relatives, 
one  after  another,  by  death.  So  I  said,  "  Have  you, 
my  friend,  a  good  hope  of  heaven  if  you  should 
die  yourself?"  "Well,  sir,"  he  said,  "I  think  as 
how  I  have."  "  Pray  tell  me  then,"  said  I,  "  what 
is  your  hope ;  for  of  a  good  hope  no  man  need  ever 
be  ashamed."  "  Well,  sir,  1  have  been  on  this  here 
river,  I  think  for  these  twenty-five  or  thirty  years, 
and  I  don't  know  that  anybody  ever  saw  me 
drunk."  "Oh  dear,  oh  dear,"  I  replied,  "is  that  all 
you  trust  to  ? — is  that  all  ?  "  "  Well,  sir,  when  the 
cholera  was  about,  and  my  poor  neighbors  were 
bad,  I  went  for  the  doctor  for  'em,  and  was  up  a 
good  many  nights;  and  I  do  think  as  how  I  am  as 
good  as  my  neighbors."  Of  course  I  told  him  that 
I  was  very  glad  to  hear  that  he  had  sympathy  for 
the  suffering,  and  that  I  considered  it  far  better  to 
be  charitable  than  to  be  churlish,  but  I  did  not  see 
how  his  good  conduct  could  carry  him  to  heaven. 


A    CAUTION  FOR    STN-SICK  SOULS.         171 

"  Well,  sir,"  he  said,  "  perhaps  it  is  not,  for  I  can- 
not be  often  going  to  church;  but  I  think,  when  I 
get  a  little  older,  I  shall  give  up  the  boat  and  take 
to  going  to  church,  and  then,  I  think,  that  will  be 
right — won't  it,  sir?"  "  No,"  I  said,  "certainly your 
resolutions  will  not  renew  your  heart,  and  should 
you  ever  perform  them,  they  would  not  purge  your 
soul  from  its  sinfulness.  Begin  to  go  to  church  as 
soon  as  possible,  but  you  will  not  be  an  inch  fur- 
ther, if  you  think  that  by  attending  the  sanctuary 
you  will  be  saved."  The  poor  man  seemed  per- 
fectly astounded,  while  I  went  on  knocking  down 
his  hopes  one  after  another.  Then  I  put  the  ques- 
tion, "You  have  sometimes  sinned  in  your  life — 
have  you  not  ?  "  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  I  have.  "  On 
what  ground,  then,  do  you  think  your  sins  will 
be  forgiven  ?  "  "  Well,  sir,"  he  said,  "  I  have  been 
sorry  about  them,  and  1  think  they  are  all  gone — 
they  do  not  trouble  me  now."  Trying  to  rouse  his 
conscience,  I  said,  "  Suppose  you  were  to  go  and 
get  into  debt  with  the  grocer  where  you  deal,  and 
you  should  say  to  her,  '  Now,  mistress,  you  have  a 
score  against  me,  I  cannot  pay  for  these  goods,  I 
am  sorry  to  say;  but  I'll  tell  you  what  I'll  do,  I'll 
never  get  into  your  debt  any  more."  Why,  she 
would  say  that  was  not  the  way  she  did  business. 
And  do  you  suppose  that  that  is  the  way  in  which 
God  does  business,  or  that  he  is  going  to  strike  out 
your  debts  because  you  say  you  will  not  run 
deeper  into  debt  ? "  "  Well,  sir,"  he  said,  "  I 
should  like  to  know  how  my  sins  are  to  be  for- 


172  STORM  SIGNALS. 

given.  Are  you  a  parson,  sir  ?  "  In  reply,  I  said, 
"  I  preach  the  gospel,  I  hope,  but  I  do  not 'go  by 
the  name  of  a  parson;  I  am  only  a  Dissenting 
minister."  I  told  him  how  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
had  paid  the  debts  of  sinners;  how  those  that 
reposed  in  him,  and  rested  in  his  blood  and  right- 
eousness should  find  peace  and  mercy,  and  the 
man  was  delighted,  and  he  said  he  wished  he  had 
heard  that  years  ago.  "  But  to  say  the  truth," 
master,  "he  added,  "I  had  not  felt  quite  easy, 
after  all,  when  I  saw  those  poor  creatures  taken 
away  to  the  graveyard.  I  did  think  there  was 
something  I  wanted,  but  I  did  not  know  what  it 
was."  I  tell  you  this  little  personal  incident  be- 
cause I  see  here  a  great  many  working  people, 
and  I  know  they  delight  in  a  little  homely  dia- 
logue. It  is  not  what  we  do  or  devise,  the  reli- 
gious rites  we  observe  or  the  romantic  aims  we 
aspire  to,  the  self-satisfaction  we  encourage  or  the 
sufferings  we  endure,  that  can  lead  us  to  the  land 
of  light ;  not  all  your  probity,  however  plausible,  or 
your  rectitude,  however  rigid  you  may  be,  will 
carry  you  to  heaven.  Your  good  works  are  good 
enough  in  themselves — good  enough  in  your  gen- 
eration— but  they  will  never  do  for  a  foundation 
to  rest  upon.  Do  not  run  away  and  say  some- 
thing like  the  foolish  man  who  went  to  a  place 
where  there  was  a  house  being  built,  and  seeing 
the  chimney  pots  standing  there,  he  took -them, 
and  laid  them  in  the  trench  to  make  the  foun- 
dation.    ''What    are   you   doing?"   said    one   of 


A    CAUTION  FOR    SIN- SICK  SOULS.  173 

the  workman.  "Why  laying  the  foundation?" 
"What,  with  the  chimney-pots?"  "I  did  not 
know  that  it  was  wrong,"  said  he.  *'  Well  take 
them  away;  they  won't  do  for  a  foundation." 
*'  Oh  ! "  said  the  other,  "  you  are  finding  fault  with 
them."  "No;  I  am  not  finding  fault  with  them, 
but  with  the  place  where  you  put  them ;  they 
are  good  enough  on  the  top,  but  they  will 
not  do  at  the  bottom."  So  with  good  works; 
they  will  do  at  the  top,  but  they  will  not  do  at  the 
bottom.  As  a  foundation  for  the  soul  to  rest  upon 
nothing  will  suffice  but  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
and  his  finished  work.  This  is  our  hope  of  salva- 
tion. Our  good  works  are  good  enough  after- 
wards, when  God  the  Holy  Spirit  by  his  grace 
works  faith,  and  love,  and  all  good  things  in  us. 

What,  then,  you  will  ask,  is  the  way  of  salvation  ? 
Whosoever  will  be  saved,  before  all  things  it  is 
necessary  he  should  know  that  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  came  down  from  heaven,  and  was  for 
our  sin  incarnate  in  human  form,  born  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  lived  a  life  of  sanctity  and  of  suff"er- 
ing;  and  at  last  this  glorious  Son  of  God — this 
grief-stricken  Son  of  man — became  obedient  even 
unto  death.  In  the  garden  he  wrestled,  and  shed, 
as  it  were,  great  drops  of  blood  in  the  prospect  of 
the  coming  terrors  of  his  death-struggle.  To  the 
cross  was  he  nailed,  amidst  shame,  and  ignominy, 
and  scoffing.  There  he  endured  pain  incredible, 
pangs  of  body  and  agony  of  soul.  He  hung  there, 
through  the  thick  darkness,  three  hours:  and  at 


174  STORM  SIGNALS. 

last,  when  the  appointed  time  was  come,  when  he 
had  suffered  all,  when  the  full  chastisement  of  our 
sin  had  been  laid  upon  him,  and  the  iniquity  of  us 
all  had  received  its  dreadful  retribution  at  his  hands 
he  cried,  "  It  is  finished  !  "  Thus  he  gave  up  the 
ghost,  was  laid  in  the  tomb,  and  then  arose  from 
the  dead  on  the  third  day,  and  ascended  to  heaven. 
Now,  if  thou  wouldst  be  saved,  my  friend,  it  is 
necessary  that  thou  believe  in  him  who  was  the 
Son  of  God  and  the  Son  of  man,  and  that  thou 
believe  in  thy  heart  these  things  of  him : — First, 
that  he  is  a  divinely  ordained  Saviour,  able  to  save 
those  that  come  unto  God  through  him.  Thou 
must  believe,  likewise,  that  he  is  willing  to  save, 
and  that  he  will  save  those  that  seek  salvation, 
believing  and  trusting  in  his  power.  When  thou 
hast  believed  this,  thou  hast  gone  a  good  part  of 
the  way  toward  that  saving  faith,  which  shall 
bring  thee  into  a  state  of  grace.  It  is  by  acting 
upon  this  belief,  by  casting  thyself  simply  on  the 
merits  of  his  blood,  and  of  his  perfect  righteous- 
ness, as  the  ground  of  thine  acceptance  before  God, 
that  thou  shalt  lind  peace.  No  man  can  be  saved 
if  he  does  not  trust  his  soul  in  the  hands  of  Christ. 
We  must  give  up  ourselves  from  our  own  keeping 
into  Christ's  keeping,  saying,  "  Lord,  take  me, 
save  me,  make  me  what  thou  wouldst  have  me  to 
be;  and  then,  when  thy  Father  shall  require  my 
soul  at  the  last  day,  stand  thou  my  surety,  and 
bring  me  perfect  and  spotless  into  his  presence." 
I  must  add  one  thing  more — there  must  be  what 


A    CAUTION  FOR   SIN-SICK  SOULS.  175 

the  old  divines  call  a  recumbency,  a  leaning  on 
him,  a  dependency  on  him.  But  here  I  must  warn 
you  that  some  people  have  an  idea  that  if  they  get 
faith  in  Christ  it  matters  not  how  they  live,  or 
what  they  are.  Now,  be  it  understood,  once  for 
all,  we  are  saved  by  faith,  and  not  by  works;  but 
we  must  have  you  know  that  faith  is  not  only  lean- 
ing on  Christ,  but  obeying  Christ.  Suppose  a  case. 
There  is  a  man  who  says  to  me,  "You  have  com- 
mitted such-and-such  an  offence;  you  are  in  such- 
and-such  difficulties;  but  if  you  will  implicitly 
trust  me,  and  leave  the  matter  entirely  in  my 
hands,  I  will  see  that  you  come  through  this 
clearly."  Well  now,  if  1  get  meddling  with  it  that 
will  prove  I  do  not  trust  in  him ;  but  by  and  by  he 
comes  to  me,  and  says,  "  My  dear  friend,  are  you 
trusting  me  wholly?  "  "Yes,"  I  say,  "  I  am  repos- 
ing all  my  trust  in  you."  Suppose  he  says,  "  I 
want  you  to  look  over  this  document,  which  you 
must  sign,  and  then  I  shall  want  you,  on  a  certain 
morning,  to  be  at  such-and-such  a  place."  What 
if  I  answer,  *'  I  shall  do  no  such  thing;  I  will  not 
sign  the  deed  nor  meet  you  by  appointment." 
"Then,"  says  he,  '*you  are  not  trusting  me."  "  I 
was  leaning  on  you  and  trusting,"  I  say.  "  Well !  " 
says  he,  "this  was  not  what  I  meant;  unless  you 
do  what  I  tell  you  your  faith  is  not  genuine  faith, 
neither  are  you  trusting  in  me  at  all."  Now,  if 
you  are  perfectly  trusting  Christ  your  next  ques- 
tion will  be,  "Lord,  I  am  trusting  to  be  saved  by 
thee,  but  how  wilt  thou  have  me  be  saved  ?  "     Oh," 


176  STORM  SIGNALS. 

saith  Christ,  "I  will  save  thee;  but  thou  must 
break  off  those  old  habits."  "  Oh,"  say  you,  "  Lord, 
assist  me  with  thy  grace,  and  I  will  renounce 
■,hem  all."  "  Well,"  saith  Christ,  "  and  if  thou 
wouldst  be  saved,  I  will  have  thee  in  the  next 
place  attend  to  ray  ordinances.  Come  forward 
and  make  a  profession  of  thy  faith;  be  baptized; 
unite  thyself  to  the  Church  visible;  receive  the 
Lord's  Supper."  But  you  say,  "  No,  Lord  !  I  will 
do  no  such  thing."  *'  Well,  then,"  says  he,  "  you 
are  not  trusting  me,  because  whatever  I  tell  you 
to  do  you  ought  to  do  it." 

You  may  have  heard  the  good  illustration  which 
Mr.  Cecil  gives  of  faith.  His  little  child  was 
standing  one  day  at  the  top  of  a  dark  cellar.  She 
was  in  the  light  and  he  was  down  below  in  the 
cellar.  "  My  dear  child,  jump  down,  and  I  will 
catch  you,"  said  he;  and  the  child  without  a 
moment's  thought,  sprang  into  the  father's  arms. 
Now  that  is  one  kind  of  faith;  that  is,  when  we  are 
enabled  so  to  trust  Christ,  that  we  do,  so  to  speak, 
venture  our  souls  on  him,  risk  all  with  him ;  but 
mark,  that  it  is  not  the  complete  picture  of  the 
faith  of  saints.  This  kind  of  faith  some  people 
profess  to  have,  but  their  lives  do  not  bear  out 
their  profession,  and  therefore  there  must  be 
something  else  to  make  it  clear,  and  Mr.  Cecil 
gives  another  illustration  through  the  same  little 
girl.  "  I  said  to  her  one  day  as  she  had  a  neck- 
lace of  beads,  '  My  dear  child,  you  know  I  love  you 
and  you  would   do   anything   I    told   you.     Take 


A    CAUTION  FOR    SIN-SICK   SOULS.  Ill 

those  beads  off  and  throw  thera  into  the  fire.'  She 
iid  so  at  once."  Now  the  first  faith  was  the  faith 
3f  daring,  venturing  herself;  but  the  second  proved 
her  faith  to  be  true  and  genuine,  when  she  could 
obey.  xA.nd  you  will  see  that  faith  and  obedience 
are,  to  some  extent,  one,  so  that  in  the  Greek  lan- 
guage the  same  word  standeth  for  both  faith  and 
obedience.  It  is  impossible  for  thee  to  believe  if 
thou  dost  not  obey.  Some  try,  but  their  faith  is 
worthless.  But  when  we  can  unite  blind  trust 
with  blind  obedience,  we  prove  that  we  are  really 
trusting  in  Christ,  and  then  we  are  safe. 

Oh,  my  dear  hearer,  if  I  have  puzzled  thee  to- 
night instead  of  making  it  plain,  1  can  say  I  did 
not  intend  to  do  so.  I  would  have  thee  to  under- 
stand, if  thou  art  troubled  on  account  of  sin,  that 
God  requires  not  aught  of  thee  but  what  he  gives 
thee.  He  requires  nothing  but  that  thou  shouldst 
depend  for  all  on  Christ.  It  is  all  he  asks  for. 
Do  it.  Oh,  may  his  Holy  Spirit  enable  you  to  do  it 
now !  But  I  will  tell  you  a  parable  which  shall  illus- 
trate faith.  There  were  two  children,  according 
to  the  fable,  walking  with  their  father  along  a  nar- 
row ridge.  On  either  side  there  was  a  dark  deep 
precipice.  One  of  the  dear  children  put  his  band 
inside  the  father's  hand,  and  his  father  grasped 
it.  The  other  put  his  little  fingers  round  his  fa- 
ther's hand  and  took  hold  of  his  father's  hand. 
It  was  not  long  before  in  the  midst  of  the  thick 
darkness  the  children  grew  weary,  and  the  child 
who  had  taken  hold  of  the  father's  hand  perished. 


'1, 


178  STORM  SIGNALS. 


But  the  child  who  had  put  his  hand  into  the 
father's  hand  and  let  the  father  take  hold  of  it  was 
carried  safely  to  the  end.  Now  put  thy  hand  in- 
side the  hand  of  Christ,  and  when  he  bids  thee  to 
obey  take  it  not  away.  Give  thyself  wholly  up  to 
him  to  be  his,  come  life,  come  death,  for  better  or 
for  worse,  to  be  his  to  trust  and  his  to  obey,  being 
from  this  time  forth  his  forever.  Oh,  may  God 
the  Holy  Spirit  lead  us  to  do  this !  It  is  easy 
enough  when  the  Holy  Ghost  enables  us,  but  it  is 
hard  enough  when  our  human  nature  kicks  against 
it.  May  sovereign  grace  our  hearts  subdue,  and 
teach  us  to  depend  on  Christ,  and  no  more  foolishly 
attempt  to  work  out  our  salvation  by  impossible 
means !  I  can  only  pray  that  God  will  bless  this 
brief,  hurried  discourse,  and  to  his  name  shall  be 
the  glory,  through  Christ  Jesus.     Amen. 


Contrition 

"  For  thy  name's  sake,  O  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity;  for  it  is 
greats — Psalm  xxv.  ii. 

THIS  striking  prayer  is  hemmed  in,  as  it  were, 
between  two  promises.  It  looks  like  a  fossil 
embedded  in  a  mass  of  stone.  What  means  it 
there?  Why  is  it  put  in  such  a  peculiar  position? 
The  Psalmist  is  both  praising  and  preaching.  How 
is  it  he  turns  to  praying?  Beloved,  I  think  it  was 
to  teach  us  that  prayer  is  never  out  of  place. 
When  the  Apostle  Paul  was  writing  the  most  doc- 
trinal of  the  Epistles,  he  sometimes  paused  in  the 
midst  of  them  to  offer  a  supplication,  as  when  he 
said — "For  this  cause  I  bow  my  knees  unto  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  When  engaged 
in  any  holy  duties  you  may  even  refrain  from 
praise  for  a  moment  to  present  a  prayer.  Nor 
would  it  be  amiss  for  us  sometimes  to  break  the 
thread  of  a  sermon,  that  the  people  might  pause 
and  join  with  the  preacher  in  asking  God's  bless- 
ing upon  the  message  of  mercy,  and  upon  all  that 
hear  it.  Certainly,  my  dear  friends,  you  will  never 
find  any  time  inopportune  for  prayer,  if  your  heart 
be  true  and  your  faith  in  full  force.     The  Mahom- 


180  STORM   SIGNALS. 

etans  have  their  hour  for  prayer,  and  when  they 
hear  the  signal  from  the  minaret  of  thd  mosque, 
wherever  they  may  be,  in  the  street  or  in  the 
market-place,  they  bow  their  heads  to  Allah,  and 
repeat  their  form  of  prayer.  Without  their  osten- 
tation, you  may  "  pray  everywhere,  lifting  up  holy 
hands  without  wrath  and  doubting."  We  need 
not  be  confined  to  special  seasons  when  a  summons 
is  given,  but  at  all  times,  and  in  every  place,  we 
may  continue  in  prayer,  and  watch  in  the  same 
with  thanksgiving.  When  your  hands  are  measur- 
ing out  your  goods,  when  they  are  pushing  the 
plane,  or  driving  the  nail,  when  you  are  driving 
the  plow,  or  threshing  the  corn,  if  you  are  speed- 
ing along  the  iron  way,  or  walking  among  the 
corn  fields,  your  heart  may  have  fellowship  with 

him 

*'  Who  is  within  no  walls  confined, 
But  habiteth  the  humble  mind," 

who  counts  all  places  holy  where  men  are  holy, 
and  all  spots  places  for  prayer,  when  the  heart 
is  in  a  prayerful  frame.  My  soul,  wait  thou  upon 
God  in  thy  daily  calling,  and  think  not  that  thou 
canst  ever  approach  him  at  any  unreasonable  hour, 
or  lift  up  thy  cry  to  him  when  he  is  otherwise  en- 
gaged, so  that  he  cannot  attend  to  thy  petition. 

Were.it  necessary  to  my  present  purpose  to  ex- 
plain the  connection  of  this  prayer  with  the  scope 
of  the  psalm  it  would  not  be  difficult.  The  promise 
that  the  Psalmist  had  just  recited  is  "to  such  as 
keep  his  covenant."     It  was  the  besetting  sin  of 


CONTRITION.  181 

Israel  to  break  the  covenant.  Do  you  not  see  now 
that  the  tinge  of  a  condition  would  shut  the  door 
of  hope  in  our  face  ?  Therefore,  the  greatness  of 
the  promise  often  stirs  up  our  deepest  anxieties, 
lest  any  of  us  should  seem  to  come  short  of  it. 
Depend  upon  it,  brethren,  that  the  prayer  for 
pardon,  which  is  never  unfitting  at  any  time,  can 
never  be  more  fitting  than  when  our  hearts  are 
lifted  up  with  the  loftiest  apprehensions  of  God's 
covenant.  My  principal  aim,  however,  to-night, 
is  to  bring  my  hearers,  myself,  all  of  us,  to  feel 
with  David,  that  our  iniquity  is  great — for  this  I 
shall  labor.  When  I  have  this  done,  I  shall  very 
briefly  try  to  show  how  the  very  greatness  of  our 
iniquity  may  become  a  plea  with  God:  *' Pardon 
mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great."  And  I  shall  close 
with  some  earnest  entreaties  to  those  who  have 
never  sought  pardon  of  sin  to  seek  it  now. 

I.  Well  then,  first,  David  declared  that  his  ini- 
quity was  great.  The  word  used  in  the  original 
conveys  the  idea  of  quantity  as  well  as  of  quality. 
Not  simply  was  his  sin  great  in  its  atrocity,  but 
there  was  very  much  of  it;  any  one  sin  was  great, 
but  it  was  not  one  but  ten  thousand  times  ten 
thousand  in  multitudes.  His  sin  was  as  great  in 
the  bulk  as  it  was  black  in  its  heinousness.  Now,  I 
do  not  know,  although  David  made  one  very  terri- 
ble fall,  that  any  humble-minded  person  here  would 
consider  himself  to  be  superior  to  David.  He  was 
a  man  after  God's  own  heart,  and  notwithstanding 
a  great  blot  upon  his  sun,  we  would  not  hesitate 


182  STORM   SIGNALS. 

to  say  he  is  a  suii  for  all  that.  For  David  presents 
a  character  so  admirable,  so  all  but  matchless 
in  the  harmony  of  the  different  graces,  that  we 
think  he  certainly  approaches  very  near  to  his 
great  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Certainly,  if 
David  felt  his  iniquity  to  be  great,  it  would  be  very 
foul  presumption  in  any  of  us  to  think  ours  to  be 
little.  At  any  rate,  we  have  to  come  out  and  say, 
*'  I  reckon  mvself  to  be  a  better  man  than  David 
was,"  or  else  we  ought  to  subscribe  heartily  with 
our  hand  to  the  truth,  that  our  iniquity  must  be 
great  too  if  David's  was. 

But  leaving  David  out  of  the  question,  not  com- 
paring ourselves  with  others,  we  will  draw  some 
few  pictures  by  which  the  greatness  of  our  iniquity 
may  be  seen.  Our  sin  is  great  when  we  consider 
against  whom  it  is  committed.  In  an  army,  if  a 
soldier  shall  strike  his  comrade,  it  is,  of  course,  a 
misdemeanor,  but  if  he  should  have  smitten  some 
petty  officer  it  is  considered  to  be  a  more  grievous 
offence,  and  if  he  should  have  struck  the  com- 
mander-in-chief it  would  become  so  heavy  a  crime» 
that  I  know  not  what  penalty  short  of  death  might 
be  awarded  it.  Now,  in  the  world  of  morals  as  God 
sees  it,  there  is  much  difference  in  sin  when  we 
consider  the  difference  in  the  person  against  vvhom 
it  is  committed.  You  and  I  think  it  is  the  worst 
sin  that  hurts  us  the  most.  We  have  heard,  I  dare 
say,  the  story  of  the  lawyer  who  was  waited  upon 
by  a  farmer,  to  ask  him  what  would  be  the  penalty 
for  a  man  whose  horse  was  always  getting  into  his 


CONTRITION.  183 

neighbor's  field  and  eating  his  corn,  whether  it 
would  be  heavy ;  he  had  warned  him  several  times, 
and  he  always  would  do  it,  and  it  was  his  fence, 
and  he  ought  to  have  mended  it.  The  lawyer  said 
of  course  there  would  be  a  considerable  fine,  no 
doubt,  and  so  on.  "  Well,"  said  he,  "  sir,  it  is  your 
horse  that  has  done  this."  "Oh  !  "  said  our  friend 
the  solicitor,  "that  is  quite  a  diff*erent  question;  I 
did  not  know  it  was  my  horse  before  1  gave  my 
opinion."  So  it  is,  generally,  with  regard  to  any- 
thing that  is  done  amiss,  if  it  hurts  you,  or  if  it 
hurts  me,  we  always  feel  very  indignant  about  it, 
but  if  it  only  offends  the  Majesty  of  heaven  we 
make  light  of  it.  What  fools  we  are!  If  it  shall 
off'end  such  puny,  insignificant  creatures  as  we, 
then  there  is  something  in  it;  but  if  the  Divine 
Majesty  be  itself  insulted,  we  pass  it  by  as  though 
it  were  a  mere  trifle.  There  really  is  a  difference 
in  the  sin  according  to  the  person  against  whom  it 
is  committed.  I  will  put  it  thus.  A  man  has  just 
now  been  striking  another,  striking  him  with  an 
intent  to  do  him  hurt.  "  That  is  bad,"  say  you. 
"  Yes,  but  it  was  his  own  father  that  he  struck." 
*'  Ay,"  now  you  say,  "  that  is  far  worse  for  him, 
to  have  injured  the  man  whom  he  ought  to  have 
loved  and  honored."  So  since  God  is  our  Creator, 
any  attack  that  is  made  upon  liis  government, 
any  willful  violation  of  his  law,  is  aggravated  by 
the  fact  that  we  ow^e  to  him  such  unbounded  alle- 
giance. "  It  is  he  that  made  us,  and  not  we  our- 
selves; we  are  his  people,  and  the  sheep  of  his  pas- 


184  STORM   SIGNALS. 

ture."  Sinners,  did  you  ever  think  of  it  ?  You 
have  offended  against  him  that  made  you,  in  whose 
hand  your  breath  ivS,  and  under  whose  control  are 
all  your  ways.  When  you  have  used  profane 
words,  it  has  been  against  the  High  and  Lofty  One, 
against  Jehovah,  who  rides  the  sky,  and  launches 
abroad  his  thunderbolts,  and  shakes  heaven  and 
earth  with  his  terrible  voice;  against  him,  before 
whom  the  bright  archangels  veil  their  faces  and 
humbly  bow  themselves,  unworthy  to  lick  the  dust 
of  his  feet;  against  God  thou  hast  offended!  Sin- 
ner, thou  thinkest  it  is  little,  but  I  tell  thee  this  it 
is  that  makes  thine  iniquity  great.    • 

Yet  further,  sin  derives  some  degree  of  its  sin- 
fulness from  the  fact  that  it  is  an  offence  against  a 
most  just  and  equitable  law.  We  sometimes  read 
in  the  newspapers,  that  persons  are  severely  pun- 
ished for  offences  against  the  game  laws.  Well,  I 
suppose  it  is  a  very  wicked  thing  to  shoot  another 
person's  hares  and  pheasants  and  partridges.  Were 
I  a  preserver  of  game  I  daresay  I  should  consider 
the  offence  of  the  tenant  farmer  to  be  very  aggra- 
vated who  shot  a  bird  that  was  feeding  on  his 
corn.  As  I  am  not,  I  do  not  particularly  see  its 
flagrant  character.  No  doubt  it  is  wrong,  though 
it  looks  to  me  more  like  a  misdemeanor  than  a  fel- 
ony. When  a  law  is  proved  to  be  harsh  and  se- 
vere, there  always  will  be  some  mitigation  in  our 
judgment  of  the  culpabiUty  of  breaking  it.  If  we 
consider  such  and  such  a  law  hard  and  tyrannical, 
not  suited  to  the  times,  and  out  of  keeping  with 


CONTRITION.  185 

the  age,  then  we  say  when  a  person  breaks  it, 
"Well,  he  had  better  not  have  done  it;  it  is  an 
ofience  against  statute  law  and  he  ought  not 
to  have  committed  it;  "  still  we  do  not  think  it  to 
be  so  black  as  when  the  offence  is  against  a  just, 
equitable,  proper,  and  righteous  law,  which  harmo- 
nizes with  strict,  unvarying  equity.  Now,  such  is 
the  law  of  God.  What  can  be  more  fitting  than  the 
law  of  the  Ten  Commandments?  Infidelity  itself 
has  turned  pale  before  those  Ten  Commandments. 
We  have  heard  of  men  who  have  attempted  to 
improve  the  law  of  God  by  a  new  commandment 
and  have  found  themselves  unable  to  do  it,  for 
they  perceived  it  to  be  so  complete  that  it  em- 
braced all  forms  of  criminality.  Those  who  have 
abhorred  other  parts  of  Scripture  have  said,  as  they 
read  the  ten  precepts,  "These  are  just  and  right- 
eous.'' They  are,  indeed,  the  fundamental  stones 
of  natural  m,orality;  they  are  such  as  even  nature 
itself  would  approve  to  be  right  and  proper  for  the 
government  of  the  world.  Well  then,  sirs,  if  you 
have  broken  these  good  commandments,  if  you 
have  run  your  neck  against  these  holy,  just  and 
righteous  precepts,  your  iniquity  is  great.  If  we 
could  turn  to  any  law  of  God  and  say,  "This  is 
harsh,  this  is  tyrannical,"  there  were  some  excuse 
for  you,  but  those  commandments  were  made  for 
your  good ;  if  you  keep  them  they  have  their  own 
reward,  if  you  break  them  they  bring  their  own 
penalty  into  your  body  and  into  your  mind. 
Wherefore  then  have  you  been  so  foolish  as  to  vio- 


186  STORM   SIGNALS. 

late  them  ?  Assuredly,  in  so  doing,  thine  iniquity 
has  become  heavy  as  the  millstone,  and  if  it  be 
about  thy  neck  when  thou  comest  to  die,  it  will 
sink  thee  in  the  floods  forever. 

But,  dear  friends,  we  ought  each  one  of  us  to  re-  • 
member  that  our  sin  is  all  the  greater  because  it 
has  been  committed  by  us,  for  sometimes  an 
oiFence  is  all  the  worse  because  of  the  person  who 
committed  it.  When  the  noble  Caesar  saw  Brutus 
stab  him,  he  said,  "  And  thou,  Brutus ! "  There 
was  force  in  his  dying  words,  for  Brutus  was  his 
dear  friend,  one  who  owed  him  no  little.  And 
surely  the  Lord  might  say  to  us,  when  we  sin, 
"  And  you  too ;  and  you !  You  whom  I  have  fed 
day  by  day;  you  who  are  clothed  by  my  charity, 
and  nourished  by  my  bounty  !  You  !  living  in  this 
fair  province  of  the  universe  which  is  called  the 
world,  this  beautiful  fair  round  green  earth !  You 
• — partakers  of  such  innumerable  favors — you  sin 
against  me ! "  Ah,  Christians,  you  that  are 
heaven's  favorites,  you  that  are  allowed  to  enter 
into  his  cabinet  counsels,  and  to  understand  the 
secrets  of  his  covenant,  you  who  are  Christ's  own 
spouse,  the  bride  of  the  Prince  of  heaven,  your  sin 
is  blacker  because  of  that  light  of  his  countenance 
in  which  it  has  been  your  privilege  to  walk. 

But  to  hasten  on,  as  I  throw  off  these  hints  to  be 
worked  out  in  your  own  minds  rather  than  to  be 
dwelt  upon  in  our  discourse,  let  me  remind  you 
again  that  our  sin  is  certainly  very  great,  because 
of  the  amount  of  it.     Innumerable  times  we  have 


CONTRITION,  187 

transgressed.  It  is  not  as  though  we  had  done 
wrong  once  and  then  washed  our  hands  of  it. 
Who  can  count  his  errors?  What  man  shall  tell 
the  number  of  the  small  dust  of  his  transgressions  ? 
As  for  the  drops  of  dew  twinkling  in  the  morning 
light,  as  for  the  drops  of  the  ocean  making  that 
vast  flood,  as  for  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  the  sand 
of  the  seashore, — the  incalculable  number  of  all 
these  sink  into  insignificance  when  compared  with 
the  infinite  host  of  our  transgressions  against  thee, 
•O  God  of  heaven  and  earth  !  This  very  day  have 
there  not  been  more  sins  than  moments,  more 
transgressions  than  heart-beats,  more  ofiences  than 
pulses  1  God  only  knows  the  sin  of  man.  Only 
his  infinite  mind  can  reckon  the  iniquity  that  crops 
forth  from  the  polluted  soil,  and  wells  up  from  the 
deep  spring  of  depravity  that  is  hidden  in  the  very 
cere  of  our  corrupt  nature.  Count  your  sins  if  you 
can,  0  ye  children  of  God,  and  then  fall  on  your 
knees,  bow  your  heads,  cover  your  faces,  and  say, 
*'  Our  iniquity  indeed  is  great !  " 

Nor  is  this  all;  we  ought  to  remember  that  we 
have  sinned  and  offended  without  any  provoca- 
tion. When  a  poor  wretch,  pinched  with  hunger, 
snatches  a  loaf  from  a  baker's  shop,  and  eats  it  rav- 
enously in  the  street,  what  magistrate  could  for- 
bear to  treat  him  leniently  ?  But  when  a  rascal 
does  a  wanton  mischief  without  cause,  or  commits 
a  willful  robbery  without  conscience,  what  defence 
can  he  set  up  ?  With  such  utter  defiance  of  law 
and  order  we  have  no  patience.     Let  the  full  pun- 


188  STORM   SIGNALS. 

ishment,  we  say,  fall  upon  his  guilty  head.  And 
this  is  what  you  and  I  have  done ;  we  have  sinned 
for  fiinning's  sake.  When  we  spent  our  money  in 
sin  it  was  for  that  which  is  not  bread,  and  our 
labor  of  iniquity  was  for  that  which  did  not  profit 
us.  You  and  I  have  not  been  gainers  by  all  we 
have  done  amiss.  There  may  have  been  times 
when  you  had  the  excuse  of  getting  something  by 
sin,  but  not  always.  For  instance,  what  excuse  is 
there  for  swearing  ?  Lust  may  plead  a  pleasure, 
wine  may  ease  a  pain,  avarice  has  an  eye  to  gain, 
but  the  cheap  swearer,  from  his  open  sluice,  lets 
his  soul  run  out  in  sorry  curses,  losing  all  the 
patience  he  possesses  for  the  mere  sake  of  venting 
forth  black  and  ugly  words  that  have  no  meaning. 
This  is  infamous;  what  if  I  say  it  is  infernal! — to 
sin  for  the  mere  sake  of  sinning.  We  heard  of  one 
the  other  day  who  said,  when  reproved  for  curs- 
ing, that  he  would  continue  to  swear;  yea,  if  he 
had  an  angel  on  each  shoulder  he  would  go  on 
cursing  still.  There  seem  to  be  some  of  this  sort 
who,  for  the  mere  sake  of  dabbling  in  the  mire, 
will  do  it;  and,  in  truth,  we  have  all  in  our  time 
sinned  in  open  defiance  of  the  Almighty,  and, 
therefore,  our  iniquity  is  heavy.  Sons  of  men,  I 
put  it  to  you,  as  one  of  yourselves,  and,  therefore 
willing  to  be  your  advocate — but  I  must  rather 
take  up  the  cause  of  him  against  whom  we  hare 
offended — what  has  he  ever  done  to  us  that  we 
should  hate  him  ?  He  has  made  us,  fed  us,  clothed 
us-;  for  which  of  these  good  works  do  we  forget 


CONTRITION.  189 

him?  He  has  sent  his  Son  to  redeem  his  people; 
is  this  a  cause  why  we  should  despise  him  ?  He 
follows  us  day  after  day  with  invitations  of  mercy, 
stirs  up  our  consciences,  hedges  up  the  road  to  hell 
as  though  he  would  not  let  us  perish;  for  which  of 
these  things  do  we  requite  him  with  evil?  What 
hath  the  Most  High  done  to  provoke  you  ?  Let 
him  answer;  do  ye  first  lay  your  accusation,  how- 
ever. Has  he  ever  done  you  a  displeas-ure  ?  In 
what  respect  has  he  thwarted  you  ?  What  pleasure 
that  is  a  real  pleasure  has  he  denied  you?  Is  his 
yoke  heavy  ?  Is  his  burden  intolerable  ?  Are  his 
commandments  like  the  whips  of  Solomon  ?  or  his 
laws  like  the  scorpions  of  Rehoboam  ?  Hath  he 
made  his  little  finger  thicker  than  the  wires  of  hu- 
man law  ?  Do  ye  not  know  that  men  in  super- 
stition wdll  make  laws  ten  times  harder  than  God's 
laws  ever  were,  and  will  keep  theui  too?  It  can- 
not, therefore,  be  that  God  hath  thus  offended  you. 
0,  wherefore,  then,  sons  of  men,  do  we  spurn  our 
Father  ?  Why  do  we  despise  our  God  ?  What 
can  there  be  so  good  in  sin  that  we  will  have  it, 
and  God's  anger  with  it  ?  What  can  there  be  so 
sweet  in  hell  that  we  choose  it,  and  despise  the 
glories  of  heaven  ?  Yerily,  in  this  arrant  folly, 
this  flagrant  malice,  this  frantic  madness,  our  in- 
iquity is  great  indeed. 

Yet  further,  what  if  I  should  say  that  we  have 
gone  on  in  sin  after  we  have,  some  of  us,  known 
and  felt  the  evil  of  it !  I  speak  advisedly  when  I 
appeal  to  almost  all  of  you  now  present,  must  not 


190  STORM   SIGNALS. 

yonr  iniquity  be  great,  because  it  was  not  done  in 
ignorance?  How  many  here  were  trained  up  in 
the  lap  of  godliness — your  sins,  therefore,  are  ten 
tim«s  heavier  than  other  men's.  The  lamp  of  the 
sanctuary  lit  us  to  our  cradles.  The  hush  of  lul- 
laby had  the  name  of  Jesus  mingled  with  it.  Per- 
haps the  first  song  we  learned  to  sing  was  concern- 
ing the  children's  best  friend.  The  first  book  that 
we  began  to  read  contained  his  sweet  name,  and 
many  were  the  times  when  we  were  pressed  by 
godly  ones  to  think  of  Jesus,  and  to  give  our  young 
hearts  to  him.  But  we  put  bitter  for  sweet,  and 
sweet  for  bitter,  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for 
darkness,  and  knowing  the  good  from  the  evil  we 
did  willfully  choose  that  which  is  wrong.  Ah,  for 
this  thing,  when  we  have  sinned  against  light  and 
knowledge,  does  not  our  transgression  become 
greater  than  that  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  that  perished 
in  their  sin  ?  And  then,  I  say,  when  we  had 
learned  by  experience,  as  well  as  by  education, 
that  sin  was  bitter,  we  went  on  in  it  still.  There 
is  a  young  man  yonder  that  went  astray  once, 
and  smarted  for  it,  and  he  thought  he  would 
never  be  such  a  fool  again.  But  it  hath  hap- 
pened to  him  according  to  the  true  proverb. 
The  dog  is  turned  to  his  own  vomit,  and  the 
sow  that  was  washed  to  her  wallowing  in  the 
mire.  Some  men  seem  only  to  get  out  of  one  ditch 
to  roll  into  another.  There  are  plenty  of  persons 
who  when  they  put  their  fingers  in  the  fire  and 
burn  them,  run  and  get  them  bound  up  and  healed, 


CONTRITION.  191 

only  to  go  to  the  next  fire  and  thrust,  not  their 
lingers  in  tliis  time,  but  their  arms  up  to  the 
elbow.  Take  care,  one  of  these  days,  man,  you 
don't  find  body  and  soul  consumed  in  that  fire. 
How  foolish  some  are  who  have  been  on  the  spend- 
thrift line  !  After  they  have  emptied  their  pockets 
and  found  themselves  beggars,  they  have  gone  to 
their  friends  who  used  to  take  a  glass  with  them — 
such  jolly  boon  companions,  such  dear  friends  they 
were,  but  they  do  not  know  them  now.  "  0  no," 
they  say,  and  give  them  the  cold  shoulder,  now 
that  their  clothes  begin  to  look  a  little  out  at  el- 
bows. I  have  seen  these  people  get  employment 
again,  and  throw  themselves  out  of  it  by  their  ill 
character.  I  have  seen  them  get  a  respectable  sit- 
uation perhaps  two  or  three  times,  and  then  go 
and  ruin  themselves  over  again,  and  expect  their 
friends  to  set  them  up  once  more;  set  them  up  on 
purpose  that  they  may  have  the  pleasure  of  tum- 
bling down.  When  men  do  this  so  many  times, 
certainly  their  iniquity  becomes  heavy. 

1  have  put  the  case  strongly  concerning  one  or 
two  delinquents;  they  are,  however,  only  repre- 
sentatives of  us  all,  for  when  we  have  smarted  for 
an  offence,  we  have  committed  it  again.  Burnt 
children  are  afraid  of  the  fire,  but  burnt  sinners 
are  not;  they  will  go  to  the  fire  again,  like  the 
moth  which  gets  to  the  candle,  singes  her  wings, 
flies  orfF  a  little,  but  she  must  needs  go  again,  and 
if  you  lift  her  out  of  the  melted  grease  around  the 
light,  she  will  fly  back  again  the  first  opportunity, 


192  STORM   SIGNALS. 

as  if  slie  thought  it  her  ambition,  and  her  life's 
best  glory,  to  be  consumed  in  the  fire.  Oh  I 
iniquity  is  great  when  it  is  against  experience. 
Men  run  upon  the  pikes  of  damnation.  They 
destroy  their  own  souls  by  a  sort  of  spiritual 
suicide. 

At  times  men's  offences  to  their  fellow-men  lose 
some  of  their  guiltiness  by  an  apology.  Why,  I 
knoAV  sometimes,  when  we  have  been  aggrieved 
by  some  little  offence,  and  a  proper  apology  has 
been  promptly  made,  we  could  have  wished  we 
never  had  taken  notice  of  it,  for  we  did  not  like  to 
see  the  good  man  so  sorry  about  it:  we  freely  for- 
gave him,  and  felt  as  if  we  did  not  want  him  even 
to  feel  he  had  done  wrong,  because  he  took  it  too 
much  to  heart:  so  we  passed  over  the  offence 
because  of  the  repentance.  But  how  great  is  that 
man's  sin  who,  having  sinned,  refuses  to  repent! 
And  is  not  this  ex?ictly  the  case  of  many  here 
present,  sinning  from  your  cradles,  but  repenting 
never?  Repentance  is  hid  from  your  eyes;  ye  go 
on  from  bad  to  worse,  from  dark  to  deeper  stains. 
The  Ethiopian  has  not  changed  his  skin,  nor  the 
leopard  his  spots.  Ye  have  sought  to  no  physician 
for  your  healing.  Ye  have  let  the  deadly  gangrene 
grow  yet  more  putrid,  until  the  whole  head  is 
sick  and  the  whole  heart  faint.  Careless  sinner  I 
I  would  to-night  I  could  play  the  part  of  Mr.  John 
Bunyan's  Captain  Boanerges,  and  run  up  the  red 
colors  before  your  eye,  bearing  as  the  escutcheon 
the  flaming  thunderbolts  of  God's  justice.     Ye  who 


CONTRITION.  193 

will  not  repent  must  incur  the  fierce  wrath  of  God. 
Lo !  he  hath  bent  his  bow,  and  made  it  ready,  he 
hath  fitted  his  arrow  to  the  string,  he  takes  his 
mark  to-night  at  thee,  the  arrow  shall  soon  fly  and 
reach  thy  heart.  0  that  thou  hadst  grace  to  re- 
pent !     0  Spirit  of  God,  break  the  sinner's  heart ! 

0  take  thou  hold  of  thy  great  hammer,  with  which 
thou  dost  cleave  mountains,  and  dash  that  heart 
in  pieces,  that  the  sinner  may  cry  out,  "  Pardon 
mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great." 

With  some  men  their  iniquity  becomes  all  the 
greater,  because  they  have  sinned  against  promises 
which  they  have  made,  vows  which  have  been 
registered  in  heaven,  and  covenants  which  they 
had  signed  with  the  Most  High.     You  know  who 

1  mean.  You  were  ill  with  the  fever  some  few 
years  ago,  you  were  given  up,  you  turned  your 
face  to  the  wall,  and  you  remember  how,  in  the 
bitterness  of  your  soul,  you  said,  "  0  !  God,  if  thou 
wilt  spare  me,  mine  shall  be  another  and  a  better 
life."  You  were  spared,  and  your  life  has  been 
rather  worse  than  better.  You  remember,  too, 
when  the  cholera  was  abroad,  and  there  were 
many  falling  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left, 
you  were  terrified  and  alarmed,  and  you  sought 
God  after  a  sort,  and  you  told  him  that  if  he  would 
but  spare  your  life,  that  life  should  be  spent  in  his 
service.  What  have  you  been  doing  since  ?  It  is 
true  you  sometimes  go  to  the  house  of  God,  but 
it  is  in  the  evening;  when  you  have  made  your 
money  in  the  morning,  you  do  not  mind  giving 


194  STORM  SIGNALS. 

God  the  fag  end  of  the  Sunday.  The  first  two  or 
three  weeks  after  you  got  better  the  shutters  were 
up;  there  was  no  rioting,  no  swearing,  no  loose 
conversation:  your  neighbors  said,  "What  has 
come  over  the  fellow  ?  he  is  quite  a  different  man." 
Yes,  you  had  another  heart  for  the  time,  but  not  a 
new  heart,  and  now  you  are  as  reckless  as  ever. 
Do  you  think  God  has  forgotten  your  promises? 
Do  you  think  that  registered  covenant  of  yours 
has  been  blotted  out  ?  No,  sinner,  no ;  it  stands 
fast  against  thee  to  make  thy  guilt  more  infamous, 
and  thy  transgressions  more  heavy  !  Take  heed  ! 
take  heed!  take  heed!  when  God  shall  hold  it  up 
against  thee  at  the  last  tremendous  day,  thou  wilt 
read  thy  doom  in  that  broken  promise,  in  that  lie 
which  had  been  uttered  against  a  God  of  grace 
and  goodness.  Such  having  been  the  case  with 
some  of  us,  most  of  us  at  some  time  or  other  having 
sinned  thus  against  resolutions  and  promises,  our 
iniquities  are  heavy.  0  dear  friends  !  I  have  a 
task  too  hard  for  me.  When  I  talk  of  the  glories 
of  the  love  of  Christ  I  feel  at  home;  when  I  speak 
of  the  matchless  grace  of  the  everlasting  covenant, 
my  heart  is  well  at  ease ;  but  0  !  to  prove  man's 
sin  heavy  is  a  task  too  hard  for  me.  Not  that  it  is 
hard  in  itself  The  evidence  is  clear,  but  to  pro- 
cure a  conviction  is  the  difficulty.  The  jury  is  not 
impartial.  Your  conscience  is  like  an  unjust 
judge.  Oh  how  hard  it  is  to  make  any  man 
believe  himself  to  be  so  bad  as  the  Word  of  God 
says  he  is !     None  but  the  Spirit  of  God  can  make 


CONTRITION.  195 

a  man  call  himself  a  sinner  and  mean  it.  Nothing 
but  the  irresistible  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  can 
ever  bring  a  man  as  low  as  the  Word  of  God  would 
have  him.  If  thou  canst  feel  in  thy  soul  to-night 
that  thine  iniquity  is  great,  that  it  deserves  God's 
wrath,  displeasure,  and  punishment,  I  have  hope 
of  thee  that  the  first  sparks  of  the  Divine  light 
have  fallen  into  thy  soul,  never  to  be  quenched, 
but  to  blaze  out  in  the  brightness  of  salvation  for- 
ever. "0  Lord,  pardon  thou  mine  iniquity,  for  it 
is  great !" 

II.  I  shall  now  turn  very  briefly  to  the  second  part, 
to  show  how  there  is  a  plea  in  the  very  greatness 
of  our  sins.  Is  not  this  a  very  strange  text,  think 
you?  Look  at  it  again;  one  needs  to  read  it  over 
twenty  times.  Is  it  so  written  ?  Can  you  believe 
your  own  eyes  ?  "  Pardon  mine  iniquity,  for  it  is 
great !  "  Imagine  a  prisoner  at  the  Old  Bailey 
pleading  with  the  judge  that  he  would  kindly  let 
him  off",  because  he  was  a  great  off'ender ;  we  should 
think  that  it  would  be  a  very  legitimate  reason 
why  he  should  not  be  pardoned.  The  pith,  how- 
ever, of  the  whole  text  lies  in  those  words  which 
we  forget  to  quote — "For  thy  name's  sake."  That 
alters  it.  It  is  an  argument  now;  it  was  not  be- 
fore. "  For  thy  name's  sake,  pardon  mine  iniquity ; 
for  it  is  great."  Now  let  us  show  that  there  is  a 
plea  here.  If  salvation  were  by  merit,  then  sup- 
posing all  men  to  have  fallen,  and  none  of  them 
to  have  any  merit,  yet  it  would  be  a  rule  that  the 
man  who  was  the  least  offender  should  have  the 


196  STORM  SIGNALS. 

first  turn  at  being  saved.  If  the  choice  of  God  de- 
pended in  any  way  upon  roan's  condition,  we 
should  naturally  expect  that  the  man  who  had  the 
least  sin  would  be  forgiven  first;  for  putting  all 
on  an  equality  in  all  other  respects,  the  choice,  if 
made  at  all,  with  reference  to  the  man,  would 
naturally  be  the  choice  of  the  man  who  had  com- 
mitted the  least  iniquity.  But,  dear  friends,  please 
to  remember  that  in  the  covenant  of  Christ,  and 
the  way  of  salvation,  the  choice  is  made  upon  re- 
verse principles,  not  according  to  man's  merit,  but 
according  to  God's  glory.  The  aim,  end,  and  ob- 
ject of  God,  in  salvation,  is  to  glorify  his  own 
character;  hence,  if  his  choice  may  be  said  to  be 
guided  by  any  principles  which  we  can  at  all 
understand,  that  choice  would  be  guided  to  select 
those  who  would  the  most  magnify  his  grace  and 
glorify  his  own  name.  Well  now,  if  God  would  do 
that  great  work  of  pardoning  sin  in  such  a  way  as 
to  glorify  his  own  name,  the  most  "fitting  persons 
to  be  saved  are  the  biggest  sinners.  Let  us  put  it 
thus.  There  is  a  number  of  persons;  they  are  all 
sick:  here  is  a  physician,  he  intends  to  get  to  him- 
self a  name,  he  is  full  of  benevolence  and  kindness, 
but  at  the  same  time,  one  part  of  his  object  is  to 
get  a  name.  Now,  you  will  perceive  that,  in  the 
selection  of  his  patients,  he  will  not  pick  out  a  man 
there  who  has  got  a  sore  finger,  for  it  will  never  tell 
very  much  to  his  credit,  that  he  healed  a  man  who 
had  a  sore  finger;  but  there  will  be,  perhaps,  a  few 
cases  among  the  sick  of  a  very  extraordinary  sort; 


CONTRITION.  197 

some  of  them  will  have  an  affliction,  a  disease, 
quite  unknown  hitherto  to  the  faculty.  Medicines 
have  been  tried,  but  the  cases  have  been  so  stub- 
born that  the  best  doctors  have  given  them  up  as 
hopeless.  Now,  the  physician  says,  "  These  are 
the  cases  that  I  will  select."  Granting  that  he  is 
able  to  cure  whomsoever  he  wills,  you  can  see  that 
if  the  object  be  his  own  glory,  he  had  rather  take 
those  in  which  there  is  the  most  room  for  the  dis- 
play of  the  healing  art,  than  those  who  have  the 
least  sickness,  and  might  be  the  most  readily  cured. 
Yet  again;  suppose  a  man  would  have  a  character 
for  generosity,  and  there  are  a  number  of  debtors 
asseml)led,  and  he  is  determined  to  discharge  their 
liabilities.  There  is  a  man  there  who  owes  a  six- 
pence, another  owes  a  pound.  Well  now,  if  he 
pays  their  debts,  he  will  never  have  much  credit 
for  liberality  there;  but  another  comes  in,  a  thump- 
ing debtor,  one  who  is  over  head  and  ears  in  debt. 
What  is  the  sum  there?  Fifty  thousand  pounds; 
let  us  say  a  hundred  thousand  pounds,  let  as  say 
half  a  million.  Well,  now,  here  is  the  opportunity 
for  the  liberal  man  to  display  his  liberality,  because 
here  there  is  room  for  it.  So  is  it  in  grace.  You 
proud  Pharisees,  you  come  to  God  and  say,  "  Lord, 
I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men ;"  and  he 
replies,  "  Then  there  is  no  room  in  you  for  my 
grace  to  work."  Yon  poor  publican  dares  not  lift 
so  much  as  his  eyes  towards  heaven — smites  upon 
his  breast.  "There  is  a  case  for  me,"  saith  sovereign 
mercy,    and   the   pardon    comes.     Mark,    when   I 


198  STORM  SIGNALS. 

speak  of  sinners,  I  do  not  mean  merely  those  who 
have  been  great  sinners,  or  those  who  have  been 
in  comparison  with  others,  little  sinners,  but  I 
mean  those  who  feel  themselves  great  sinners.  1 
say,  the  more  we  feel  our  guilt  the  more  fit  we  are 
for  mercy;  the  more  broken  down  we  are  with 
hopelessness,  on  account  of  our  own  lost  estate, 
the  more  room  there  is  for  the  triumphs  of  Christ. 
Now,  there  is  many  a  moral  man  here  to-night,  who 
never  offended  against  the  laws  of  his  land,  or  the 
laws  of  outward  propriety,  and  yet  he  feels  himself 
to  be  as  black  as  hell.  Well  then,  there  is  room 
in  him  for  grace  to  glorify  itself  We  have  noticed 
that  men  of  the  worst  character  are  often  the  most 
self-righteous.  There  is  many  a  Pharisee  whose 
morals  would  not  pass  muster,  though  he  vaunts 
his  piety  as  a  harlot  flaunts  her  broidery;  and 
many  a  scamp,  who  would  be  a  disgrace  to  the 
meanest  society  if  his  character  were  known, 
brazens  it  out  as  though  he  never  had  offended 
against  a  single  law  of  God.  Again  I  say,  ye 
chief  of  sinners,  and  ye  that  feel  it,  ye  who  groan 
and  mourn  on  account  of  sin,  be  not  silenced  at  the 
mercy-seat  because  of  the  greatness  of  your  guilt, 
but  rather,  with  the  inimitable  skill  of  the  Syro- 
Phenician  woman,  turn  the  very  desperateness  of 
your  case  into  a  reason  why  he  should  hear  and 
answer  you.  Now  to-night,  upon  your  knees, 
wrestle  with  the  angel  of  mercy,  and  say,  "  Pardon  ( 
me,  for  my  transgression  is  great;  and  my  hell  will  ( 
be  great.     But  if  thou   save  me  thine  honor  will  1 


CONTRITION.  199 

be  great;  if  thou  redeem  me,  the  power  of  thy 
blood  will  be  great;  if  thou  give  me  a  new  heart, 
the  transforming  power  of  thy  Spirit  will  be  great. 
God,  save  me;  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  This 
is,  as  Luther  says,  to  cut  off  the  devil's  head  with 
his  own  sword.  When  the  devil  says  to  you,  "  You 
are  a  sinner,"  say  to  him,  "  I  am,  and  Christ  died 
to  save  sinners."  And  when  he  says,  '*  But  you 
are  a  big  sinner,"  answer  him,  '*  Lord,  have  mercy 
upon  me,  for  mine  iniquity  is  great."  "But,"  says 
he,  "  You  are  a  Jerusalem  sinner,  a  bigger  sinner 
than  any  other."  Say,  "Yes,  it  is  true;  but  Jesus 
said,  '  beginning  at  Jerusalem.' " 

0  !  1  have  tried,  and  I  am  trying,  to  preach  a  . 
wide  gospel;  I  do  not  like  to  have  a  net  with  such 
big  meshes  that  the  fish  get  through.  I  think  I 
may  catch  you  all  if  the  Lord  wills.  If  the  vilest 
are  not  shut  out,  then  you  are  not  shut  out,  friends; 
and  if  thou  believest  in  Christ  with  all  thy  heart, 
thou  shalt  be  saved.  But  0  !  what  if  you  should 
say,  "I  care  not  for  forgiveness;  I  do  not  want 
pardon,  I  will  not  seek  it;  I  will  not  have  it;  I  love 
my  sins;  I  love  myself!  "  O,  sinner !  then  by  that 
death-bed  of  thine,  where  thou  shalt  see  sins  in 
another  light ;  by  that  resurrection  of  thine,  where 
thou  shalt  see  eternity  to  be  no  trifle ;  by  that  doom 
of  thine ;  by  the  last  dread  thunders ;  by  the  awful 
sentence,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed,"  of  the  Judge,  I  be- 
seech you,  do  me  but  this  one  favor.  Own  that 
you  had  an  invitation  to-night,  and  that  it  was 
affectionately  pressed  upon  you.     I  have  told  you, 


200  STORM  SIGNALS. 

in  God's  name,  that  your  sin  is  not  a  trifle  with  God 
— that  it  is  not  a  matter  to  be  laughed  at  or  to  be 
whistled  over.  I  have  told  you  that  the  greatness 
■f  your  sin  need  not  shut  you  out.  What  is  wanted 
is  that  the  Spirit  of  God  should  teach  you  these 
things  in  your  heart.  But  do  remember,  if  your 
ears  refuse  these  truths,  and  if  you  reject  them,  we 
are  a  sweet  savor  unto  Christ  as  well  in  them  that 
perish  as  in  them  that  are  saved.  But  woe  unto 
you — woe  unto  you,  who,  with  the  gospel  ringing 
in  your  ears,  go  down  to  the  pit !  "  Verily,  verily, 
I  say  unto  you,  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment,  than 
for  you."  May  God  save  you,  for  Jesus'  sake. 
Amen  ! 


SCJje  33attle  of  Hife. 

**Who  goeth   a  warfare  any   time   at  his   own   charges  f*^ 
I  Cor.  ix.  7. 

THIS  question  occurs  in  the  course  of  an  argu- 
ment. The  Apostle  was  proving  that  the 
minister  who  gives  all  his  time  to  the  preaching  of 
the  Word  is  entitled  to  a  maintenance  from  those 
people  amongst  whom  he  labors.  He  gives  divers 
illustrations;  among  them  this — that  the  soldier 
who  devotes  himself  to  the  service  of  his  country 
is  not  expected  to  find  his  own  equipment  and  his 
own  rations,  but  he  is  provided  for  by  his  country. 
And  so  should  it  be,  he  teaches  us,  in  the  church 
of  God.  The  minister  set  apart  to  labor  wholly 
in  spiritual  things  should  have  temporal  supplies 
found  him.  That  is  a  topic,  however,  on  which  it 
would  be  superfluous  for  me  to  enlarge.  Your  con- 
victions are  so  sound,  and  your  practice  so  consist- 
ent, that  you  do  not  need  to  be  exhorted,  much 
less  to  be  expostulated  with  on  that  matter. 

But  the  same  question  may  be  asked  when  we 
have  other  morals  to  point.  Is  it  ever  expected 
that  men  who  go  on  a  warfare  should  pay  their 
own  charges  ?     There  is  a  warfare  in  which  all  of 


202  STORM   SIGNALS. 

US  are  engaged.  What  is  life  but  a  great  battle, 
lasting  from  our  earliest  days  until  we  sheathe  the 
sword  in  death  ?  This  battle  we  hope  to  win,  and 
yet,  if  we  succeed,  it  will  be  a  distinct  and  definite 
response  to  the  challenge  before  us — "  Who  goeth  a 
warfare  any  time  at  his  own  charges  ?  "  We  may 
be  quite  sure  that  if  ever  we  attempt  the  warfare 
of  life  at  our  own  expense,  we  shall  soon  find  our- 
selves failing,  and  it  will  end  in  a  miserable  defeat. 
I.  Going  at  once  to  the  subject,  we  have  here  an 
INSPIRITING  METAPHOR.  When  life  is  represented  as 
a  warfare,  some  peaceful  minds  may  feel  a  little 
alarmed  at  the  picture,  yet  there  are  other  minds 
with  enough  of  gallantry  in  their  constitutions  to 
feel  their  blood  pulsing  the  stronger  at  the  thought 
that  life  is  to  be  one  continued  contest.  I  do  but 
borrow  a  reflection  from  the  secular  press  when  I 
say  that  it  were  ill  for  us  if  the  love  of  peace,  fos- 
tered among  us  as  a  nation,  should  degenerate  into 
a  fear  of  danger,  a  reluctance  to  bear  hardships,  or 
an  indiff'erence  to  the  accomplishment  of  exploits. 
Craven  spirits  we  may  expect  always  to  find,  who 
conjure  up  gloomy  anticipations  and  forbode  hor- 
rible disasters.  The  untrodden  path  and  the  un- 
accustomed climate  are  dreadful  bugbears.  But 
is  this  the  instinct  of  an  Englishman  ?  How  else 
should  he  contemplate  difiiculties  but  as  problems 
to  be  solved  ?  capital  out  of  which  fame  or  fortune 
is  to  be  won  ?  And  as  for  the  British  soldier,  is  he 
to  be  looked  upon  as  a  hot-bouse  plant  who  shrinks 
from  exposure?     Far  rather  would  I  respect  him  as 


THE    BATTLE    OF  LIFE.  203 

a  representative  individual,  the  type   of  his  race, 
always  ready  for  any  emergency.     In  the  days  of  the 
old  Gallic  wars,  when  we  had  to  fight  with  Napoleon 
in  Egypt,  there  were  just  as  many  knotty  points 
and   critical   situations  to   be  grappled  with;  and, 
certainly,   at  head-quarters  the   War  Department 
was  not  more  efficiently  managed  than  it  is  now. 
Yet  British  soldiers  pressed  forward  then   to  the 
conflict,  nor  did  they  pant  for  fortune ;  what  they 
did  seek  for  was  a  career,  with  some  opportunity 
of    distinguishing    themselves.     ]\Ioreover,    those 
who  stayed  at  home  scanned  the  dispatches  with 
eager  interest,  and  full  often  lamented  that  they 
had  not  the  chance  given  them  of  going  forth  to  the 
fight.     Well  may  the  patriot  ask — his  Anglo-Saxon 
courage  all  fled,  if  at  every  call  to  fresh  deeds  of 
heroism  we  listen  to  the  croaking  of  those  whose 
nature  it  is  to  look  black  and  utter  dark  portents  ? 
Our  children's  children  may  read  how  the  haughty 
insolence  of  Theodore  of  Abyssinia  was  humbled, 
but  I  hope  they  will  never  hear  the  screeching  of 
the  ravens  who   warned   us  of  the  mountain  fast- 
nesses in  which   he  was   lodged.     The   Ashantee 
war  is  far  behind  us  now,  and  I  suppose  those  who 
were  once  afraid  of  its  perils  are  now  amazed  at  its 
prowess.     Yes,    and   that   is   how   I   would   have 
Christians  feel   with  regard  to  spiritual  conflicts. 
Difficulties !     Well,    they   are   things   to  be   deci- 
phered.    Dangers  !     They  are  things  to  be  met  and 
encountered.     Impossibilities !     They    are    to    be 
scouted  as  a  nightmare,  a   delirious  dream.     The 


204  STORM   SIGNALS. 

Christian  wakes  to  find  impossibility  possible. 
With  a  history  behind  him  and  a  destiny  before 
him  he  can  say — *'  The  Lord  God  Omnipotent 
reigneth."  Things  that  are  impossible  with  man 
are  possible  with  God.  I  like  my  text  all  the 
better  because  it  implies  a  hostile  engagement, 
and  speaks  of  warfare.  For  me  the  battle-field 
has  no  charms.  With  host  encountering  host,  and 
carnage  left  behind,  I  have  no  sympathy;  but 
spiritually  my  soul  seems  enamored  of  the  idea; 
I  buckle  on  my  armor  at  the  very  thought  that  life 
is  to  be  a  conflict  and  a  strife  in  which  it  behoves 
me  to  get  the  mastery. 

Do  I  not  address  many  young  men  just  commenc- 
ing life  ?  If  you  have  thought  of  life  at  all,  I  hope 
you  have  tlwught  that  it  is  loise  to  begin  the  battle  of 
life  early.  We  have  all  so  little  time  to  live,  and 
the  first  years  of  life  are  so  evidently  the  best 
years  we  shall  ever  have,  that  it  is  a  pity  to  waste 
them.  Oh,  how  much  more  some  of  us  might 
have  done  if  we  had  begun  betimes !  Had  the 
very  flush  of  our  boyhood  been  consecrated  and 
the  strength  of  our  youth  spent  in  our  Master's 
service,  what  work  we  might  have  accomplished  ! 
Now,  young  men,  as  a  comrade  a  little  farther  on 
the  road  than  you,  I  take  you  to  the  brow  of  the 
hill  for  a  moment,  and  point  out  to  you  the  path- 
way we  have  to  pursue,  and  as  I  point  it  out  I  tell 
you  that  you  will  have  to  fight  along  every  inch 
of  the  road  if  you  are  at  the  end  to  win  the  crown 
which  I  hope  your  ambition  pants  after.     Are  you 


THE    BATTLE    OF  LIFE.  209 

*'  It  is  enough,"  for  he  who  saith  '*  It  is  finished," 
until  he  breathes  his  last,  has  not  yet  truly  begun. 
We  must  have  our  swords  drawn  even  to  the  very 
last.  1  have  sometimes  thought  that  could  we  en- 
ter heaven  by  one  sharp,  quick,  terrible  encounter, 
such  as  the  martyrs  faced  at  the  stake,  we  might 
endure  it  heroically,  but  day  after  day  of  protracted 
martyrdom,  and  year  after  year  of  the  wear  and 
tear  of  pilgrimage  and  soldier-life  is  the  more  bitter 
trial  of  patience.  1  do  but  tell  you  this  in  order 
that  you  may  be  convinced  that  it  is  not  in  our 
power  to  engage  in  this  warfare  at  our  charge,  that 
if  we  have  to  endure  in  our  own  strength  and  with 
our  own  resources  it  is  most  certain  that  disaster 
will  befall  us  and  defeat  will  humble  us.  To  fight, 
and  fight  on,  is  our  vocation.  But  if  thus  you  fight 
you  may  hope  to  conquer^  for  others  have  done  so  before 
you.  On  the  summit  of  the  palace  see  you  not 
those  robed  in  white,  who  walk  in  light,  with  faces 
bright,  and  sparkling  o'er  with  joy  ?  Can  you  not 
hear  their  song  ?  They  have  overcome,  and  they 
tell  you — 

•'  To  him  that  overcometh 
A  crown  of  life  shall  be; 
He  with  his  Lord  and  Master 
Shall  reign  eternally." 

They  have  overcome;  then  why  should  not  you? 
Jesus  Christ,  who  is  bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of 
our  flesh,  has  passed  through  the  sternest  part  of 
the  battle,  and  he  has  overcome — a  type  and  rep- 


210  STORM   SIGNALS. 

resentative  of  all  those  who  are  cross  bearers,  and 
who  shall  overcome  as  he  has  done. 

Do  I  see  some  young  man  eager,  earnest,  all  of 
a  glow,  ready  for  the  crown  ?  Let  me  remind  thee 
tlmt  thou  mayest  he  defeated.  Though  it  is  well  for 
thee  to  begin  life  with  a  resolute  determination  to 
fight  through  the  battle,  still  I  would  have  thee  re- 
member that  thou  mayest  be  led  captive  by  the 
foe.  There  is  a  most  instructive  little  book  issued 
by  the  Religious  Tract  Society  called  "  The  Mirage 
of  Life,"  which  1  think  all  young  men  should  read. 
It  gives  historical  pictures  of  the  different  ways  in 
which  men  have  sought  to  be  great,  wherein  the 
result  of  the  greatness  attained  has  proved  to  be  a 
mirage,  mocking  the  man  as  the  mirage  in  the 
desert  mocks  the  traveler  when  it  promises  him 
water  and  he  finds  none.  That  book  contains  the 
history  of  such  men  as  Beckford,  a  man  worth  two 
hundred  thousand  pounds  a  year,  who  spent  the 
former  part  of  his  life  in  building  Fonthill  Abbey, 
with  an  enormous  tower,  enriching  the  place  with 
all  the  treasures  that  he  could  gather  from  every 
country;  making  the  grounds  so  splendid  that 
crowned  heads  longed  to  look  within,  but  it  is  said 
were  refused;  and  at  the  end  of  his  life  you  find 
him  almost  penniless,  the  house  upon  which  he  had 
spent  all  his  time  and  money  a  dilapidated  rifin, 
the  tower  fallen  to  the  ground,  and  the  name  of 
Beckford  forgotten.  You  have  a  sketch  of  William 
Pitt,  the  heaven-born  minister,  one  of  the  greatest 
of  statesmen,  who  could  make  war  or  peace  at  his 


THE    BATTLE    OF  LIFE.  211 

will,  and  after  years  of  the  most  brilliant  success 
he  dies  with  a  broken  heart  through  grief     The 
high  ambition  of  men  of  art,  such  as  Haydon,  is 
introduced   to   your   notice.     This    great   painter, 
after  blazing  with  wondrous  fame  in  his  art,  took 
away  his  life  because  he  found  himself  a  disap- 
pointed and  forgotten  man.     As  I  read  a  series  of 
such  cases,  each  one  seemed  sadder  than  the  other, 
and  it  was  enough  to  make  a  man  sit  down  and 
weep  to   think   that   our  mortal   race   should   be 
doomed  to  follow  such  phantoms  and  to  be  mocked 
by  such  delusions.     As  I  read  them  all,  I  could  not 
help  feeling  how  necessary  it  was  to  say  to  young 
men,  especially  just  as  they  are  beginning  life,  and 
to  young  women  too — aye,  and  the  lesson  is  profit- 
able to  all  of  us — Take  care  how  ye  run  in  the  race, 
lest  after  running  till  ye  think  ye  have  won  the 
prize  ye  find  that  in  truth  ye  have  lost  it.     We 
must  take  care  how  we  live,  for  this  is  the  only 
lifetime  we  shall  have  in  which  to  settle  the  life 
that  lasts  forever.     Make  bankruptcy  in  your  secu- 
lar business,  why,  you  can  start  again;  but  once 
make  bankruptcy  in  soul  affairs,  and  there  is  no 
second  life  in  which  to  start  your  career  afresh. 
Are  you  a  defeated  soldier  oF  life?     Ah,  then,  you 
can  never  begin  again,  or  turn  the  defeat  into  a 
victory.     If  you  go  down  to  your  grave  a  captive 
of  sin,  the  iron  bands  will  be  about  you  forever. 
There  is  no  retrieving  your  position.     The  priceless 
boon  of  freedom  is  beyond  your  reach      You  may 
lament,  you  cannot  attain  it.     See,  then,  our  life  is 


212  STORM   SIGNALS. 

a  battle;  we  must  constantly  fight,  baply  we  may 
win,  or  haply  we  may  be  defeated. 

11.   With  a  KINDLY  HINT  I  now  proceed  to  mark  a 
second  point. 

Like  a  cool  breath  fanning  our  cheeks  when  too 
hot  with  ambition,  this  inquiry  greets  us — "Who 
goeth  a  warfare  at  any  time  at  his  own  charges  ?  " 
So  tJien,  charges  there  ivill  he  in  this  life-hattle.  It  is 
not  to  be  won  without  pain  and  cost.  Let  us  just 
glance  at  some  of  these  charges.  You  will  soon  see 
how  they  mount  up.  If  any  man  shall  get  up  to 
heaven,  what  a  demand  for  courage  he  will  have  to 
meet !  How  many  enemies  he  must  face  !  How 
much  ridicule  he  must  endure !  How  frequently 
must  he  be  misrepresented  and  maligned  1  How 
often  must  he  be  discreet  enough  to  be  silent,  and 
anon  bold  enough  to  speak  and  avow  his  convic- 
tions and  his  purpose. 

If  a  man  shall  get  to  heaven,  what  a  charge  of 
patience  he  will  be  at !  How  he  must  bear  and 
forbear !  How  he  must  put  up  with  one  sharp 
difficulty  and  another,  making  light  of  fatigue 
and  fasting,  restless  days  and  sleepless  nights;  in 
fiery  temptation  unflinching,  amidst  cold  contempt 
unabashed. 

It  any  man  will  get  to  heaven,  w^hat  an  amount 
of  perseverance  he  will  require  to  hold  on  and  to 
hold  out!  What  hours  of  prayer,  what  wrestling 
with  God  for  a  blessing,  what  striving  with  him- 
self to  overcome  sinful  propensities !  What  a 
charge  of  watchfulness  he  will  be  at !     How  he  must 


THE    BATTLE    OF  LIFE.  213 

guard  the  avenues  of  his  being!  How  he  must 
track  his  actions  to  the  springs  of  motives,  and  keep 
his  thoughts  pure  from  guile  !  There  pan  be  little 
ease  and  not  much  slumber  for  a  man  who  would 
get  the  eternal  crown.  What  fresh  supplies  of  zeal 
he  will  need;  for  we  shall  not  drift  into  heaven 
without  a  conflict  or  a  care!  We  must  cut  and 
hack  and  hew  with  intense  energy,  for  the  Saviour 
says,  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence, 
and  the  violent  take  it  by  storm."  What  strength 
he  will  require,  for  he  has  to  deal  with  potent  foes ! 
And  oh,  what  a  charge  of  ivisdom  he  will  be  put  to 
the  expense  of,  for  he  has  to  stand  against  the 
craftiness  of  evil  creatures,  and*to  overcome  one 
who  is  wiser  than  the  ancients^  even  Satan,  the  arch- 
tempter.  It  is  possible  that  the  difficulties  of  an 
expedition  may  be  intensely  aggravated  by  a  lack 
of  knowledge  as  to  the  country  to  be  invaded. 
Under  such  circumstances  it  is  hard  to  anticipate 
the  contingencies  that  may  arise.  In  the  battle 
of  life  this  is  the  rub.  Who  knows  what  lies  next 
before  him  ?  How  can  we  forestall  the  surprises 
that  may  await  us  ?  "  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-mor- 
row, for  thou  knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring 
forth."  If  I  were  aware  of  the  temptations  that 
would  befall  me  a  year  hence,  I  think  I  could 
guard  myself  against  them;  but  I  do  not  even 
know  what  pinch  or  what  peril  may  befall  me  be- 
fore the  hour  has  passed.  You  cannot  tell  the 
provocations  that  to-night  may  occur  before  you 
close  your  eyes  in  slumber.     You  may  have  a  trial 


214  STORM  SIGNALS. 

or  a  temptation  such  as  never  crossed  your  path 
before.  Hence  I  beseech  you  to  consider  the  great- 
ness of  the  charge  of  this  warfare.  You  have  to 
})ass  through  an  experience  which  no  man  before 
you  has  proved.  Ail  the  path  of  Hfe  is  new  to  you, 
unmapped,  untrodden,  unanticipated.  Yet  all  you 
lack  of  clear  statistics  is  made  up  for  in  dire  prog- 
nostics. No  doubt  the  climate  is  baneful,  and  will 
subject  you  to  fever  or  ague.  Our  British  soldiers, 
rank  and  file,  must  press  forward,  though  they  are 
landed  on  a  blazing  beach,  across  which  they  have 
to  march;  nor  will  it  ever  do  for  them  to  be  dis- 
mayed by  steep  mountains,  dismal  swamps,  or  sav- 
age tribes.  Bent  on  victory,  they  brave  the  inci- 
dents of  the  campaign  before  they  sight  the  adver- 
saries they  attack,  while  their  heads  and  hearts  are 
full  of  honor,  promotion,  stars,  stripes,  and  Victo- 
ria crosses.  But  in  our  eventful  battle  of  life  the 
checks  and  bars  to  progress,  the  dangers  and 
temptations  that  we  shall  all  have  to  meet  with  in 
our  natural  constitution  and  our  secular  calling, 
the  unnavigable  currents  and  the  impassable  bar- 
riers that  thwart  us  before  we  grapple  with  the  main 
enterprise  to  enter  heaven,  are  more  than  I  can 
describe  in  one  sermon.  No  marvel  to  me  that 
Mr.  Pliable  should  say,  as  he  turned  back,  "You 
may  have  the  brave  country  yourselves  for  me.'' 
The  Slough  of  Despond,  as  a  first  part,  put  him 
into  a  dungeon,  and  he  said,  "  I  do  not  like  it;  I 
will  have  no  more  of  it." 

Apart  from  Divine  strength.  Pliable  was  a  wise 


THE    BATTLE    OF  LIFE.  215 

man,  wise  in  his  generation,  to  shrink  from  the 
adventure,  for  it  is  a  hard  journey  to  the  skies. 
They  spake  the  truth  who  said  that  there  were 
g-iants  to  fight  with,  dragons  to  be  slain,  moun- 
tains to  be  crossed,  and  black  rivers  to  be  forded. 
It  is  so,  and  I  pray  you  count  the  cost.  There  is 
no  "royal  road"  to  heaven,  except  that  the  King's 
highway  leads  there.  There  is  no  even  road  skill- 
fully leveled  or  scientifically  macadamized.  The 
labor  is  too  exhaustive,  the  obstructions  are  too 
numerous,  the  difficulties  are  too  serious,  unless 
God  himself  come  to  our  help.  I  wittingly  put 
these  dilemmas  before  you  that  I  may  constrain 
you  to  say,  "  Who  can  go  this  warfare  at  his  own 
charges  ? " 

III.  And  now  in  the  third  place,  let  us  look  at 
our  text  as  a  gracious  reminder.  Does  any  man  at 
any  time  go  a  warfare  at  his  own  charge  ?  1 
trow  not. 

Young  man!  I  have  told  you  of  difficulties  and 
of  dangers.  I  trust  your  bold  spirit,  taught  by 
God,  has  thereby  been  fired  to  greater  ardor.  Now 
1  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee  which  has 
cheered  me,  and  cheered  thy  sires  before  me,  and 
made  them  strong  even  in  their  weakness.  It  is 
this.  You  see  you  cannot  go  this  warfare  in  your 
own  strength.  Is  not  that  clear  to  you  ?  Then,  I 
pray  you,  do  not  try  it.  Do  not  for  a  moment  bon- 
template  it.  If  you  do  you  will  rue  it.  Your  fall 
will  be  your  first  warning;  the  second  time  it  will 
warn  you  more  bitterly;  if  you  continue  in  your 


216  STORM   SIGNALS. 

own  strength  you  will  perhaps  have  a  warning 
too  late.  But  you  may  rely  on  God  to  help  you. 
The  text  implies  it.  If  by  faith  you  yield  your- 
self to  Christ,  whoever  you  may  be,  with  a  desire 
and  intent  to  live  henceforth  as  a  follower  of  Jesus, 
God  will  help  you,  and  that  right  early.  Though 
a  warfare  is  before  you,  you  are  not  to  go  at  your 
own  charges.  Shall  I  tell  you  how  God  will  help 
you  ?  Certainly,  you  may  reckon  upon  his  watchful 
Providence.  You  little  know  how  easy  the  Al- 
mighty can  make  a  path  which  otherwise  would 
have  been  difficult  and  dangerous.  Follow  God's 
leading  and  you  shall  never  lack  for  his  comfort. 
I  have  lived  long  enough  to  see  many  people  carve 
for  themselves  very  eagerly  and  cut  their  fingers 
very  severely.  I  have  seen  others  who  albeit  they 
were  great  losers  for  a  time  by  doing  right,  have 
had  to  bless  God  year  after  year  for  the  abundant 
recompense  they  received  afterward.  No  man 
shall  be  a  loser  in  the  long  run  by  loving  and 
serving  God.  If  thou  be  willing  and  obedient, 
trusting  thyself  with  Christ,  thou  shalt  find  those 
awful  wheels  of  Providence  revolve  for  thy  welfare. 
The  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  in  league  with  thee, 
and  the  stones  of  the  field  shall  be  at  peace  with 
thee.  All  things  shall  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  God.  Now,  I  am  not  pretending 
that  piety  will  procure  wealth,  or  that  if  you 
espouse  Christ's  cause  you  shall  grow  rich.  I 
should  not  wonder  if  you  did.  You  are  none  the 
less  likely  to  prosper  in  business  for  being  a  Chris- 


THE    BATTLE    OF   LIFE,  217 

tian.  I  am  not  going  to  predict  that  you  shall  be 
without  sickness,  much  less  without  temptation,  fur 
"  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scour- 
geth  every  son  whom  he  accepteth" ;  but  sure  I  am  of 
this,  that  if  you  put  your  trust  in  God  and  do  right, 
no  temporal  circumstances  shall  ever  happen  to  you 
which  shall  not  be  for  your  eternal  good.  This  is 
forestalling  much  more  than  any  transient  benefit. 
In  the  short  space  you  are  to  live  here  you 
may  reckon  upon  the  gigantic  wheels  of  Provi- 
dence as  your  helpers.  The  angels  of  God  shall 
be  swift  to  defend  you.  Your  eyes  shall  not  see 
them,  but  your  heart  shall  wax  confident.  You 
shall  perceive  that  by  some  means  you  have  been 
rescued  from  a  place  of  drought  and  led  into  a 
fruitful  land. 

More  than  this;  as  you  go  this  warfare,  looking 
to  God  to  bear  your  charges,  you  shall  have  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  to  help  you.  Promise  not  yourself  that 
you  will  be  able  to  maintain  henceforth  a  perfect 
life.  Sin  will  harass  you.  Old  corruptions,  even 
when  they  are  driven  out  from  the  throne  (for  sin 
shall  not  reign  over  you),  will  yet  struggle  at  the 
foot  thereof  But  Jesus  Christ  will  be  your  helper. 
He  will  be  always  present  to  revive  you  with  his 
precious  blood,  to  sprinkle  your  hearts  from  an 
evil  conscience,  to  wash  your  bodies  with  pure 
water.  Have  you  never  admired  that  picture  of 
Christ  with  the  basin  and  the  towel  washing  his 
disciples'  feet  ?  This  is  what  he  will  ever  do  for  you 
at  every  eventide  when  you  have  defiled  yourself 


218  STORM  SIGNALS. 

through  inadvertence  or  infirmity.*  Look  into  the 
face  of  the  Crucified.  Perhaps  you  have  sometimes 
wished  that  he  were  now  visible,  and  in  body  ac- 
cessible to  you.  That  sympathizing  One  who  has 
sufi'ered  so  much  for  you  1  You  have  said,  "  Oh  ! 
that  I  might  go  and  tell  him  my  griefs,  and  get 
his  help  !  "  He  is  alive.  He  is  here.  He  is  not 
far  from  any  one  that  seeketh  him.  Whosoever 
trusteth  shall  surely  find  Christ  to  be  his  very 
present  help  in  time  of  trouble.  Believe  this,  and 
thou  shalt  prove  it  true. 

And  he  that  is  a  soldier  of  the  cross  shall  have 
the  divine  power  of  God  tJie  blessed  Spirit  to  help 
him.  I  have  sometimes  thought,  when  some  strong 
passion  has  been  raging  within  my  soul — How  can 
I  ever  overcome  it  ?  The  will  was  good,  but  the 
flesh  was  weak.  But  as  soon  as  the  Spirit  of  God 
has  moved  on  me  the  flesh  has  given  way.  The 
Holy  Ghost  can  give  the  man  that  is  prone  to 
idleness  such  an  intense  apprehension  of  the  value 
of  time  that  he  shall  be  more  industrious  than  the 
naturally  active  man.  I  believe  that  if  any  of  you 
who  are  subject  to  a  bad  temper  will  lay  this  beset- 
ting sin  before  God  in  prayer,  and  ask  the  Holy 
Spirit's  help,  you  shall  not  only  be  able  to  curb  it, 
but  you  will  acquire  a  sweeter  and  gentler  spirit 
than  some  of  those  whose  temperament  is  naturally 
even  with  no  propensity  to  fitful  change  or  sudden 
storm.  Do  not  tell  me  that  there  is  anything  in 
human  nature  too  obdurate  for  the  Lord  to  over- 
come,   for  there  is  not.     Whatever   may  be  your 


THE    BATTLE    OF  LIFE.  219 

temptation,  you  need  not  account  it  an  effectual 
hindrance  to  your  being  a  Christian.  What 
though  it  be  beyond  your  own  power  to  grapple 
with  it!  When  the  Eternal  arm  comes  to  the  res- 
cue ;  when  the  right  hand  of  Jehovah  is  made  bare ; 
when  the  Holy  Spirit  puts  forth  his  irresistible 
power,  he  can  smite  through  .  the  loins  of  our 
kingly  sins,  and  cut  the  Rahabs  and  dragons  of  our 
iniquities  in  pieces.  Rest  thou  in  the  might  of  Je- 
hovah, the  God  of  Israel.  He  that  brake  Egypt  in 
pieces  with  his  plagues  can  vanquish  our  sins  with 
his  judgments  or  with  his  grace,  and  he  can  bring 
the  new  nature,  like  the  children  of  Israel,  up  out 
of  bondage  into  joyous  liberty.  Go  thou  to  the 
blood,  and  thou  shalt  conquer  sin.  Go  to  the 
Eternal  Spirit,  and  thy  worst  corruptions  shall  be 
overthrown.  "  Who  goeth  a  warfare  at  any  time 
at  his  own  charges  ?  "  As  the  soldier  draws  from 
his  paymaster,  so  let  every  Christian  draw  from 
his  God  and  Saviour.  Conduct  your  warfare  trust- 
ing in  the  blessed  God. 

IV.  My  last  words  shall  be  to  those  who  are 
beginning  the  great  battle  of  life.  Let  me  urge 
upon  them  these  two  or  three  cautions  and 
counsels. 

Behold  ilie  tvisclom  of  diffidence.  I  heard  some 
time  ago  of  a  minister  preaching  on  the  dignity 
Df  self-reliance:  and  I  thought  to  myself,  Surely 
that  is  the  dignity  of  a  fool !  The  dignity  of  self- 
reliance  !  Taken  in  a  certain  sense,  there  is  some 
kind  of  truth  about  it;  or  at  least  the  folly  of  asking 


220  STORM  SIGNALS. 

counsel  of  your  neighbor  in  every  strait  is  suffi- 
ciently obviou-s.  But  he  that  relies  on  his  own  wits 
will  soon  pander  to  expediency  and  grovel  in  the 
mire.  His  actions  will  admit  of  no  better  defence 
than  excuses  and  apologies.  Nay,  sirs;  "but  let 
him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he 
fall."  A  better  subject,  and  one  that  no  preacher 
need  be  ashamed  of  if  the  Master  should  come  ere 
the  sermon  be  done,  is  tlie  dignity  of  reliance  upon 
God,  and  the  ivisdom  of  diffidence  of  oneself.  Begin 
life,  young  man,  by  finding  out  that  the  capital 
you  thought  you  had  is  much  less  than  it  looked 
before  you  counted  it.  Begiu  life,  young  man,  by 
understanding  that  all  in  your  nature  that  gUtters 
is  not  gold,  and  that  your  strength  is  perfect 
weakness.  Begin  by  being  emptied,  and  you 
will  soon  be  tilled.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in 
spirit."  Begin  by  being  poor.  If  you  begin  with 
lowliness  you  will  not  need  to  be  humiliated. 

"  He  that  is  down  need  fear  no  fall, 
He  that  is  low  no  pride ; 
He  that  is  humble  ever  shall 
Have  God  to  be  his  guide." 

He  will  win  the  battle  who  knows  how  to  begin  on 
the  low  ground,  and  to  fight  uphill  by  Divine 
strength.  Learn  the  wisdom,  not  of  self-reliance 
but  of  self-diffidence,  for  he  that  trusteth  in  his  own 
heart  is  a  fool. 

Be  thoroughly  alive  to  the  importance  of  prayer. 
If  all  our  charges  in  the  life- war  are  to  be  paid 
us  by   the   Paymaster,  let  us  go  to  the  treasury. 


THE    BATTLE    OF  LIFE,  221 

Amongst  the  strangest  of  human  sins  is  a  distaste 
for  prayer.  I  open  my  eyes  with  wonder  at  my- 
self whenever  1  find  my  own  self  slow  to  pray ! 
Why,  if  your  children  want  anything  of  you  they 
are  not  slow  to  speak.  They  need  not  be  exhorted 
to  ask  for  this  or  that ;  they  speak  at  once.  And 
here  is  the  soul-enriching  exercise  of  prayer,  is  it 
not  strange  that  you  and  I  should  be  slack  in  it  ? 
Did  you  ever  stand  in  a  market  and  see  the  peo- 
ple coming  in  from  the  country  with  their  goods  ? 
How  diligent  they  are  in  their  business;  how  eager 
to  take  home  as  much  money  as  they  can  !  How 
their  eyes  glitter ;  how  sharp  they  are  !  But  here 
is  heaven's  market;  God's  wares  are  given  away  to 
them  that  will  ask  for  them.  Yet  we  seem  indif- 
ferent, as  though  we  did  not  care  to  be  enriched ; 
we  even  leave  the  mercy-seat  of  God  un visited  ! 
Oh!  young  people,  do  understand  the  value  of 
prayer,  and  you  aged  people,  do  continue  in 
prayer  and  supplication ;  for  if  we  are  to  win  this 
battle  of  our  life  it  can  only  be  by  taking  in  our 
charge-bill  to  the  great  Paymaster,  and  asking  him 
to  discharge  the  charges  of  this  war. 

Consider,  too,  the  necessity  of  holiness.  If  in  my 
life's  warfare  I  am  entirely  dependent  upon  God, 
let  me  not  grieve  him.  Let  me  seek  so  to  walk 
with  him  that  I  may  expect  to  have  him  with 
me.  Oh  let  our  consecration  be  unreserved  and 
complete  1 

And  in  all  these  we  must  prove  the  poiuer  of 
faith.     If  we  have  never  begun  to  trust  in  Jesus 


222  STORM  SIGNALS 

let  us  begin  now.  Oh !  may  the  Eternal  Spirit 
breathe  faith  into  our  souls.  The  beginning  of 
true  spiritual  life  is  here — trusting  what  Christ  has 
wrought  for  us,  relying  upon  his  sufferings  on  our 
behalf.  The  continuation  of  spiritual  life  is  here 
— trusting  still  in  what  Christ  has  done  and  is  do- 
ing. The  consummation  of  spiritual  life  on  earth 
is  still  the  same — trusting  still,  trusting  ever; 
always  repairing  to  Christ  for  the  supply  of  all  our 
needs;  going  to  him  with  our  blots  to  have  them 
removed,  with  our  tailings  to  have  them  forgiven, 
with  our  wants  and  requirements  to  have  them 
provided  for,  with  our  good  works  and  our  prayers 
to  have  them  rendered  acceptable,  and  with  our- 
selves that  we  may  still  be  preserved  in  him. 

Sharpen  your  swords,  soldiers  of  the  cross,  and 
be  ready  for  the  fray,  but  as  ye  march  to  the  battle 
let  it  be  with  heads  bowed  down  in  adoration  be- 
fore him  who  alone  can  cover  your  heads  in  the 
day  of  battle;  and  when  you  lift  up  those  heads  in 
the  front  of  the  foe,  let  this  be  your  song — "  The 
Lord  Jehovah  is  my  strength  and  my  song;  the 
Lord  has  become  my  salvation  ! "  And  when  the 
fight  waxes  hot,  if  your  head  grow  weary,  think 
of  "  Him  who  endured  such  contradiction  of  sin- 
ners against  himself,"  and  still  fight  on  until  you 
win  the  day,  and  then  as  the  figlit  draws  to  a  close, 
and  your  sun  is  going  down,  and  you  can  count 
your  scars,  and  are  ready  to  enter  into  your  rest, 
be  this  your  prayer — ''  I  have  gone  astray  like  a 
lost  sheep,  but  seek  thy  servant,  for  I  do  not  forget 


THE    BATTLE    OF  LIFE.  223 

thy  commandments."  And  be  this  your  last  word 
on  earth — "Into  thy  hand  I  commit  my  spirit,  for 
thou  hast  redeemed  me,  O  Lord  God  of  my  salva- 
tion ;"  so  shall  this  be  your  eternal  song  in  heaven 
above — "  Unto  him  that  hath  loved  us,  and  washed 
us  from  our  sins  in  his  blood,  to  him  be  glory  for 
ever  and  ever."  Amen. 


Attention  I 

^^  Hear  ye  him.^* — Matthew  xvii.  5. 

WHEN  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  trans- 
figured, there  came  a  voice  from  the  bright 
overshadowing  cloud,  which  said,  "  This  is  my  be- 
loved Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased.  Hear  ye 
him."  It  was  the  voice  of  the  Father  concerning 
his  Son ;  a  testimony  to  his  person,  a  notification  of 
his  office,  an  announcement  of  his  authority  to 
t^each  and  to  legislate.  You  can  understand  how 
imperative  it  then  was  for  those  who  heard  it  to 
heed  him.  But  now  he  is  gone  up  from  us.  He 
has  entered  into  the  excellent  glory;  he  no  more 
teaches  in  our  streets,  yet  still,  as  though  present 
with  us,  he  speaks  to  us.  By  the  written  Word, 
his  sayings  are  handed  down  to  us  infallibly. 
Oftentimes,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  rests  upon  God's 
servants,  they  become  as  the  voice  of  Christ  to  us ; 
and  when  that  same  blessed  Spirit,  as  the  Com- 
forter, brings  to  our  remembrance  the  things  of 
Christ,  seems  it  not  as  though  Jesus  himself  spake 
to  our  souls?  The  admonition  is  not  out  of  date; 
it  has  not  lost  its  telling  point  or  its  vital  force. 


A  TTENTION,  225 

Still  dotli  the  Father  say  to  ns  concerning  his  well- 
beloved  Son,  *'  Hear  ye  him." 

Let  us  proceed  to  meditate  on  this  sacred  charge. 
The  three  little  words  may  give  rise  to  four  short 
questions.     Why  ?     What  ?     How  ?     When  ? 

I.  Do  you  ask  why  ?  Why  should  we  hear  him  ? 
It  might  serve  for  a  sufficient  answer,  had  we  no 
other  reply,  because  God  himself  commands  us. 
This  injunction  cometh  of  the  Father,  "  Hear  ye 
him."  Over  and  over  again  are  we  enjoined  to  lis- 
ten to  the  voice  of  Christ.  Every  messenger  from 
God  ought  to  have  our  respectful  attention,  how 
much  more  the  greatest  of  all  messengers;  that 
messenger  of  the  covenant,  the  Messiah,  the  sent 
One,  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession. 
Did  not  Jehovah  himself  say,  "This  is  my  Son"? 
It  seemed  reasonable  that  the  Son  should  receive 
more  reverence  than  any  of  the  servants.  If  sen- 
ators and  patriots,  counselors  and  prophets,  had 
been  stoned  and  cast  out  of  the  vineyard,  deference 
might  yet  be  paid  to  the  Son.  If  their  perverse- 
ness  had  refused  him  homage,  their  scruples  might 
have  sheltered  him  from  indignity.  Surely  they 
would  not  go  so  far  as  to  cast  out  the  Son  himself. 
There  is  a  willfulness,  a  defection  of  heart,  an 
enormity  of  sin,  in  refusing  to  hear  the  Christ  of 
God,  for  which  it  is  difficult  to  find  terms.  Ap- 
pointed, anointed,  commissioned  of  the  Father  to 
speak  to  us,  to  confer  with  us,  to  make  known 
amongst  us  the  mind  and  will  of  our  great  and 
gracious  Sovereign,   it  becomes  treason  and  bias- 


226  STORM   SIGNALS. 

phemy  of  the  highest  order  and  the  deepest  dye 
for  us  to  refuse  to  heed  his  presence  or  hearken  to 
his  words. 

Why  hear  him  ?  do  ye  ask  ?  Does  not  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  himself  deserve  to  be  heard  ?  Peer- 
less among  the  princes  of  heaven,  is  he  not  very 
God  of  very  God  ?  Immaculate  among  the  chil- 
dren of  men,  is  he  not  man  of  the  substance  of  his 
mother  ?  Here  is  a  double  claim  upon  our  atten- 
tion. Beaming  with  divinity,  instinct  with  human- 
ity, he  speaks  as  never  man  spake;  clothing  the 
highest  oracles  in  the  most  familiar  parables.  And 
will  ye  not  hear  what  this  God-man  hath  to  say  ? 
Is  he  not  perfect  in  wisdom^  pure  in  motive,  and 
undeviating  in  truthfulness  ?  To  whom  should 
we  listen,  if  we  turn  away  from  him  ?  He  has  all 
those  high  sanctions  which  should  claim  our 
allegiance,  and  all  those  sweet  traits  of  character 
which  should  attract  our  regard.  If  we  will  not 
listen  to  such  an  one  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the 
gentle,  and  meek,  and  lowly,  yet  the  truthful,  the 
honest,  and  the  brave,  to  whom  will  we  ever  lend 
an  attentive  ear  7  0,  sons  of  men,  there  was  never 
mentor  or  orator  so  worthy  of  your  regard  as  Jesus 
Christ;  never  philosopher  who  had  such  maxims  to 
deliver  or  such  mysteries  to  unfold  as  this  man — 
the  Son  of  God — the  Incarnate  Wisdom. 

Why  will  ye  not  hear  him,  when  the  message  he 
has  come  to  communicate  concerns  yourselves,  your 
present  and  future  welfare,  your  most  solemn  in- 
terests ?    The  tidings  he  brings  are,  indeed,  laden 


A  TTENTION.  227 

with  ten  thousand  blessings  for  us,  if  we  will  but 
incline  our  ear,  and  hearken  to  them.  He  conies  to 
redress  our  grievances,  to  retrieve  our  disasters,  to 
redeem  our  souls,  to  secure  our  prosperity,  to  effect 
our  salvation :  as  an  ambassador  from  God  he  comes, 
not  to  treat  upon  small  matters,  to  settle  petty 
disputes,  or  to  advise  upon  local  or  temporary 
jxffairs,  but  with  supreme  authority  to  show  how 
sinful  man  may  be  reconciled  to  his  Maker,  how 
the  foul  stains  of  transgression  may  be  washed 
away,  and  scarlet  sins  become  white  as  snow.  He 
comes  to  tell  us  how  we  may  escape  the  impend- 
ing doom  of  hell,  and  how  we  may  attain  an  in- 
heritance in  heaven.  To  fit  us  for  that  high  estate, 
and  that  blessed  society,  he  comes  to  cleanse  us 
from  our  corruptions,  and  to  endow  us  with  a  na- 
ture that  is  divine,  and  faculties  that  are  suited  to 
the  celestial  glory.  Such  a  message  as  this  should 
enamor  our  very  selfishness,  and  constrain  our 
ambition  to  regard  it  with  favor.  Hear  ye  him. 
O  ye  sick  and  wounded,  will  ye  not  listen  to  the 
physician  ?  0  ye  bankrupt  debtors,  will  ye  not 
hearken  to  the  jubilee  trumpet  that  proclaims 
your  debts  paid,  and  your  forfeited  rights  re- 
stored ?  0  ye  outcasts,  wandering  all  forlorn,  in 
climes  uncongenial  to  your  health,  your  peace, 
your  homely  joys;  will  ye  not  heed  the  voice  of  a 
guide,  who  comes  to  conduct  you  in  safety  to  your 
fatherland  ?  O  ye  despairing  souls,  he  sets  before 
you  an  open  door.  Ye  famished  poor,  he  invites 
you  to  a  banquet,  a  banquet  richly  provisioned  with 


228  STORM   SIGNALS. 

all  the  dainties  of  eternal  love.  With  such  wo^'ds 
upon  his  lips,  such  blessed  news  to  bring  to  such 
needy  creatures,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  well 
claim  to  be  heard. 

There  is  a  further  argument  which  ought  to  have 
thrilling  force  among  full  many  of  you,  my  hearers. 
With  what  zest  should  those  of  us  hear  him  who 
profess  to  be  his  disciples.     Years  ago  some  of  us 
took  his  easy  yoke  upon  our  shoulders,   and  we 
bless  his  name  it  has  never  galled  them,  neither 
are  we  weary  of  the  load.     He  is  our  Master  and 
our  Lord,  and  if  he  be  so,  surely  our  proper  place 
is  at  his  feet.     It  is  an  ill  thing  of  us,  and  untruth- 
ful,  if  we  call  him  Master,  and  yet  will  not  be- 
lieve what  he  teaches;  if  we  say  to  him  "  Rabboni," 
and  yet  turn   aside  to   hail   some   fellow-creature 
— be  he  a  noted  saint  long  since  dead,  or  a  party 
leader  who  still  survives  among  us,  as  our  captain 
and  commander-in-chief.     If  Peter  be  our  master, 
let  us  call  him   so;   if  Calvin   be   our  master,  let 
us  call  him  so;  and  if  Wesley  be  our  master,  let  us 
call  him  so;  but  if  we  be  disciples  of  Jesus,  then  let 
us  follow  Jesus,  and  follow  him  with  other  men 
only  so  far   as  we  perceive  they  followed  Christ. 
Hear  ye  Am,  0  ye  disciples,  if  ye  be  his  disciples. 
Will  ye  enlist  as  his  soldiers,  and  shrink  from  his 
lead  ?     Will  ye  engage  to  be  his  servants,  and  yet 
violate  his  orders  ?     Will  ye  who  declare  that  he  is 
your  chieftain,  and  wear  his  uniform,    cede  your 
homage  to  other  masters  ?     Nay,    by   all  that  is 
honest  and  just,  pure  and  comely,  and  of  good  re- 


A  TTENTION.  229 

port,  the  shame  would  fester  in  every  believer's 
conscience.  Ye  call  him  "  Master  and  Lord,"  and 
ye  say  well,  for  so  he  is ;  but  prove  yourselves  to  be 
truly  his  disciples  by  hearing  him. 

To  the  rest — I  am  grieved  at  heart  that  I  should 
have  to  speak  of  "  the  rest,"  but  we  know  there  is 
such  a  remnant  here — to  those  who  are  not  his  dis- 
ciples, there  is  an  argument,  that  if  it  tell  not  now, 
will  tell  hereafter.  You  must  hear  him  in  this  day 
of  grace,  or  else  you  shall  hear  him  in  that  day  of 
judgment,  and  perish  forever.  Do  you  refuse  to 
hear  Christ,  there  are  not  any  tidings  of  mercy  to 
be  heard  elsewhere.  "  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him 
that  speaketh,  for  if  they  escaped  not  who  refused 
him  that  spake  on  earth,  much  more  shall  not  we 
escape  if  we  turn  away  from  him  that  speaketh 
from  heaven."  0  sinners,  hear  ye  the  Saviour's 
voice !  0  wanderers,  hear  your  Shepherd's  voice  ! 
0  ye  dying,  hear  your  physician's  voice  !  I  will 
add,  0  ye  dead,  hear  ye  the  voice  of  the  great 
Quickener,  for  the  time  is  come,  that  they  that  are 
in  their  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
man,  and  they  that  hear  him  shall  live.  "  Hear  ye 
him  !  "  Thus  with  general  arguments  suitable  to 
all,  and  with  special  arguments  for  those  who  have 
believed,  and  for  those  who  have  not  believed,  we 
leave  with  you  a  few  of  the  reasons  why. 

II.  Our  second  catch-word  is  "What?"  What 
are  we  to  hear  ?  "  Hear  ye  Him''  There  is  much 
to  hear  concerning  the  person  of  Christ,  the  actions 
of  Christ,  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  offices 


230  STORM   SIGNALS. 

of  Christ,  but  the  fullness  of  all  revelation  is  embod- 
ied in  himself  Greater  than  the  greatest  sermon 
that  was  ever  preached  in  the  world,  is  the  AVord 
made  flesh.  He  is  the  manifestation  of  God;  the 
brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express 
image  of  his  person.  Would  you  know  God,  you 
must  know  Christ.  "He  that  hath  seen  me"  (it  is 
His  own  testimony)  "  hath  seen  the  Father."  In 
the  character  of  Jesus  the  character  of  God  is  re- 
flected with  inefiable  purity.  The  invisible  God  is 
in  him,  made  visible  to  men  as  far  as  the  sense  of 
faith  can  behold  him:  infinitely  farther  than  the 
natural  senses  can  discern.  The  infinite  can  never 
be  brought  down  to  the  level  of  our  puny  intelli- 
gence, so  as  to  be  comprehended  by  us;  yet  in  the 
presence  of  Christ  we  are  conscious  of  the  infinite. 
It  is  palpable  to  us  as  a  mountain  that  cannot  be 
scaled,  but  under  whose  shadow  we  can  find  shel- 
ter. And  when  we  look  to  Christ,  and  listen  to 
his  voice,  we  are  as  those  who  gaze  on  the  vast 
ocean,  in  which,  to  our  poor  minds,  the  infinite  is 
mirrored  forth ;  for  as  far  as  the  vision  can  stretch, 
there  is  no  bound,  no  shore  beyond,  and  his  words 
sound  on  and  on  like  the  mighty  sea,  through  time 
that  knows  no  limit,  and  through  eternity  that  has 
no  end.  He  is  the  wisdom  of  God  and  the  power 
of  God.  Hear  him,  then,  hear  him;  let  his  voice 
break  on  your  ears  as  the  music  of  the  main,  in 
that  melodious  anthem :  "  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that 
labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you 
rest;"  or  in  that  thrilling  utterance,  "I,  if  I  be 


A  TTENTION.  231 

lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto 
me."  Hear  j?m,  I  say,  hear  Him.  As  the  sound 
of  many  waters,  as  the  chorus  of  the  waves,  hear 
this: — "God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world 
unto  himself."  View  Christ  as  a  child  who  must 
be  about  his  Father's  business,  and  as  a  man  who 
must  work  the  works  of  his  Father  while  it  is  day ; 
know  him  as  a  teacher  and  a  guide;  mark  his  zeal 
to  minister,  and  his  devotedness  to  suffer.  Then  let 
poets  sing  of  "Nature,"  if  they  please.  Let  them 
call  it  "  the  thin  veil  which  half  conceals  and  half 
reveals  the  face  and  lineaments  of  God,"  as  some 
of  them  have  done.  But  let  Christians  bear  me 
witness,  that  the  simple  tale  of  Christ  living  among 
men,  with  which  we  delight  to  make  ourselves 
more  and  more  familiar,  unveils  the  attributes  of 
God  in  words  and  deeds  of  mercy  and  compassion, 
of  patience  and  long-suffering,  of  sweet  mindful- 
ness and  great  marvel  in  such  clearness  as  days  of 
sunshine  and  moonlight  nights  could  never  teach 
you,  though  more  than  threescore  years  and  ten  of 
these  revolving  seasons  should  pass  over  your 
head.  But  especially  read  God  in  the  death  of 
Jesus.  Behold  the  divine  justice  gleaming  there, 
for  he  wakens  his  sword  that  he  may  sheath  it  in 
the  heart  of  the  great  Shepherd,  and  that  the 
sheep  may  escape  its  keen  edge.  See  there  the 
love  of  God,  who  spared  not  his  own  Son.  See  all 
the  divine  attributes  marvelously  blended  on  the 
cross  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  begot- 
ten Son  of  the  Father.     Hear  him.     And  now  do 


232  STORM   SIGNALS. 

ye  hear  tell  of  him  as  he  goes  beyond  the  stars 
aud  enters  the  pearl  gate  to  take  possession  of  his 
well-earned  crown:  let  us  hear  him  there,  and 
understand  that  he  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost 
them  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.  Hear  the  voice 
of  his  ascension,  as  it  proclaims  the  justification  of 
those  for  whom  he  died  and  rose  again,  and  the 
assurance  of  the  eternal  perfection  of  all  those  for 
whom  his  blood  was  shed;  "  for  this  man  hath  per- 
fected forever  them  that  are  set  apart,  by  the  one 
sacrifice  that  he  hath  offered."  Hear  him.  His 
very  person,  and  everything  connected  with  him, 
speaks  with  trumpet  tongue.  Hear  what  God  says 
to  you  by  him.  Oh,  I  wish  that  we  were  more  at- 
tentive to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  I  am  afraid 
many  of  us  are  very  superficial  in  our  consider- 
ations of  our  Saviour.  We  do  not  labor  "  to  compre- 
hend with  all  saints  what  are  the  heights  and 
depths."  God  speaks  to  dull  ears.  Though  his 
accents  are  far  more  sweet  than  music  when  he 
speaks  by  Jesus  Christ,  yet  a  very  large  part  of 
what  God  has  thus  said  to  us,  many  of  you  have 
not  hitherto  understood. 

Let  me  remind  you,  dear  friends,  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  many  forms  of  speaking — many  varie- 
ties of  utterance.  Sometimes  he  instructs.  He  is 
a  great  didactic  teacher,  and  he  has  spoken  by  the 
mouth  of  his  apostles  as  well  as  with  his  own  lips. 
The  truths  that  were  uttered  in  his  name,  like  the 
miracles  that  were  wrought  in  his  name,  have  the 


ATTENTION.  233 

impress  of  his  sovereign  authority.  Hence  that 
summary  of  Christian  doctrine  which  Paul  was  in- 
spired of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  open  up,  was  the  plain 
result  of  the  life  of  Jesus;  a  key  to  interpret  what 
he  said  and  did.  Do  you  read  in  the  gospels  how 
he  obeyed  the  Father  ?  in  the  epistles  you  read  of 
that  obedience  as  a  righteousness  imputed  to  all  that 
believe.  Do  you  find  in  the  gospels  a  minute  ac- 
count of  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus;  the  epistles 
will  tell  you  that  his  death  was  a  py^opitiation  for 
our  sins.  Do  the  gospels  furnish  you  with  proofs 
of  his  rising  from  the  dead;  the  epistles  will  as- 
sure you  that  he  was  raised  for  our  justification. 
Do  you  learn  from  the  gospels  that  he  ascended 
up  into  heaven?  the  epistles  will  teach  you  that 
he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.  We 
are  bound  to  take  our  theology  from  the  entire 
Scriptures. 

Where,  and  when,  and  by  whomsoever  Christ 
speaks  to  us,  let  us  hear  him.  The  well  of  theology 
undefiled  is  the  Word  of  God.  We  err  when  we  pin 
our  profession  to  creeds  of  human  devising.  Creeds 
are  exceedingly  useful,  and  I  hope  they  will  never 
be  discarded;  in  fact  they  never  can  be,  for  every 
man  has  a  creed,  whether  he  likes  to  think  so  or 
not.  He  has  a  consistent  or  an  inconsistent  one. 
But  our  creed  must  not  be  constructed  from  the 
dogmas  of  general  councils,  or  the  opinions  of 
learned  men,  much  less  must  it  be  the  reflection  of 
"  modern  thought,"  which  is  full  of  infidelity,  but 
it  must  embrace  the  truths  which  we  have  received 


234  STORM  SIGNALS. 

directly  from  the  Word  of  God.  And  surely,  after 
reading  controversies  upon  theology,  one  has  often 
said,  like  David,  "Oh,  that,  one  would  give  me  to 
drink  of  the  water  of  the  well  of  Bethlehem,  that 
is  within  the  gate!"  Oh,  that  I  could  get  a  drink 
of  water  from  the  well-head — from  the  Scripture 
itself!  And  ye  do  well,  my  brethren,  if  your  only 
Doctor  of  Divinity  is  Christ,  and  if  he  is  your  only 
body  of  divinity;  for,  indeed,  was  there  ever  any 
other  body  of  divinity  under  heaven  save  Jesus 
Christ?  Let  my  doctrine  be  what  Christ  taught; 
let  my  reason  for  believing  it  be  that  he  said  so; 
let  me  sit  at  his  feet  and  learn  of  him,  and  let  him 
be  my  authority.  I  shall  want  no  better  argu- 
ment, if  1  gather  my  reason  from  the  fact  that  he 
hath  declared  it. 

But  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  not  always  the  voice 
of  instruction;  it  is  sometimes  spoken  in  per- 
emptory tones,  commanding  us.  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  has  given  many  absolute  injunctions  to  his 
people.  Some  there  are  amongst  us — we  grieve 
to  confess  it — who  are  not  so  fond  of  his  precepts 
as  of  his  doctrines.  They  will  hear  the  preaching 
that  sets  forth  the  precious  doctrines  of  grace,  and 
the  sweet  promises  of  the  covenant,  with  very,  great 
delight,  as  I  hope  we  all  do,  but  at  the  mention 
of  the  precepts  and  the  practical  obligations  they 
are  offended,  and  afraid  that  there  is  more  of  a 
legal  twang  than  of  a  gospel  tone  in  the  sermon. 
Perhaps  such  fears  have  too  often  been  justified;  at 
the   same   time,   brethren,   we   should   always    be 


A  TTENTION.  235 

ready  to  suffer  the  word  of  exhortation,  and  be  as 
content  to  do  for  Christ  that  which  he  enjoins,  as 
to  get  from  Christ  that  which  he  freely  bestows. 
That  saying  of  the  mother  of  Jesus  to  those  who 
waited  at  the  feast  of  Cana,  is  good  advice  for  us 
all,  stie  said  to  the  servants,  "  Whatsoever  he  saith 
unto  you,  do  it."  Does  Christ  command  separation 
from  the  world — separate  yourselves,  and  come  ye 
out.  Does  Christ  command  cross-bearing,  and  go- 
ing without  the  camp — take  up  your  cross  cheer- 
fully, and  follow  him  without  the  camp.  Doth 
Christ  command  integrity  of  character  and  holi- 
ness of  life — oh,  that  we  might  be  blameless  in 
the  one  and  exemplary  in  the  other.  Doth  he 
command  love,  a  kindly  affection  for  the  brethren, 
and  a  practical  benevolence  towards  all  mankind, 
let  us  diligently  cherish  both.  Doth  he  command 
us  to  forgive  injuries,  to  show  a  peaceable  disposi- 
tion, then  let  us  bear  and  forbear  in  advance  of  all 
the  maxims  of  society,  stimulated  by  the  nobte  ex- 
ample of  our  Lord,  and  obedient  to  the  law  of  his 
mouth.  Do  ye  call  the  blessed  Jesus  your  Lord 
and  Master?  "Hear  ye  him."  Heed  his  precepts 
as  well  as  hearken  to  his  doctrine.  Often,  too,  by 
way  of  direction  does  our  Lord  speak  to  us.  How 
wisely  would  our  lives  be  ordered  did  we  simply 
and  sincerely  follow  Christ's  guidance  !  We  often 
make  glaring  mistakes  in  trivial  matters,  because 
we  fancy  ourselves  able  to  direct  our  own  steps  in 
plain  common  paths.  Many  a  man  has  gone 
straight  through  an  intricate  coarse,    because  he 


236  STORM   SIGNALS. 

has  prayed  earnestly,  and  in  answer  to  prayer  he 
has  found  out  the  narrow  channel  between  the 
quicksands  and  the  rocks;  yet  on  other  occasions 
that  same  man  had  committed  folly  in  Israel, 
because  he  thought  it  was  fair  sailing  and  he  did 
not  want  to  take  the  divine  pilot  on  board.  Let  us 
in  all  things,  great  or  small,  ask  counsel  of  Christ, 
and  when  once  we  know  his  will,  let  us  never  have 
a  second  thought.  It  is  not  ours  to  reason  or  to 
question,  but  it  is  ours  to  suffer  loss  and  endure 
reproach,  if  need  be,  when  we  have  his  orders. 
The  Christian's,  like  the  soldier's  duty  is  to  obey. 
Be  it  to  do  or  to  die,  it  is  imperative  that  he  lay 
his  judgment  at  the  feet  of  his  commander. 
His  judgment  is  never  sounder  than  when  he  de- 
fers to  his  chief,  demurs  to  nothing,  and  decides 
at  the  spur  of  prescript  or  prohibition.  With 
his  charge  for  your  chart,  be  ready  to  hear  his 
direction. 

Nor  is  there  any  lack  in  another  particular. 
Full. often,  blessed  be  his  name,  Christ  gives  us 
the  word  of  consolation.  Unhappy  are  those  dis- 
ciples who  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  those  sweet  refresh- 
ments. We  do  know  some  who  are  so  sickly  and 
depressed  in  spirit,  that  "  their  soul  abhorreth  all 
manner  of  meat,  and  they  draw  nigh  unto  the 
gates  of  death."  "My  soul  refuseth  to  be  com- 
forted,'' says  the  Psalmist,  and  there  are  persons  in 
that  pitiable  condition.  But,  dear  friends,  when 
Jesus  deigns  to  comfort,  surely  it  is  wise  to  obey 
the  injunction,   "  Hear  ye  him."     Why,  if  I  could 


A  TTENTION.  237 

not  believe  the  promise  of  ray  father,  or  the  promise 
of  my  brother,  yet  must  I  believe  the  promise  of 
my  Saviour.     He  cannot  deceive;   he  would  not 
speak  flattering  words;   it  were  not   possible   for 
him  to  buoy   me  up  with   specious   consolations, 
showing  me  the  bright  side  of  the  picture,  and 
veiling  the  darker  shadows.     Oh  no !  he  has  said 
himself,   "  If  it  were  not  so,    1    would   have   told 
you."     He  is  perfectly  ingenuous  in  what  he  says; 
he  conceals  nothing  which  it  is  profitable  for  us  to 
know.     He  is   himself  transparent  truth.     When 
he  says  to  me — to  you — "  Let  not  your  hearts  be 
troubled!     Ye  believe  in  God:  beUeve  also  in  me. 
In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions;" — shall 
we  not  dismiss  our  fears,  renew  our  hearty  confi- 
dence in  him,  believe  in  the  many  mansions,  and 
look  forward  to  them  ?    And  if  he  says  to  us  (as  he 
does),  "I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee;" 
if  he  declares,   "  I  give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life, 
and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck 
them  out  of  my  hand,"  should  we  not  ground  our 
full  assurance   on  his  simple  assertion?     Are  we 
to  question  what  he  affirms,  because  it  seems  too 
good  to  be  true  ?     May  it  not  remind  us  of  that 
famous  speech  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of  his 
servant   Esaias:  "As   the  heavens  are  above  the 
earth,  so  are   my  ways   higher   than  your   ways, 
and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts."     Oh,  bow 
thine  ear,  thou  mournful  one,  disconsolate  as  thou 
art,  I  marvel  not   that  thou   dost   refuse   earthly 
sedatives,  but  I  wonder  much  that  thou  should- 


238  STORM  SIGNALS. 

est  deny  thyself  these  heavenly  restoratives.  The 
oil  and  wine  that  Jesus  brings  must  be  healing 
and  healthful.  The  ointment  that  he  puts  upon 
thee  will  not  aggravate  thy  sores,  but  it  will  cure 
thy  malady.  Yield  thyself  to  his  generous  treat- 
ment. The  spirit  of  Christ  never  comforts  un- 
wisely. Kejoice  thou  that  he  has  given  the  Spirit, 
and  still  speaks  by  the  Spirit  unto  the  mourners  in 
Zion. 

I  might  linger  over  these  kindred  reflections. 
When  our  Lord  speaks  by  way  of  warning,  and 
bids  thee  "  Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,"  hear  ye 
him.  When  he  speaks  by  way  of  exhortation,  or  of 
invitation,  saying,  "  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that 
labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you 
rest,"  then  "hear  ye  him."  If  his  tone  should 
seem  somewhat  severe  to  your  souls,  and  your 
flesh  should  revolt  against  it,  yet  "  Hear  ye  him." 
His  lips  are  as  lilies,  dropping  sweet  smelling 
myrrh;  always  sweet  smelling  and  healing  like 
the  myrrh.  Oh,  regard  him ;  catch  his  faintest 
accents;  treasure  his  words.  Take  your  tablets 
and  write  down  what  he  saith;  but  let  your 
tablets  be  your  heart's  best  flesh,  made  soft  by  the 
power  of  the  regenerating  Spirit.  Pray  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  write  upon  your  souls,  to  carve  deeply 
upon  your  hearts,  all  that  Jesus  Christ  may  speak 
to  you.  This  is  xoliat  we  would  have  you  hear. 
"  Hear  ye  /^^m." 

HI.  The  third  word  about  which  some  remarks 
were  to  cluster  was  '*  How  ?  "     How  shall  we  hear 


A  TTENTION.  239 

him  ?  We  have  shown  you  that  he  speaks  in  the 
words  of  Scripture;  that  he  speaks  through  his  ser- 
vants; that  he  speaks  by  his  Holy  Spirit  to  the 
hearts  of  his  people.  How  shall  w^e  hear  him, 
then  ?  Undoubtedly  it  becomes  us  to  listen  with  ' 
devout  reverence.  Let  us  revere  each  particular 
truth  of  Scripture,  for  the  sacred  authority  with 
which  it  comes  to  us.  Every  rightly  constituted 
mind  must  feel  shocked  at  the  way  in  which  cer- 
tain parts  of  God's  Word  are  treated  by  the  thought- 
less as  well  as  the  profane.  I  believe,  brethren, 
that  the  habit  of  trifling  with  the  minutest  detail 
of  God's  house  is  very  sinful.  I  know  that  it  has 
led  to  much  mischief  in  the  church  of  God.  I  re- 
member hearing  a  minister  speak  of  the  contro- 
versy about  baptism  with  palpable  levity.  It  made 
me  shudder  when  he  said,  that  for  his  part  he  did 
not  care  twopence  about  baptism.  Is  there  not  a 
baptism  of  the  Lord's  commandment?  Some  sort 
of  baptism  there  is,  at  any  rate,  which  Christ  has 
enjoined.  God  forbid  that  I  should  scoff  at  it. 
Where  is  your  loyalty  to  the  Son  of  God,  if  ye 
rudely  snap  your  fingers  at  any  ordinance  he  has 
appointed  ?  Ye  that  hear  may  account  it  of  no 
consequence,  but  he  that  declared  it  to  us  well 
knew  its  profound  importance,  for  he  said,  "Who- 
soever, therefore,  shall  break  one  of  these  least 
commandments,  and  shall  teach  men  so,  he  shall 
be  called  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.' 
You  have  coined  a  new  proverb  to  supersede  the 
old  statutes.     "  There  are  no  sects  in  heaven,"  you 


240  STORM  SIGNALS. 

inform  us.  Then,  having  forged  a  text,  you  supply 
us  with  a  commentary.  '*  Tliese  points  are  really 
non-essential";  you  tell  us,  "  it  would  promote  love 
and  concord  utterly  to  ignore  them."  Nay,  sirs, 
but  the  pomts  of  which  you  speak  so  lightly  are 
not  mere  specks  on  the  horizon,  they  are  more 
like  lights  in  the  firmament  of  the  heaven  to 
divide  the  day  from  the  night;  let  them  be  to  you 
for  signs  and  for  seasons.  "  They  are  not  essential 
for  salvation,"  says  one.  Be  it  so,  and  yet  they 
may  be  essential  for  approbation,  I  reply.  As  a 
servant,  "  will  you  willfully  offend  because  the 
penalty  is  that  you  be  reproved,  not  that  you  be 
discharged.  As  a  pupil  in  the  school  of  Christ, 
will  you  violate  his  laws,  because  you  will  only  be 
put  to  the  bottom  of  the  class,  and  no  one  supposes 
you  will  be  expelled  from  school.  Has  it  come  to 
this  with  thee,  professing  Christian,  that  to  escape 
from  hell  is  the  only  thing  you  care  about?  Are 
you  of  so  mean,  so  beggarly  a  spirit,  that  provided 
you  get  saved,  it  is  all  you  are  concerned  about  ?  " 
Dear  friends,  after  we  are  saved,  it  is  essential  to 
the  peace  of  our  conscience  that  we  search  the 
word  of  God  to  know  the  will  of  Christ  concerning 
us;  and  that  in  every  particular,  as  far  as  we  are 
able,  we  endeavor  to  do  his  will.  You  may  err 
through  ignorance,  not  knowing  that  you  are 
doing  wrong.  That  is  a  sin,  a  sin  concerning 
which  Christ  says  you  shall  be  beaten  with  few 
stripes.  But  it  is  an  aggravation  of  sin  when  a 
person  does  not  wish  to  know  his  Lord's  will ;  nay, 


ATTENTION.  241 

refuses  to  inquire,  and  thinks  it  quite  unimportant; 
for  such  willfulness  the  servant,  to  use  our  Lord's 
own  words,  "shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes." 
God  save  us  from  the  censure  as  well  as  from  the 
penalty  of  that  transgression.  Never  treat  with 
levity  any  text  of  Scripture;  never  suppose  that 
because  the  truth  is  considered  small  by  the  men 
of  your  generation,  that  it  is  therefore  inconsid- 
erable in  the  eyes  of  him  who  ruleth  throughout 
all  generations.  The  sweepings  of  the  lapidary's 
shop,  where  diamonds  are  polished,  are  precious; 
how  much  more  should  each  member  of  the  whole 
church  be  jealous  of  every  minute  particle  of  truth. 
Small  errors  are  the  seedlings  from  which  gigantic 
heresies  spring  up.  The  more  accord  with  the 
mind  of  Christ  there  is  in  the  individual  dis- 
ciples of  Jesus  the  more  concord  there  will  be 
in  the  visible  church.  Unity  is  not  promoted 
by  endorsing  one  another's  faults,  but  by  con- 
spiring one  with  another  to  maintain  the  Mas- 
ter's statutes. 

Let  us  hear  believingly.  •  Some  are  troubled 
with  doubts  and  fears,  and  others  foster  them  as  if 
they  were  accessories  to  faith,  and  proofs  of  an  in- 
genuous disposition.  We  have  heard  from  the 
philosophic  side  that  there  is  more  faith  in  doubt- 
ing than  in  crediting  the  revealed  Word.  Keally, 
such  cant  I  do  not  care  to  quote.  The  marvel  is 
that  it  gets  currency  for  an  hour.  The  class  of 
doubters  we  have  abroad  in  the  present  day  may 
well  be  always  protesting  that  they  are  honest, 


242  STORM  SIGNALS. 

since  there  is  so  much  reason  to  suspect  the  hon- 
esty of  their  doubts.  And  there  are  Christian  peo- 
ple who  think  it  a  commendable  humility,  and  an 
excellent  feature  of  experience,  to  entertain  doubts, 
to  make  a  profession  of  fears,  and  to  cast  reflec- 
tions on  "  the  full  assurance  of  faith,"  as  though  it 
were  presumptuous  and  unbecoming.  From  the 
tone  of  their  conversation  you  might  infer  that  the 
promise  of  the  gospel  is  to  him  that  doubts,  and 
hesitates  to  show  his  allegiance,  rather  than  to  him 
that  believes  and  is  baptized,  that  he  shall  be  saved. 
The  new  birth  is  a  grave  subject  to  their  think- 
ing. It  fills  them  with  terror,  instead  of  inspir- 
ing them  with  hope.  But  their  morbid  views  are 
all  wrong,  my  brethren.  What  Christ  has  said  is 
true,  infallibly  true,  it  is  not  to  be  lightly  ques- 
tioned, but  implicitly  relied  on.  Be  it  ours  to  ac- 
cept from  his  lips  whatever  of  teaching,  or  consola- 
tion, or  promise,  he  may  utter.  And  let  us  hear  him 
expectantly  with  the  full  assurance  of  hope,  know- 
ing that  he  is  faithful  who  hath  promised.  Espe- 
cially in  the  matter  of  prayer,  let  us  encourage  the 
utmost  confidence  that  he  will  hear  us.  Have  you 
not  caught  yourself  sometimes  telling  of  the  re- 
markable answers  you  have  obtained,  as  if  it  caused 
you  the  greatest  possible  surprise  that  you  should 
ask  and  receive  ?  Meet  and  right  it  is,  my  dear 
brother,  that  you  should  relate  what  God  has  done 
for  you ;  but  is  it  quite  right  for  you  to  express  as- 
tonishment that  he  has  fulfilled  his  own  engage- 
ments ?     Should  it  be  accounted  strange  by  God's 


A  TTENTIOISr.  243 

own  children  that  their  Father  keeps  his  word? 
Are  his  oracles  so  equivocal  that  when  they  are 
literally  fulfilled  we  hold  up  our  hands  in  blank 
amazement  ?  Not  so,  beloved.  Better  far  the  say- 
ing of  that  aged  Christian  woman,  who,  when  she 
heard  a  young  disciple  relate  the  answer  he  had 
got  to  the  prayer  he  had  offered,  and  finish  up  his 
story  with  the  exclamation,  *'  Wasn't  it  surpris- 
ing !  "  replied,  "  No,  it  is  just  like  him."  As  it  is 
his  wont  and  custom  to  keep  his  word,  let  us  al- 
ways hear  him  expectantly.  And  let  me  charge 
you,  beloved  friends,  that  ye  take  heed  by  the 
power  of  God's  Spirit  always  to  hear  Jesus  Christ 
obediently.  There  is  a  way  of  hearing  that  is 
worse  than  not  hearing  at  all.  Who  are  so 
deaf  as  those  that  will  not  hear — or  hearing, 
will  not  obey  ?  How  often  has  the  Lord  called 
some  of  you,  and  yet  you  have  not  come  to 
him  ?  Though  he  has  taught  you  much,  you  have 
not  learned  anything.  Though  he  has  exhorted 
you  many  times,  you  have  not  stirred.  Though  he 
has  frequently  warned  you,  you  have  never  started 
at  the  cry  of  danger,  or  woke  to  the  call  for  vigil- 
ance. Oh,  that  we  obeyed,  instantly  obeyed  him, 
scrupulously  obeyed  him,  universally  obeyed  him ; 
inquired  and  ascertained  his  will,  with  an  eager- 
ness to  do  his  bidding.  Fain  would  I  be  like  a 
cork  upon  the  waters,  that  feels  every  breath  of 
the  wind,  and  every  rise  of  the  wave,  not  like 
some  great  steam  vessel,  that  needs  a  storm  to  make 
it  roll.     Would  to  God  we  were  delicately  sensi- 


244  STORM  SIGNALS. 

tive  to  the  mind  of  Christ,  like  the  photographer's 
sensitive  plate  that  catches  the  image  as  it  passes, 
and  permanently  retains  the  reflection,  so  that 
when  Jesus  Christ's  perfect  image  comes  before  our 
soul,  it  might  be  there  stamped  upon  us  to  abide 
uneffaceably  evermore.  Oh,  my  dear  brothers  and 
sisters!  ponder  this  pensively,  pray  over  it  pri- 
vately, ask  yourselves  personally,  are  we  all  thus 
hearing  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  Come  to  close 
quarters ;  let  us  put  it  pointedly :  are  any  of  you 
living  in  habitual  disregard  of  your  Lord's  will  ? 
If  so,  you  are  imhappy ;  I  know  you  are.  You  can 
not  be  happy  until  you  come  and  yield  yourself  up 
to  him.  What  is  the  true  posture  of  a  servant  but 
to  wait  his  master's  beck  and  bidding  ?  How  can 
ye  expect  to  know  the  sweetness  of  Christ  unless 
ye  own  him  as  your  Lord,  and  yield  your  souls  in 
allegiance  to  him.  Cry  to  God  then  for  cleansing 
from  the  errors  of  the  past;  invoke  his  help  to 
make  your  obedience  complete,  now  and  in  days 
to  come.  We  know  we  are  not  saved  by  our  obe- 
dience ;  we  are  saved  already  by  Ms  obedience ;  but 
for  the  love  we  bear  his  name  what  was  our  gain 
we  count  our  loss,  and  we  desire  to  render  our- 
selves as  living  sacrifices  unto  him,  which  is  but 
our  reasonable  service.  Thus  let  us  hear  him. 
I  beseech  you,  you  who  listen  to  me  from  Sabbath 
to  Sabbath,  never  to  take  aught  of  your  beliefs 
from  my  sermons  unless  you  can  verify  them  from 
his  sayings.  I  would  cheerfully  blot  out  from 
your  recollection  every  dogma  that  has  no  authority 


ATTENTION.  245 

but  my  own.  I  would  urge  you  to  give  it  like 
chaff  to  the  wind.  Let  your  soul  be  established 
upon  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  "  Hear  ye  him." 
Whatever  he  saith  accept  beyond  appeal.  Let  that 
be  your  postulatum  and  your  ultimatum,  the  begin- 
ning  of  your  confidence  and  the  end  of  all  your 
controversy.  Should  Christ's  teaching  take  you 
out  of  our  connection,  or  out  of  any  association 
where  you  now  are,  never  mind,  follow  it;  through 
floods  or  flames,  if  Jesus  leads,  follow  his  guidance. 
Do  not  be  foolish  enough  to  take  up  with  impres- 
sions that  are  merely  of  the  flesh.  Do  not  be  for- 
ever changing  and  shifting  with  the  currents  of 
opinion.  Do  not  have  windmills  on  the  brain. 
Read,  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest  Holy 
Scripture.  Having  done  so,  if  there  be  not  any 
one  else  in  this  world  besides  yourself  who  pro- 
fesses to  accept  the  truth  that  Christ  has  taught, 
believe  it  all  the  more  intensely,  cherish  it  the 
more  tenaciously,  and  act  upon  its  counsels  the 
more  scrupulously.  Be  concerned  that  so  much 
dishonor  should  be  done  him  by  so  many  whose 
ignorance  or  misapprehension  has  blinded  their 
eyes  and  bereft  them  of  understanding,  but  be 
jealous  to  honor  him  yourself  with  a  fealty  that 
never  swerves,  by  keeping  the  testimonies  of  his 
mouth,  and  observing  those  statutes  of  his  kingdom 
which  others  overlook  or  despise.  "  The  Bible,  and 
the  Bible  alone,"  said  Chillingworth,  in  an  oft- 
quoted  aphorism,  "  is  the  religion  of  Protestants," 
but  I  am  afraid  it  is  hardly  a  fact.     It  ought  to  be 


ii46*  STORM  SIGNALS. 

true,  and  it  would  be  true,  were  we  all  true  to 
Christ  The  Bible  ie  the  basis  of  all  the  professed 
religion  of  Christendom.  The  word  of  God  applied 
to  the  soul  by  the  eternal  Spirit  becomes  to  us  the 
voice  of  Christ,  and  we  desire  to  hear  it.  God 
help  us  to  hear  it. 

IV.  One  more  question  remains  to  be  answered. 
When  shall  we  hear  him  ?  The  reply  must  be, 
Evermore  !  Hear  him  when  ye  begin  your  Chris- 
tian career.  "  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live." 
"Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the 
word  of  God."  It  is  the  hearing  of  him  that 
quickens  the  soul.  '*  Incline  your  ear,"  saith  he, 
"and  come  unto  me;  hear,  and  your  soul  shall 
live."  Nor  are  we  to  give  up  hearing  Christ  after 
we  have  found  life  in  him;  we  are  to  continue  still 
learning  of  him.  We  shall  never  grow  so  wise 
that  we  do  not  need  him  for  a  teacher.  We  shall 
never  be  so  experienced  that  we  can  find  our  own 
way,  and  no  longer  require  him  as  a  guide.  We 
shall  have  to  keep  on  hearing  him  when  our  locks 
are  gray  and  our  age  is  reverend;  when  we 
are  on  the  banks  of  Jordan,  and  our  feet  almost 
tread  the  hallowed  soil  of  the  border  land,  even 
then,  brethren,  we  must  still  hear  him.  And 
after  we  have  passed  across  the  river  his  voice 
will  greet  us.  We  shall  forever  hear  him  in  the 
upper  skies.  The  great  matter,  however — great 
because  it  presses  so  heavily  on  our  present  in- 
terest and  our  future  destiny — is  that  we  hear 
him    now.     "  To-day   if  ye   will    hear   his  voice, 


ATTENTION.  247 

harden  not  your  hearts,  as  in  the  provocation, 
in  the  day  of  temptation  in  the  wilderness  when 
your  fathers  tempted  me,  proved  me,  and  saw 
my  works  forty  years."  May  we  have  grace 
to  hear  him  now.  If  we  do  not  hear  him  now 
speaking  with  the  voice  of  mercy,  to-morrow  we 
may  hear  him  say,  "I  never  knew  you."  It 
would  be  a  terrible  hearing  that,  *'  Depart  from 
me,  ye  workers  of  iniquity ! "  The  thunder  of 
those  dreadful  words  would  be  everlasting.  May 
God  of  his  infinite  grace,  save  us  from  hear- 
ing the  dreary  sentence  of  the  Judge  by  ena- 
bling us  to  hear  now  the  cheery  welcome  of  the 
Saviour. 

And  do  you  not  think,  dear  friends,  it  would  be 
well  that  believers  should  have  a  special  time  for 
hearing  Christ  everyday?     Might  you  not  mark 
off  a   quarter  of  an  hour  in  the  day  for  hearing 
what  God  the  Lord  shall  speak?     In  the  middle  of 
London,  amidst  all  the  din  of  traffic,  the  sweetest 
chimes  cannot  be  heard,  they  are  drowned.     But 
that  same  music,  when  other  sounds  are  hushed, 
will  be   extremely  pleasant.     We   have  the   rush 
and  crash  of  the  world  in  our  ears  nearly  all  the 
day ;  if  we  want  to  hear  Christ's  voice,  we  must  get 
alone  sometimes,  and  sit  in  silence.     Our  Puritan 
forefathers,  who  were  mighty  men  of  God,  owed 
much  of  the   strength  of  their   character   to  the 
time  that  they  could  afford  for  uninterrupted  devo- 
tion.    They  would  have  an  hour,   some  of  them 
when  they  rose,  others  of  them  more,  for  reading 


248  STORM   SIGNALS. 

the  Scriptures  and  prayer.  After  that,  family 
prayer  was  a  service  to  which  a  full  measure  of 
time  was  allotted,  it  was  not  got  over  in  a  hurry 
with  them.  And  then  at  eventide,  and  many  of 
them  during  the  middle  of  the  day,  they  devoted 
portions  of  time  to  meditation  and  worship.  There 
was  system  in  their  habit  of  hearing  Christ.  Now, 
it  is  obvious,  I  think,  that  we  should  be  neglect- 
ing our  duty,  many  of  us,  were  we  to  take  hours 
in  that  way  (for  the  time  is  not  our  own),  yet 
those  who  have  time  at  their  own  disposal  could 
not  occupy  it  betiei\  But,  at  any  rate,  we  must 
jealously  guard  a  little  time  each  day  for  trading 
with  heaven.  It  is  the  best  commerce  a  man  can 
engage  in ;  it  brings  in  the  richest  treasure.  He 
will  be  poor  who  does  not  set  apart  some  time  in 
which  he  can  listen  to  the  voice  of  Christ,  by 
searching  the  Scriptures,  by  drawing  near  to  God, 
by  watching  and  prayer.  I  would  stir  you  up  to 
diligence  in  this  matter,  dear  friends.  Even  the 
public  prayer-meetings  should  be  second  to  private 
intercessions.  "This  ought  ye  to  have  done,"  I 
would  say  of  the  prayer-meeting,  *'  not  to  have  left 
the  other  undone."  Both  should  be  regarded,  for 
oftentimes  in  the  morning,  if  one  can  get  a  text  of 
Scripture  and  put  it  under  the  tongue,  it  will  keep 
the  mouth  sweet,  and  the  breath  sweet,  and  the 
heart  sweet  all  the  day  long.  And  at  night,  when 
one  is  weary,  it  gives  calmness  to  our  slumbers, 
and  even  makes  our  dreams  pleasant,  if  we  can 
get  a  kiss  from  the  lips  of  the  spouse  in  some  joy- 


ATTENTION.  249 

fal  promise,  some  precious  portion  of  the  Word  of 
God.  "  Hear  ye  him."  The  Lord  unstop  your  ears 
to  hear,  0  ye  that  have  never  heard  him.  And  ye 
that  have  heard  him  often,  may  ye  hear  him  yet 
more  frequently  and  more  familiarly,  till  he  shall 
say  unto  you,  "Come  up  hither,"  and  you  shall 
enter  finally  into  his  joy. 


Perilous  Procrastination* 

'■^  He  lingered y — Genesis  xix.  i6, 

LOT  was  highly  favored.  In  the  midst  of  a 
general  destruction  angels  were  sent  to  take 
care  of  him.  He  had  received  a  warning  which 
many  had  not  heard,  and  he  had  felt  the  terror 
that  warning  should  excite,  while  some  who  had 
heard  the  tidings  little  heeded  their  imminent 
moment.  Lot  stood  in  the  condition  of  one  who 
knew  that  he  must  leave  the  city,  for  it  was  about 
to  be  destroyed,  who  intended  to  leave  it,  who  was 
just  about  to  take  his  departure,  but  who,  never- 
theless, hesitated  a  little,  halted  awhile,  avoided 
hurry,  protracted  his  stay  with  some  attachment 
to  the  place  where  he  had  dwelt,  and  so,  in  the 
face  of  danger,  he  delayed;  being  slow  to  move 
when  fully  aware  that  judgment  was  swift  to  over- 
take;— "  he  lingered."  I  believe  Lotto  be  in  this 
respect  the  exact  counterpart  of  a  gi-eat  many 
hearers  of  the  gospel.  They  understand  that  the 
wrath  of  God  is  revealed  against  all  unrighteous- 
ness of  men ;  they  know  that  the  dreadful  penal- 
ties will  be  soon  enforced;  they  are  well  aware  of 
the  way  of  escape;  they  have  resolved  to  follow 


PERILOUS   PROCRASTINATION.  251 

that  way;  and  they  intend  to  do  so  very  soon. 
Yet  for  a  long  time  they  have  halted  on  the  verge 
of  decision,  almost  persuaded  to  be  Christians. 
Strong  as  their  resolution  to  become  followers  of 
the  Saviour  seems  at  times  to  be,  unhappily  they 
stop  short,  they  linger  still  in  their  old  condition, 
halting  between  two  opinions.  To  such  persons  I 
propose  to  address  a  few  words  of  exhortation  this 
evening.  First  of  all,  to  expostulate  with  you 
personally  upon  matters  that  concern  yourselves; 
then  to  speak  to  you  about  other  people  in  whom 
you  are  interested, — for  I  have  the  full  conviction 
that  the  man  who  lingers  puts  others  in  danger  as 
well  as  himself,  just  as  Lot's  lingering  was  hazard- 
ous to  his  daughters  and  to  his  wife ;  and  lastly, 
to  commend  the  means  which  I  trust  God  will  use, 
similar  to  those  which  he  used  with  Lot,  that  some 
angelic  hand  or  some  providential  force  may  lay 
hold  upon  the  lingerer,  that  he  may  be  brought 
out  from  the  City  of  Destruction  and  made  to  flee 
for  help  to  Christ  the  Lord. 

L  I  must  begin  by  speaking  to  the  person  who 
is  lingering  himself  I  should  like  to  be  looked 
upon,  just  now,  less  as  a  preacher  than  as  a  friend 
who  is  talking  to  the  lingering  one,  the  one  almost 
decided — talking  to  him  in  the  most  familiar  tones, 
but  at  the  same  time  with  the  most  earnest  pur- 
pose. There  are  certain  thoughts  which  have  been 
and  are  still  fermenting  in  my  soul.  I  have  heard 
that  a  conclave  was  held  in  pandemonium.  In  the 
lower   regions   Satan  had  called  together  all  the 


252  STORM   SIGNALS. 

devils  who  showed  him  allegiance,  and  he  said  to 
them,  "I  want  one  of  you  to  go  forth  as  a  lying- 
spirit  from  this  place  to  deceive  many.  The 
gospel  is  being  f^iithfully  preached,  and  men  are 
being  won  to  Christ,  my  rival.  Spirits  of  the  in- 
fernal pit,  I  desire  your  help  that  this  gospel  may 
not  spread  farther.  I  pause  while  each  one  of  you 
my  liege  servants,  shall  tell  me  of  the  device 
you  will  use  to  prevent  men  from  fleeing  to  Christ. 
His  device  that  shall  seem  wisest  to  my  subtlety, 
shall  be  most  fully  employed  among  the  sons  of 
men."  Then  outspake  one  and  said,  "  0  prince  of 
the  infernal  pit,  I  will  go  forth  and  tell  men  that 
there  is  no  God,  no  heaven,  no  hell,  no  hereafter." 
But  the  arch-fiend  said,  "  It  is  in  vain.  The 
gospel  has  already  gone  so  far  with  the  men  of 
whom  I  am  thinking  now,  that  this  would  not 
avail.  They  know  there  is  a  God,  they  are  sure  of 
it.  The  testimony  which  has  been  borne  in  the 
world  has  brought  so  much  light  into  it,  that  they 
cannot  close  their  eyes  to  the  fact,  and  thy  device, 
though  admirable,  will  not  succeed."  Then  up 
rose  another,  and  he  said,  "  I  shall  insinuate  doubts 
as  to  the  authenticity  of  Scripture;  I  shall  belie 
the  teachings  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Word  of  God, 
and  so  shall  I  keep  them  from  Christ."  But  again 
the  leader  of  that  conclave  objected  that  this 
would  scarcely  suffice,  for  the  multitude  had  so 
heard  the  gospel,  and  those  whose  conversion  he 
was  most  anxious  to  prevent  were  so  conversant 
with    its    historical    facts    that   they   could    not 


PERILOUS   PROCRASTINATION.  253 

seriously  question  them;  neither  could  they  live 
in  systematic  doubt  who  had  been  schooled  in 
positive  belief.  There  were  many  devices;  but 
I  will  tell  you  the  one  that  most  of  all  struck 
Satan,  which  he  determined  to  make  the  chief  use 
of  among  the  sons  of  men.  It  was  this :  one  foul 
spirit  said,  "  I  will  not  insinuate  doubts  about  the 
existence  of  God  or  the  truth  of  Scripture.  I  know 
they  would  not  avail.  But  this  thing  I  will  do — I 
will  tell  men  that  though  these  things  are  true 
and  important  there  is  no  hurry  about  them,  there 
is  time  enough  and  to  spare — that  they  may  wait 
a  little,  till  there  is  a  more  convenient  season,  and 
then  shall  they  attend  to  tliem."  Now,  the 
subtlety  of  Satan  was  pleased  with  this,  and  he 
said,  "Servant,,  go  thy  way.  Thou  hast  invented 
the  net  in  which  the  fowler  shall  take  more  birds 
than  in  any  other.  Good  speed  to  thine  enterprise. 
This  deadly  poison  will  destroy  innumerable  souls." 
Feeling  this  to  be  the  case,  it  shall  be  my  earnest 
endeavor  to  tear  that  net  to  pieces,  and  to  expose 
this  poison,  that  none  of  you  may  be  entangled 
unawares  and  perish  unwarned. 

Coming  back,  then,  to  the  purpose  with  which  I 
started,  earnestly  and  personally  to  speak  to  the 
lingerer,  I  should  like  to  ask  you,  my  beloved 
friend,  if  this  matter  about  which  you  are  still  hes- 
itating is  not  of  vital  importance  to  you?  It  con- 
cerns 3^our  soul,  yourself,  your  true  self;  it  deals 
with  your  destiny,  your  impending,  your  eternal 
destiny.     You  are  immortal;  you  acknowledge  a 


254  STORM   SIGNALS, 

deathless  principle  within  you;  and  j^ou  are  con- 
Bcious  that  you  shall  live  forever  in  happiness  or 
woe.  Do  you  think  you  ought  to  put  off  all  pre- 
paration for  the  future  that  awaits  you  ?  If  I  knew 
that  some  one  was  about  to  defraud  you  of  your 
estate,  and  that  unless  you  were  diligent  about  it  you 
would  lose  all  your  property,  I  think  I  should  say 
to  you,  "Bestir  yourself"  If  I  knew  that  some 
deadly  disease  had  begun  to  pray  on  your  consti- 
tution,  and  that  if  neglected  it  would  soon  gain  an 
ascendency  with  which  'twere  hard  to  grapple,  I 
think  I  should  say,  "  Go  to  the  physician.  Do  not 
delay;  for  bodily  health  is  a  boon  to  be  prized." 
But,  dear  friend,  if  your  estate  is  worth  preserving, 
much  more  your  soul ;  and  if  the  health  of  this  poor 
clay  ought  to  be  looked  to,  much  more  the  welfare 
of  your  soul — the  welfare  of  your  soul  forever.  Do 
you  not  think  if  anything  should  be  postponed  it 
should  be  something  of  less  importance  ?  Was  not 
Christ  right  when  he  said,  "  Seek  first  the  king- 
dom of  God  and  his  righteousness"?  Does  not 
your  reason  agree  that  he  was  right  in  putting 
that  first  ?  I  shall  not  need  to  argue  with  you.  1 
speak  as  to  a  man  who  has  his  wits  about  him.  Is 
it  not  so  ?  Suppose  you  look  to  getting  on  in  the 
world  first,  you  may  die  and  be  lost  before  you 
have  got  on  !  Suppose  the  taking  of  a  degree  at 
the  university  should  be  your  first  concern — that 
would  be  a  poor  recompense.  The  honors  of  learn- 
ing could  not  mitigate  the  terrors  of  judgment. 
Do  you  not  feel  now  (if  you  will  let  your  better 


PERILOUS   PROCRASTINATION.  255 

nature  speak)  that   the   very  first   thing   a   man 
should  see  to  should  be  this,— to  be  reconciled  to 
God  and  have  all  right  with  him  for  eternity  ?     I 
will  then  ask  you  another  question— is  there  any- 
thing so  very  pleasant  in  a  state  of  enmity  to  God, 
that   you   should   wish   to    remain   in   it?     Why 
should  Lot  want  to  linger  in   Sodom?     He  had 
often  been  vexed  there.     The  very  night  before  he 
had  his  house  beset  with  rioters.     Why  should  he 
want  to  linger?     Have  you  found  any  great  com- 
fort in  being  undecided?     Is  there  anything  very 
fascinating  in  remaining  hesitant  and  halting  be- 
tween two  opinions?     Dear  friend,  if  your  condi- 
tion is  at  all  like  what  mine  was  before  I  believed 
in  Jesus,  I  know  you  would  be  glad  enough  to  get 
out  of  it.     Oh,  how  earnest   I  was  sometimes  in 
seeking  Christ !     Oh,  how  wretched  I  was  at  other 
times  that  I  could  not  find  him !     Then,  again,  I 
was  stupidly  senseless  about  divine  things,  and  my 
self-upbraidings  would  not  let  me  be  at  peace.     It 
is  a  most  unhappy  condition  to   be  in— to  have 
light  enough  to  know  that  you  are  in  the  dark  and 
no  more,  to  have  just  enough  grace  to  feel  that 
you  have  not  the  grace  that  can  save  you,  to  be 
enough  awakened  to  feel  that  if  you  remain  as  you 
are,  you  must  perish  forever.     I  do  not  see  any- 
thing  in   this   hesitating    condition    that   should 
allure  you  to  keep  in  it  any  longer  than  you  can 
help.     Beloved   friends,   have  you   ever   seriously 
weighed,  if  not  I  will  ask  you  to  do  so,  the  unut- 
terable horror  of  the  destruction  which  must  come 


256  STORM  SIGNALS. 

upon  you  if  you  are  not  decidedly  a  believer  in 
Christ,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  unspeakable 
glory  and  bliss  which  will  belong  to  you  if  you ' 
are  led  to  trust  in  Jesus  and  are  saved  ?  I  can  i 
scarcely  recall  the  details  of  a  little  incident  in 
Russian  history  which  might  illustrate  the  emer- 
gency: but  the  fact,  as  far  as  my  memory  serves, 
was  this.  The  Czar  had  died  suddenly,  and  in  the 
dead  of  night  one  of  the  counselors  of  the  empire 
came  to  the  Princess  Elizabeth  and  said  to  her, 
"  You  must  come  at  once  and  take  possession  of 
the  crown."  She  hesitated,  for  there  were  diffi- 
culties in  the  way,  and  she  did  not  desire  the 
position.  But  he  said,  "  Now,  sit  down.  Prin- 
cess, for  a  minute."  Then  he  drew  her  two 
pictures.  One  was  the  picture  of  herself  and 
the  Count  thrown  into  prison,  racked  with  tor- 
tures, and  presently  both  brought  out  to  die  be- 
neath the  axe.  "That,"  he  said,  "you  can  have 
if  you  like."  The  other  picture  was  of  herself 
with  the  imperial  crown  of  all  the  Russias  on 
her  brow,  and  all  the  princes  bowing  before  her, 
and  all  the  nation  doing  her  homage.  "That," 
said  he,  "is  the  other  side  of  the  question.  But, 
to-night,  your  Majesty  must  choose  which  it  shall 
be."  With  the  two  pictures  vividly  depicted  be- 
fore her  mind's  eye  she  did  not  hesitate  long,  but 
cast  in  her  choice  for  the  crown.  Now  I  would 
fain  paint  to  you  such  pictures,  only  I  lack  the 
skill.  You  will  either  sink  forever  down  in  deeper 
and  yet  deeper  woe,  filled  with  remorse  because 


PERILOUS   PROCRASTINATION.  257 

you  brought  it  all  upon  yourself,  or  else,  if  you  de- 
cide for  Christ,  and  trust  in  him,  you  shall  enter 
into  the  bliss  of  those  who  forever  and  forever, 
without  admixture  of  grief,  enjoy  felicity  before 
the  throne  of  God.  To  my  mind,  there  ought  to 
be  no  halting  as  to  the  choice.  It  should  be  made. 
I  pray  God's  Holy  Spirit  to  help  you  to  make  it  to- 
night. On  this  winged  hour  eternity  is  hung. 
The  choice  of  this  night  may  be  the  cooling  of  the 
wax  which  now  is  soft.  Once  cooled,  it  will  bear 
the  impress  throughout  eternity.  God  grant  it 
may  be  a  resolve  for  Christ,  for  his  cause,  for  his 
cross,  for  his  crown. 

I  would  like  still,  dear  friend,  to  hold  you  by  the 
button  which  I  laid  hold  of  just  now,  and  to  say 
to  you,  What  is  it  that  has  kept  you  waiting  so 
long  ?  Did  not  I  meet  you  some  years  ago  in 
the  street,  and  you  said  to  me,  "  Sir,  I  have  been  a 
hearer  of  yours  for  many  years:  "  and  I  said,  "  Oh, 
yes,  and  when  did  you  join  the  church  ?  "  and  you 
said,  *'  Ah,  I  have  never  done  that ;  "  and  I  said, 
*'  Why  not  ?  "  and  you  were  honest  enough  to  say, 
"  Because  I  am  afraid  I  should  be  very  much  out 
of  place  there;  for  1  am  not  a  believer  in  Christ." 
Do  you  recollect  how  I  squeezed  your  hand  and 
said,  "Ah,  I  hope  it  will  not  be  long  before  you 
give  your  heart  to  the  Lord,"  and  you  said,  "  Well, 
I  hope  not  too"?  It  is  a  good  long  while  now; 
and  you  have  been  getting  gray  since  then.  I  dare 
say,  if  I  were  to  shake  hands  again  with  you  to- 
night, and  put  the  same  question,  you  would  make 


258  STORM  SIGNALS. 

the  same  reply;  and  in  ten  years'  time,  if  you  and 
I  live,  we  shall  be  still  relatively  in  the  same  posi- 
tion— I  still  pleading  and  you  still  saying,  *'Yes, 
yes,  yes,  it  is  very  right."  Nay,  nay,  I  answer,  it 
is  very  wrong;  that  consenting  without  complying: 
not  doing  what  the  gospel  bids  you  do,  yielding 
and  resisting  as  it  were  by  turns;  repenting  and 
then  forgetting.  Forgetting !  ay,  forgetting,  and 
forgetting,  till  these  delays  will  cast  you  into 
irrevocable  ruin.  What  is  it  you  are  waiting  for, 
my  friend  ?  Is  there  some  sin  you  cannot  give  up  ? 
What  sin  is  worth  being  damned  for  ?  If  there  be 
one,  keep  on  with  it.  I  defy  you  to  defend  your 
negligence.  Put  it  to  this  test, — if  there  be  any 
supposable  delight  that  is  worth  the  endurance  of 
eternal  wrath,  pursue  that  delight,  however  sen- 
sual it  may  be,  with  avidity;  but  if  there  be  not,  do 
not  play  the  fool  or  act  the  madman.  Do  I  hear 
you  plead  ignorance  ?  I  would  make  some  excuse 
for  you,  if  I  thought  the  plea  were  just  and  true, 
but  suppose  for  a  minute  that  it  is  so.  Then,  dear 
friend,  ought  not  you  to  begin  to  search  the  Scrip- 
tures at  once  ?  Should  not  you  be  making  in- 
tensely earnest  inquiries  that  you  might  know  the 
certainty  of  these  things  ?  For  the  soul  to  be 
without  knowledge  is  not  good,  but  if  you  are 
perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge  there  certainly  is  no 
reason  why  you  should.  Many  of  us  would  only 
be  too  delighted,  if  we  might  tell  you  still  more 
fully  what  is  the  way  of  salvation.  Well,  but  do 
you  tell  me  that  it  is  inconvenient  just  now  ?     Are 


PERILOUS   PROCRASTINATION'.  259 

you  promising  yourself  a  more  favorable  oppor- 
tunity? Let  me  ask  you,  Do  you  imagine  you  will 
be  any  better  off  to-morrow  than  you  are  to-day  ? 
Do  you  think  in  ten  years'  time  you  will  be  more 
likely  to  lay  hold  on  Christ  than  you  are  at  pre- 
sent ?  I  do  not  think  you  will.  Have  you  ever 
seen  sponges  that  have  been  turned  into  flints  ? 
Well,  that  is  a  slow  process,  it  takes  a  long  time. 
The  like  process,  however,  is  gradually  happening 
to  you;  every  year  you  are  getting  more  flinty. 
The  drip,  drip,  drip  of  this  world's  care  and  sin  is 
petrifying  you.  You  are  getting  stony.  It  strikes 
me  the  best  time  to  repent  in  is  this  moment;  and 
the  very  best  season  in  which  to  fly  to  Jesus  is 
now.  Ere  yet  the  clock  has  ticked  again  your 
heart  will  have  grown  more  callous.  It  certainly 
does  not  soften.  When  will  there  be  any  influence 
more  potent  than  there  is  now  to  help  you  ?  The 
Spirit  of  God  is  ready  now;  do  you  want  more  than 
his  power  ?  The  blood  of  Christ  is  a  full  atone- 
ment for  sin ;  do  you  want  anything  more  efiicacious 
than  that  for  your  salvation  ?  Do  you  expect 
Christ  to  come  down  again  on  earth  to  save  you  ? 
Do  you  want  any  promise  fuller  than  that  which 
the  Bible  has  in  it  now,  or  any  invitation  rnore 
gracious  than  that  which  the  gospel  give^  lO  you 
now  ?  "To-day  is  the  accepted  time:  to-day  is  the 
day  of  salvation."  I  pray  you,  my  lingering  friend, 
linger  no  longer.  Oh,  how  I  wish  I  could  put  my 
hand  in  thine  and  lead  thee  to  the  Saviour !  but  I 
cannot.     I  will,  however,  pray  him  to  lead  thee  this 


2G0  STORM   SIGNALS. 

very  night.  "  I  will  think  of  it,"  say  you.  No, 
that  is  the  very  thing  I  do  not  want  you  to  do.  1 
want  you  to  believe  in  Jesus  now,  and  talk  about 
tliinking  of  it  to-morrow.  In  your  seat,  if  you  will 
rest  in  Jesus,  and  trust  your  soul  in  his  hands,  you 
are  saved  this  very  moment.  It  is  an  instantan- 
eous work. 

"  The  moment  a  sinner  believes, 
And  trusts  in  liis  crucified  God, 
His  pardon  at  once  he  receives, 

Salvation  in  full  through  his  blood." 

Oh  that  thou  wouldest  exercise  that  simple  faith 
now,  and  not  talk  about  thinking  of  it  to-morrow ; 
for  to-morrow,  to-morrow,  to-morrow,  alas,  to-mor- 
row never  comes  !  It  is  in  no  calendar  except  the 
almanac  of  fools.  Each  day  to  the  wise  man  is  to- 
day as  it  comes.  The  fool  wastes  to-day,  and  so  he 
squanders  all  the  days  of  his  life.  0  lingerer,  I 
beseech  thee  think  now  of  the  long  time  thou  hast 
lingered.  It  may  well  suffice  tliee:  it  has  surely 
been  protracted  and  persisted  in  enough.  I  would 
say  to  thee,  in  the  words  of  one  of  old,  "  How  long 
halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ? "  and  quote  the 
saying  of  yet  another,  "  Choose  ye  this  day  whom 
ye  will  serve,"  and  may  God,  the  Holy  Ghost,  guide 
tlie'choice,  and  he  shall  have  the  praise. 

II.  Now,  I  want  to  speak  a  little  upon  another 
topic.  Let  me  remind  the  lingerer  that  while  he 
lingers  he  endangers  the  souls  of  other  people. 
When  Lot  went  to  his  sons-in-law,  and  told  them 
that  the  city  was  to  be  destroyed,  "  he  was  to  them 


PERILOUS  procrastination:  261 

as  one  that  mocked."    How  would  tliey  say  to  hira, 
"  Go  to,  old  dotard !  dost  thou   think  we  believe 
thee  ?     The  sky  is  clear  and  blue,  and  the  sun  has 
risen:    dost    thou  think  we  believe  thy  nonsense 
about  fire  and  brimstone  coming  out  of  heaven  ? 
We  don't  believe  thee."     When  Lot  lingered — he 
was  defeating  his  own  purpose,  and  doing  the  worst 
imaginable   thing,  if  he  wanted  to  convince   his 
sons-in-law  that  he  spake  the  truth;  for  while  he 
lingered,  they  would  say,   "  The  old  fool  does  not 
believe  it  himself,  for  if  he  did  believe  it,  he  would 
pack  up  and  haste  away :  nay,  he  would  take  his 
daughters  by  the  hand  and  lead  them  out  of  the 
city  at  once."     A  little  hesitancy  in  the  conduct 
of  a  man  who  professed  to  believe  that  a  dreadful 
judgment  was   imminent   would  be   sufficient  to 
give  them  umbrage — quite  reason  enough  to  make 
them  say,   "  He  does  not  believe  himself  what  he 
tells  us."     Have  not  some  of  you  spoken  seriously 
to   others  about  the  value  of  their  souls,  though 
you  are  not   saved   yourselves.     Did  you  try  the 
other  day  to  rebuke  a  swearer  ?    I  am  glad  you  did. 
You  are  a  member  of  a  Temperance  Association, 
and  you  do  what  you  can  to  stay  drunkenness.     I 
am  glad  you  do.     You  will  not  allow  sin  to  pass 
unrebuked  in  your  presence.     But,  hark  ye,  man, 
with  what  face  dost  thou   reprove   others   whilst 
thou  art  not  decided  thyself  ?     Where  is  thy  con- 
sistency?    Should  they  turn  round   on    thee  and 
say,  "  If  there  is  anything  reliable  in  the  grace  of 
God,  why  are  you  not  reconciled  to  him  ?     If  there 


262  STORM  SIGNALS. 

is  anything  desirable  in  religion,  why  do  you  not 
walk  according  to  its  precepts  ?  If  Christ  be  a 
Saviour,  why  do  you  not  yield  to  him  and  obey  his 
ordinances  ?  "  I  know  not.  what  answer  you  could 
give.  I  cannot  imagine  any  response  but  a  blush 
that  should  betoken  your  shame  and  confusion  of 
face. 

The  mischief  that  Lot  did  to  his  daughters-in- 
law  was  yet  more  aggravated,  for  all  the  while  he 
was  hesitating  they  were  sure  to  hesitate  too.  He 
was  keeping  them  waiting.  They  were  in  jeopardy 
as  well  as  himself.  How  many  comrades,  young 
man,  you  might  have  instructed  in  the  faith  before 
now  had  you  been  yourself  decided !  It  is  a 
happy  circumstance  when  a  young  married  couple 
become  converted  to  God  before  their  little  ones 
are  able  to  imitate  a  bad  example.  I  thank  God 
for  a  father  whom  I  know  and  honor;  only  one  of 
all  his  children  can  recollect  the  time  when  the 
evening  was  spent  in  playing  cards,  and  that  one 
recollects  the  night  when  they  were  all  thrown 
into  the  fire  and  burnt.  Only  one  of  his  children 
recollects  when  the  Sabbath-day  was  wont  to  be 
spent  in  quiet  walks  and  pleasant  recreations;  but 
not  in  pubhc  worship  or  private  devotion.  He  re- 
collects the  rearing  of  the  family  altar,  when 
prayer  was  made  a  household  institute.  He  can 
well  remember  the  earnest  entreaties  made  that 
the  fathers  sin  might  not  be  visited  upon  the 
children.  Oh  happy  circumstance  !  Had  the  par- 
ents been  converted  later  in  life,  the  ill  example 


PERILOUS   PROCRASTINATION.  263 

might  never  hare  been  wiped  out.  The  converted 
father  might  have  found  that  the  children  did  not 
emulate  the  good  example  of  his  regenerate  state; 
but  preferred  to  imitate  him  in  the  negligence  and 
sinfulness  of  his  natural  unrenewed  life.  When 
you,  who  are  parents,  habitually  demur  and  hesit- 
ate, do  you  not  think  that  other  members  of  your 
family  will  hesitate  too  ?  I  have  noticed,  on  the 
contrary,  that  where  there  is  a  man  or  a  woman 
knowing  the  truth  in  a  measure,  but  not  decided, 
no  sooner  does  the  husband  or  the  wife  become 
savingly  converted  than  the  other  follows  suit,  and 
avows  the  same  faith.  Not  unfrequently  the  chil- 
dren follow  in  their  footsteps,  awakened  by  an  ex- 
ample that  comes  home  to  them  fresh  and  forceful. 
It  only  wanted,  somehow,  in  God's  providence,  the 
decision  of  the  head  of  the  household.  This  has 
influenced  all  the  family.  It  becomes,  therefore,  a 
very  mournful  reflection  that  there  should  be  men 
and  women  lingering  upon  the  brink  of  the  grave 
who  are  helping  others  to  halt;  their  example  be- 
ing the  means  of  keeping  others  in  a  state  of  peril- 
ous hazard.  You  must  know,  many  of  you,  that 
it  is  so  with  yourselves :  therefore,  I  shall  leave  the 
truth  to  weigh  upon  your  conscience,  hoping  it 
will  stir  you  up  to  decision. 

Let  me  venture  to  make  one  other  observation 
here.  I  should  not  wonder  if  the  death  of  Lot's 
wafe  might  not  partly  be  aittributed  to  Lot  himself. 
If  you  think  that  this  is  a  severe  reflection,  I 
would  remind   you  that  she  must  have  seen  her 


264  STORM   SIGNALS. 

husband  hesitate.  She  was  a  woman  far  lower 
down  in  the  scale  then  he  was:  when,  therefore, 
she  saw  him  lingering,  it  was  no  wonder  if  that 
contagious  example  led  her  to  look  back.  Perhaps, 
amongst  the  regrets  of  Lot  throughout  the  rest  of 
his  life,  there  would  be  this  one — "  I  did  not  has- 
ten myself  out  of  that  city  as  I  should:  1  was  in 
no  hurr}^;  1  tarried,  and  lingered,  and  paused;  I 
had  almost  to  be  dragged  out  by  the  angels'  hands 
myself;  and  this  it  may  be,  led  her  to  look  back 
with  lingering,  and  then  to  be  turned  into  a  pillar 
of  salt.  Oh,  undecided  man  !  I  would  not  like 
thee  to  feel  that  the  blood  of  thy  wife  was  on  thy 
skirts.  Oh,  undecided  father  !  I  should  dread  to 
have  thee  think,  in  years  to  come,  •'  The  loss  of  my 
children's  souls  was  due  to  my  procrastination." 
Alas,  it  may  be  so — it  may  be  so  !  Therefore, 
now,  with  a  brother's  earnest  affection,  let  me 
come  to  thee  and  say,  "  Thou  dost  intend  to  believe; 
thou  hast  resolved  to  be  a  Christian;  thou  art  no 
Atheist,  and  no  scoffer;  thou  art  not  hardened  and 
rebellious;  thy  heart  is  soft  and  tender,  and  ready 
for  these  things — then  yield  it  up  now,  yield  it 
completely  this  night,  to  that  dear  hand  that  once 
was  crucified.  That  hand  shall  mould  thee  accord- 
ing to  its  own  will.  Thus  saith  the  Spirit  of  God 
to  thee  to-night.  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  for  "  he  that  believeth 
and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved  " :  he  that  believeth 
not — though  he  may  have  resolved  to  believe,  if 
he  dies  believing  not — must  be  damned ! 


PERILOUS    PROCRASTINATIOM.  265 

III.  Our  last  word  was  to  be  on  the  means  by 
which  God  is  pleased  at  times  to  rouse  the  lingerers. 
Let  us  pray  for  them,  that  they  may  by  some 
means  be  hastened.  I  do  not  expect  to  see  angels 
come  walking  down  these  aisles,  or  threading  their 
way  through  these  pews  to-night;  but  I  do  trust 
that  a  messenger  from  God  will  come,  notwith- 
standing that.  Sometimes  lingerers  have  been 
quickened  and  decided  by  their  own  reflections 
being  blessed  to  them  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  A  very 
simple  observation  was  once  the  means  of  deciding 
a  man.  He  was  a  mechanic,  and  a  man  of  a 
mathematical  turn  of  mind.  He  had  attended  a 
meeting.  The  meeting  was  held  in  an  upper  room 
and  on  going  below  stairs,  his  attention  was  at- 
tracted by  the  beam  that  had  supported  the  people, 
and  he  said  to  himself,  "  What  a  weight  there 
must  have  been  upon  that !"  Just  at  that  very 
minute,  into  his  mind  there  flashed,  "  And  what  a 
weight  there  is  resting  upon  you !"  How  that 
thought  should  have  followed  the  other,  I  cannot 
tell,  but  as  he  turned  it  over,  it  did  seem  to  him 
that  he  had  a  weight  of  sin  enough  to  crush  him ; 
that  he  could  not  bear  up  under  such  a  weight; 
and  that  his  soul  would  come  down  in  ruin  like 
many  a  building  whose  beams  have  not  been 
strong  enough;  after  enduring  awhile  it  has  given 
way  at  last.  I  mind  not  what  form  the  thought 
may  take:  I  only  pray  that  some  such  thought 
may  come  home  and  decide  you.  Occasionally,  a 
good  man  has  been  the  means  of  suggesting  the 


266  STORM   SIGNALS. 

thought  that  shaped  the  course  of  a  fellow  creature. 
A  smith  was  blowing  his  bellows  one  day,  when 
the  saintly  McCheyne  stepped  into  the  smithy  for 
shelter  from  a  shower  of  rain.     As  the  smith  was 
blowing  the  coals  and  they  were  at  a  great  heat, 
he  simply  said  to  him,  "  What  does  that  fire  make 
you  think  of  ?"     He  never  waited  for  an  answer, 
but  went  his  wav.     It  made  the  smith  think  of  the 
wrath  to  come,  and  it  made  him  flee  from  it  too. 
We   cannot  tell    what   may   be,    in   the   gracious 
providence  of  God,  the  means  of  bringing  you  to 
decision.     He  that  used  an  angel's  hand  with  Lot, 
can  use  a  well-timed  observation  with  you.     There- 
fore, I  urge  all   Christian   people    that   they    use 
every  opportunity,  and  study  to  season  their  con- 
versation with  grace.     Sow  beside  all  waters,  for 
you   know  not   which  may  prosper,  this  or  that. 
Sometimes  men  have  been  decided  by  the  deaths 
of  their  relatives  or  their  friends.     "  I  may  be  the 
next"   has   been  suggested   to   them.     When  the 
dear  child   has   been  buried,  it  has  made  the  af- 
flicted father  reflect  that  he  shall  never  meet  it 
in  heaven  unless  he  mends  his  ways.     So,  too,  the 
bereaved   mother   in  the  bitterness   of  her  heart, 
has  sought  a  Saviour,  in  the  hope  that  she  might 
meet  her  babe  again   in   the    better   land.     Such 
things   are   good.     They  are  blessed    deaths  that 
bring   eternal  life  to  the  survivors!     These  little 
ones  well  spend  their  lives  in  winging  their  flight 
to  Paradise,  and  showing  us  the  way.     But  surely, 
dear  friend,  you  don't  require  a  distressing  visita- 


PERILOUS   PROCRASTINATION.  267 

tion  to  decide  you.     I   trust  your  heart   will   be 
given  to  Christ  without  the  dire  necessity  that  you 
should  lose  those  you  love  on  earth.     Occasionally, 
and  very  occasionally,  persons  have  been  decided 
by  personal  sickness.     Some,  but,  oh,  how  few, 
have  witnessed  the  good  confession  in  the  hour  of 
death.     A  soldier  in  the  army  of  the  Potomac,  of 
whom  I  somewhere  read,  was  taken  to  the  rear  to 
die.     He  was  badly  wounded;  he  was  also  suffer- 
ing  from   fever.     Some   one   had   told   him,   just 
before  the  fever  came  on,  of  a  soldier  found  asleep 
at  his  post  who  was  condemned  to  die.     The  poor 
fellow  in  his  delirium  imagining  that  he  was  that 
soldier,  cried  out  to  the  doctor  who  was  attending 
him,   "Sir,    I  am  to  be  shot  to-morrow  morning; 
and  as  I  wish  to  have  all  right,  I  want  you  to  send 
for  the  chaplain  at  once.     I    want   to    see    him." 
The  doctor,  to  calm  his  fears,  said,  "  No,  no,  you 
are   not   to   be   shot   to-morrow    morning;    it's   a 
mistake."     "Oh,  but  I  am,"  he  said;  "I  know  I 
shall."     "But   I    will    be   here,"  said   the    doctor, 
*'  and  if  any  one  comes  to  touch  you,  I  will  have 
him  arrested.     I  will  take  care  you  shall  not  die." 
**  Is  it  so,  doctor?"     said   he,  in  calmer  accents, 
"then  you  need  not  send  for  the  chaplain;  I  shall 
not  want  him  just  yet."     So  the  truth  came  out 
that  fear,  not  faith,  animated  him,  though  it  was 
but  spoken  in  a  feverish  dream.     How  many  men, 
if  they  thought  they  were  going  to  die,  would  say 
"  Oh  yes,  let  all  be  said  and  done  that  it  is  right 
tosayanddo;"  but  persuade  them  that  they  are 


268  STORM   SIGNALS. 

likely  to  live  a  little  longer,  they  will  wait,  and 
adjourn  their  faith  while  they  can  allay  their  i'ear. 
Not  very  often  is  the  decision  genuine  which  men 
arrive  at  under  the  stress  of  that  fear  which  comes 
of  impending  dissolution.  May  God's  Spirit  deepen 
in  some  here  present  their  sense  of  sin.  May 
your  crimes  sting  you.  May  you  feel  your  guilt. 
May  you  hate  yourselves  because  of  your  trans- 
gressions. May  you  be  distressed  because  of  your 
ingratitude,  your  disobedience,  your  unbelief 
Then  you  will  long  to  get  rid  of  this  horrible 
evil,  this  enmity  against  God.  May  you  feel  to- 
night what  a  mischievous  thing  it  is  for  the  crea- 
ture to  be  at  variance  with  his  Creator,  for  man  to 
be  out  of  order  with  his  God.  What  a  shameful 
thing  it  is  for  the  most  favored  of  creatures  to  be 
inimical  to  the  Sovereign  that  favors  him  !  What 
an  incredible  thing  it  is,  that  while  the  ox  knoweth 
its  owner  and  the.  ass  its  master's  crib,  man,  the 
object  of  love  divine,  should  not  know  his  Lord, 
his  Friend,  his  Benefactor !  Oh,  may  you  give  no 
rest  to  your  eyes  or  slumber  to  your  eyelids  till 
you  have  opened  your  mouth  to  profess  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  and  fled  for  refuge  to  take  hold  of  his 
righteousness  and  strength.  0,  that  you  might 
be  too  agitated  to  sleep  till  you  have  confessed 
your  sin  into  the  ear  of  the  Great  Elder  Brother, 
and  sought  pardon  from  your  God  through  Christ 
your  Saviour.  There,  is  forgiveness;  there  is 
mercy  to  be  had — to  be  had  now.  Whosoever 
believeth  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  be  saved.    Believing 


PERILOUS   PROCRASTINATION.  269 

is  trusting,  relying  upon,  a  simple  but  sincere 
dependence.  May  his  grace  enable  you  to  cast 
yourself  upon  his  mercy  and  credit  his  promise  in 
this  good  hour,  so  you  shall  be  this  night  enrolled 
among  the  saved,  and  he  shall  have  all  the  praise. 
The  Lord  grant  it,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


a  $oul=$ttrrin3  Wetrttation, 

"  Without  Christ.  ^^ — Ephesians  ii.  12. 

TTTTE  shall  have  two  things  to  consider  this 
^  ^  evening — the  misery  of  our  fast  estate,  and 
(he  great  deliverance  which  God  has  ivrought  for  us. 
I.  As  for  the  misery  of  our  past  estate,  be  it 
known  unto  you  that,  in  common  with  the  rest  of 
mankind,  believers  were  once  without  Christ.  No 
tongue  can  tell  the  depth  of  wretchedness  that  is 
hid  in  this  half  a  sentence.  There  is  no  poverty 
like  it;  no  indigence  or  destitution  that  is  compar- 
able to  it;  for  those  who  die  so,  there  is  no  outlook, 
but  dark  desertion,  dire  despair,  irretrievable  ruin : 
all  sorrow,  no  succor.  Without  Christ !  If  this 
be  the  description  of  some  of  you,  we  need  not 
affright  you  with  talk  about  the  fires  of  hell ;  there 
is  surely  peril  enough  in  the  privation  to  startle 
you,  when  you  are  in  such  a  desperate  state  as  to 
be  without  Christ.  Oh,  what  terrible  evils  lie  clus- 
tering thick  within  these  two  words ! 

The  man  who  is  without  Christ  2s  ivithout  any  of 
those  spiritual  blessings  ivhich  only  Christ  can  hestoio. 
Christ  is  the  life  of  the  believer,  but  the  man  who 
is  without  Christ  is  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins. 


A    SOUL-STIRRING   MEDITATION.  271 

There  he  lies;  let  us  stand  and  weep  over  his 
corpse.  It  is  decent  and  clean,  and  well  laid  out, 
but  life  is  absent,  and  life  being  absent,  there  is  no 
knowledge,  no  feeling,  no  power.  What  can  we 
do  ?  Shall  we  take  the  word  of  God  and.  preach  to 
this  dead  sinner?  We  are  bidden  to  do  so,  and 
therefore  we  will  attempt  it;  but  so  long  as  he  is 
without  Christ  no  result  will  follow,  any  more  than 
when  Elisha's  servant  laid  the  staff  upon  the  child 
— there  was  no  noise,  nor  sound,  nor  hearing.  As 
long  as  that  sinner  is  without  Christ  we  may  give 
him  ordinances,  if  we  dare;  we  may  pray  for  him, 
we  may  keep  him  under  the  sound  of  the  ministry, 
but  everything  will  be  in  vain.  Till  thou,  0  quick- 
ening  Spirit,  come  to  that  sinner,  he  will  still  be 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Till  Jesus  is  revealed 
to  him  there  can  be  no  life. 

So,  too,  Christ  is  the  light  of  the  world.  Light 
is  the  gift  of  Christ.  "  In  him  was  light,  and  the 
light  was  the  light  of  men."  Men  sit  in  dark- 
ness until  Jesus  appears.  The  gloom  is  thick  and 
dense ;  not  sun,  nor  moon,  nor  star  appeareth,  and 
there  can  be  no  light  to  illumine  the  understand- 
ing, the  affections,  the  conscience.  Man  has  no 
power  to  get  light.  He  may  strike  the  damp 
match  of  reason,  but  it  will  not  yield  him  a  clear 
flame.  The  candle  of  superstition,  with  its  tiny 
glare,  will  but  expose  the  darkness  in  which  he  is 
wrapped.  Rise,  morning  star !  Come,  Jesus, 
come!  Thou  art  the  sun  of  righteousness;  and 
healing  is   beneath   thy  wings.     Without   Christ 


272  STORM   SIGNALS. 

there  is  no  light  of  true  spiritual  knowledge,  no 
light  of  true  spiritual  enjoyment,  no  light  in  which 
the  brightness  of  truth  can  be  seen,  or  the  warmth 
of  fellowship  proved-  The  soul,  like  the  men  of 
Napthali,  sits  in  darkness,  and  seeth  no  light. 

Without  Christ  tliere  is  no  peace.  See  that  poor 
soul  hunted  by  the  dogs  of  hell.  It  flies  swift  as 
the  wind,  but  faster  far  do  the  hunters  pursue.  It 
seeks  a  covert  yonder  in  the  pleasures  of  the  world, 
but  the  baying  of  the  hell-hounds  aifright  it  in  the 
festive  haunts.  It  seeks  to  toil  up  the  mountain 
of  good  works,  but  its  legs  are  all  too  weak  to  bear 
it  beyond  the  oppressor's  rule.  It  doubles;  it 
changes  its  tack;  it  goes  from  right  to  left,  but  the 
hell-dogs  are  too  swift  of  foot,  and  too  strong  of 
wind  to  lose  their  prey,  and  till  Jesus  Christ  shall 
open  his  bosom  for  that  poor  hunted  thing  to  hide 
itself  within,  it  shall  have  no  peace. 

Without  Christ  there  is  no  rest.  The  wicked  are 
like  the  troubled  sea,  which  cannot  rest,  and  only 
Jesus  can  say  to  that  sea — "  Peace,  be  still." 

Without  Christ  there  is  no  safety.  The  vessel 
must  fly  before  the  gale,  for  it  has  no  anchor  on 
board;  it  may  dash  upon  the  rocks,  for  it  has  no 
chart,  and  no  pilot.  Come  what  may,  it  is  given 
up  to  the  mercy  of  wind  and  waves.  Safety  it  can- 
not know  without  Christ.  But  let  Christ  come  on 
board  that  soul,  and  it  may  laugh  at  all  the  storms 
of  earth,  and  e'en  the  whirlwinds  which  the  Priiice 
of  the  power  of  the  air  may  raise  need  not  confound 
it;  but  without  Christ  there  is  no  safety  for  it. 


A    SOUL-STTRRING    MEDITATION.  273 

Without  Christ,  again,  there  is  no  hope.  Sitting 
wrecked  upon  this  desert  rock,  the  lone  soul  looks 
far  away,  but  marks  nothing  that  can  give  it  joy. 
,  If,  perchance,  it  fancies  that  a  sail  is  in  the  distance 
/it  is  soon  undeceived.  The  poor  soul  is  thirsty, 
and  around  it  flows  only  a  sea  of  brine,  soon  to 
change  to  an  ocean  of  fire.  It  looks  upward,  and 
there  is  an  angry  God;  downward,  and  there  are 
yawning  gulfs;  on  the  right  hand,  and  there  are 
accusing  sounds;  on  the  left  hand,  and  there  are 
tempting  fiends.  It  is  all  lost !  lost !  lost !  without 
Christ,  utterly  lost,  and  until  Christ  comes  not  a 
single  beam  of  hope  can  make  glad  that  anxious 
eye. 

Without  Christ,  beloved,  remember  that  all  the 
religious  acts  of  men  are  vanity.  What  are  they  but 
mere  air-bags,  having  nothing  in  them  whatever 
that  God  can  accept?  There  is  the  semblance  of 
worship, — the  altar,  the  victim,  the  wood  laid  in 
order, — and  the  votaries  bow  the  knee,  or  prostrate 
their  bodies,  but  Christ  alone  can  send  the  fire  of 
heaven's  acceptance.  Without  Christ,  the  off'ering 
like  that  of  Cain's,  shall  lie  upon  the  stones,  but  it 
shall  never  rise  a  fragrant  smoke,  accepted  by  the 
God  of  heaven.  Without  Christ  your  church-goings 
are  a  form  of  slavery,  your  chapel-meetings  a 
bondage.  -  Without  Christ  your  prayers  are  but 
empty  wind,  your  repentances  are  wasted  tears, 
your  alms-givings  and  your  good  deeds  are  but  a 
coating  of  thin  veneer  to  hide  your  base  iniquities. 
Your  professions  are  white-washed  sepulchres,  fair 


274  STORM  SIGNALS. 

to   look   upon,    but   inwardly   full   of  rottenness. 
Without  Christ  your  religion  is  dead,   carrupt,   a 
stench,  a  nuisance  before  God — a  thing  of  abhor- 
rence, for  where  there  is  no  Christ  there  is  no  life 
in  any  devotion,  nothing  in  it  for  God  to  see  that 
can  possibly  please  him.     And  this,  mark  you,  is  a 
true  description,  not  of  some,  but  of  all  who  are 
without  Christ.     You  moral  people  without  Christ 
you  are  lost  as  much  as  the  immoral.     You  rich 
and  respectable  people,  without  Christ  you  will  be 
as  surely  damned  as  the  prostitute  that  walks  the 
streets  at  midnight.     Without  Christ,  though  you 
should  heap    up   your    charitable    donations,   en- 
dow your  almshouses  and  hospitals,  yea,  though 
you   should  give  your  bodies  to  be    burned,    no 
merit  would  be  imputed  to  you.     All  these  things 
would  profit  you  nothing.     Without  Christ,  e'en  if 
you  might  be  raised  on  the  wings  of  flaming  zeal, 
or  pursue  your  eager  course  with  the  enthusiasm 
of  a  martyr,  you  shall  yet  prove   to  be  but  the 
slave  of  your  own  passion,  and  the  victim  of  your 
own  folly.     Unsanctitied  and  unblest,   you  must 
then  be  shut  out  of  heaven,  and  banished  from  the 
presence  of  God.     Without  Christ  you  are  desti- 
tute of  every  benefit  which  he,  and  he  alone,  can 
bestow. 

Without  Christ  implies,  of  course,  that  you  are 
without  the  benefit  of  oR  those  gracious  offices  of 
Christ  tvJiich  are  so  Tiecessary  to  the  sons  of  men,  you 
have  no  true  prophet .  You  may  pin  your  faith  to 
the  sleeve  of  man,  and  be  deceived.     You  may  be 


A    SOUL-STIRRING    MEDITATION.  275 

orthodox  in  your  creed,  but  unless  you  have  Christ 
in  your  heart,  you  have  no  hope  of  glory.  With- 
out Christ  truth  itself  will  prove  a  terror  to  you. 
Like  Balaam,  your  eyes  may  be  open  while  your  life 
is  alienated.  Without  Christ  that  very  cross  which 
does  save  some  will  become  to  you  as  a  galloius 
upon  which  your  soul  shall  die.  Without  Christ 
you  have  no  priest  to  atone  or  to  intercede  on 
your  behalf.  There  is  no  fountain  in  which  you  can 
wash  away  your  guilt;  no  passover  blood  which 
you  can  sprinkle  on  your  lintel  to  turn  aside  the 
destroying  angel;  no  smoking  altar  of  incense  for 
you,  no  smiling  God  sitting  between  the  cherubim. 
Without  Christ  you  are  an  alien  from  everything 
which  the  priesthood  can  procure  for  your  welfare. 
Without  Christ  you  have  no  shepherd  to  tend,  no 
King  to  help  you;  you  cannot  call  in  the  day  of 
trouble  upon  one  who  is  strong  to  deliver.  The 
angels  of  God,  who  are  the  standing  army  of  King 
Jesus,  are  your  enemies,  and  not  your  alHes. 
Without  Christ  Providence  is  working  your  ill, 
and  not  your  good.  Without  Christ  you  have  no 
advocate  to  plead  your  cause  in  heaven;  you  have 
no  representative  to  stand  up  yonder  and  repre- 
sent you,  and  prepare  a  place  for  you.  Without 
Christ  you  are  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd;  with 
out  Christ  you  are  a  body  without  a  head;  without 
Christ  you  are  miserable  orphans  without  a  father, 
and  your  widowed  soul  is  without  a  husband. 
Without  Christ  you  are  without  a  Saviour;  how 
will  you  do  ?  what  will  become  of  you  when  you 


276  STORM   SIGNALS. 

find  out  the  value  of  salvation  at  the  last  pinch, 
the  dreary  point  of  despair  ?  and  without  a  friend 
in  heaven  you  must  needs  be  if  you  are  without 
Christ.  To  sura  up  all,  you  are  without  anything 
that  can  make  life  blessed,  or  death  happy.  With- 
out Christ,  though  you  be  rich  as  Croesus,  and 
famous  as  Alexander,  and  wise  as  Socrates,  yet 
are  you  naked  and  poor  and  miserable,  for  you 
lack  him  by  whom  are  all  things,  and  for  whom 
are  all  things,  and  who  is  himself  all  in  all. 

Surely  this  might  be  enough  to  arouse  the  con- 
science of  the  most  heedless.  But  ah !  without 
any  of  the  blessings  which  Christ  brings,  and  to 
miss  all  the  good  offices  which  Christ  fills — this  is 
only  to  linger  on  the  side  issues  !  The  imminent 
peril  is  to  be  witliout  Christ  himself.  Do  you  see 
there  the  Saviour  in  human  form — God  made  flesh 
dwelling  among  us  ?  He  loves  his  people,  and 
came  to  earth  to  wipe  out  an  iniquity  which  had 
stained  them  most  vilely,  and  to  work  out  a  right- 
eousness which  should  cover  them  most  gloriously ; 
but  without  Christ  that  living  Saviour  is  nothing 
to  you.  Do  you  see  him  led  away  as  a  sheep  to 
the  slaughter,  fastened  to  the  cruel  wood,  bleeding, 
dying  ?  Without  Christ  you  are  without  the  virtue 
of  that  great  sacrifice;  you  are  without  the  merit 
of  that  atoning  blood.  Do  you  see  him  lying  in 
the  tomb  of  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  asleep  in  death  ? 
That  sleep  is  a  burial  of  all  the  sins  of  his  people, 
but  without  Christ  your  sins  are  not  atoned  for; 
your  transgressions  are  yet  uuburied;  they  walk 


A    SOUL-STIRRING    MEDITATION:  277 

the  earth;  they  shall  go  before  you  to  judgment; 
they  shall  clamor  for  your  condemnation;  tliey 
shall  drag  you  down  without  hope.  Without 
Christ,  remember,  you  have  no  share  in  his  resur- 
rection. Bursting  the  bonds  of  death,  you  too  shall 
rise,  but  not  to  newness  of  life,  nor  yet  to  glory, 
for  shame  and  everlasting  contempt  shall  be  your 
portion  if  you  be  without  Christ.  See  him  as  he 
mounts  on  high;  he  rides  in  his  triumphal  car 
through  the  streets  of  heaven ;  he  scatters  gifts  for 
men,  but  without  Christ  there  are  none  of  those 
gifts  for  you.  There  are  no  blessings  for  those  who 
are  without  Christ.  He  sits  on  that  exalted  throne, 
and  pleads  and  reigns  forever,  but  without  Christ 
you  have  no  part  in  his  intercession,  and  you  shall 
have  no  share  in  his  glory.  He  is  coming.  Hark, 
the  trumpet  rings  !  My  ear  prophetic  seems  to 
catch  the  strain  !  He  comes,  surrounded  by  majes- 
tic pomp,  and  all  his  saints  shall  reign  with  him, 
but  without  Christ  you  can  have  no  part  nor  lot 
in  all  that  splendor.  He  goes  back  to  his  Father, 
and  surrenders  his  kingdom,  and  his  people  are 
forev^er  safe  with  him.  Without  Christ  there  shall 
be  none  to  wipe  away  the  tears  from  your  eyes,  no 
one  to  lead  you  to  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  no 
hand  to  give  you  a  palm  branch,  no  smile  to  make 
your  immortality  blessed.  Oh  !  my  dear  hearers, 
I  cannot  tell  you  what  unutterable  abysses  of 
wretchedness  and  misery  are  comprised  here  with- 
in the  fullness  of  the  meaning  of  these  dreadful 
words— without  Christ. 


278  STORM   SIGNALS. 

At  tliis  present  hour,  if  you  are  without  Christ, 
you  lack  the  very  essence  of  good,  by  reason  of 
which  your  choicest  privileges  are  an  empty  boast 
instead  of  a  substantial  boon.  Without  Christ,  oil 
the  ordinances  and  means  of  grace  are  nothing  ivorth. 
Even  this  precious  Book,  that  might  be  weighed 
with  diamonds — and  he  that  was  wise  would 
choose  the  Book  and  leave  the  precious  stones — 
even  this  sacred  volume  is  of  no  benefit  to  joxx. 
You  may  have  Bibles  in  your  houses,  as  I  trust  you 
all  have,  but  what  is  the  Bible  but  a  dead  letter 
without  Christ  ?  Ah  I  I  would  you  could  all  say 
what  a  poor  woman  once  said.  "  1  have  Christ 
here,*'  as  she  put  her  hand  on  the  Bible,  "  and  I 
have  Christ  here,"  as  she  put  her  hand  on  her  heart, 
"  and  I  have  Christ  there,"  as  she  raised  her  eyes 
towards  heaven;  but  if  you  have  not  Christ  in  the 
heart  you  will  not  find  Christ  in  the  Book,  for  he  is 
discovered  there  in  his  sweetness  and  his  blessedness 
and  his  excellence  only  by  those  who  know  him, 
and  love  hira  in  their  hearts.  Do  not  get  the  idea 
that  a  certain  quantity  of  Bible-reading,  and  par- 
ticular times  spent  in  repeating  prayers,  and  regu- 
lar attendance  at  a  place  of  worship,  and  tlie 
systematic  contribution  of  a  guinea  or  so  to  the 
support  of  public  worship  and  private  charities 
will  insure  the  salvation  of  your  souls.  No,  you 
must  be  born  again.  And  that  you  cannot  be;  for 
it  is  not  possible  that  you  could  have  been  born 
again  if  you  are  still  living  without  Christ.  To 
have  Christ  is  the  indispensable  condition  of  enter- 


A    SOUL-STIRRING    MEDITATION.  279 

ing  heaven.  If  you  have  him,  though  compassed 
about  with  a  thousand  infirmities,  you  shall  yet 
see  the  brightness  of  the  eternal  glory ;  but  if  you 
have  not  Christ,  alas  for  all  your  toil  and  the 
wearisome  slavery  of  your  religion,  you  can  but 
weave  a  righteousness  of  your  own,  which  shall 
disappoint  your  hope,  and  incur  the  displeasure  of 
God. 

And  without  Christ,  dear  friends,  there  comes 
the  solemn  reflection  that  ere  long  ye  shall  perish. 
Of  that  I  do  not  like  to  talk,  but  I  would  like  you 
to  think  of  it.  Without  Christ  you  may  live,  young 
man — though,  mark,  you  shall  miss  the  richest 
joys  of  life.  Without  Christ  you  may  live,  hale 
strong  man  in  middle  age — though  mark,  without 
him,  you  shall  miss  the  greatest  support  amidst 
your  troubles.  Without  Christ  you  may  live, 
old  man;  and  lean  upon  your  staff,  content  with 
the  earth  into  which  you  are  so  soon  to  drop, 
though  mark  you,  you  shall  lose  the  sweetest  con- 
solation which  your  weakness  could  have  found. 
But  remember,  man,  thou  art  soon  to  die.  It  mat- 
ters not  how  strong  thou  art;  death  is  stronger 
than  thou,  and  he  will  pull  thee  down,  even  as  the 
stag-hound  drags  down  his  victim,  and  then,  "  how 
wilt  thou  do  in  the  swellings  of  Jordan,"  without 
Christ  ?  How  wilt  thou  do  when  the  eyes  begin 
to  close,  without  Christ  ?  How  wilt  thou  do,  sin- 
ner, when  the  death-rattle  is  in  thy  throat,  with- 
out Christ  ?  When  they  prop  thee  up  with  pil- 
lows, when  they  stand  weeping  round  thine  expir- 


280  STORM   SIGNALS. 

ing  form,  when  the  pulse  grows  faint  and  few, 
when  thou  hast  to  lift  the  veil,  and  stand  disem- 
bodied before  the  dreadful  eyes  of  an  angry  God, 
how  wilt  thou  do  without  Christ  ?  And  when  the 
judgment-trump  shall  wake  thee  from  thy  slumber 
in  the  tomb,  and  body  and  soul  shall  stand  to- 
gether at  that  last  and  dread  assize,  in  the  midst 
of  that  tremendous  crowd,  sinner,  how  wilt  thou 
do  without  Christ  ?  When  the  reapers  come  forth 
to  gather  in  the  harvest  of  God,  and  the  sickles 
are  red  with  blood,  and  the  vintage  is  cast  into 
the  wine  press  of  his  wrath,  and  it  is  trodden  until 
the  blood  runs  forth  up  to  the  horse's  girdles — how 
wilt  thou  do  then,  I  conjure  thee,  without 
Christ  ?  Oh !  sinner,  I  pray  thee  let  these  words 
sound  in  thy  ears  till  they  ring  into  thy  heart.  I 
would  like  you  to  think  of  them  to-morrow,  and 
the  next  day,  and  the  next,  AVithout  Christ !  I 
would  like  to  make  thee  think  of  dying,  of  being 
judged,  of  being  condemned,  without  Christ ! 
May  God  in  his  mercy  enable  thee  to  see  thy 
state,  and  fly  to  him  who  is  able  to  save,  even 
unto  the  uttermost,  all  them  that  come  unto 
God  by  him.  Christ  is  to  be  had  for  the  ask- 
ing. Christ  is  to  be  had  for  the  receiving. 
Stretch  out  thy  withered  hand  and  take  him; 
trust  him,  and  he  will  be  thine  evermore,  and 
thou  shalt  be  with  him  where  he  is,  in  an  eternity 

II.  Having  thus  reviewed  the  misery  of  our  past 
estate,  let  us  endeavor  with  the  little  time  we  have 


A    SOUL-STIRRING   MEDITATION.  281 

left,  to  excite  the  thankfulness  of  God's  people  for 
what  the  Lord  has  done  for  them. 

We  are  not  without  Christ  now,  but,  let  me  ask 
you,  who  are  believers,  where  you  would  have  been 
now  without   Christ  ?     As  for  some  of  you,  you 
might,  indeed  you  would,  have  been  to-night  in 
the    ale-house   or    gin-palace.     You   would    have 
been   with  the  boisterous  crew  that  make  merri- 
ment on  the  Lord's  day;  you  know  you  would,  for 
"such  were  some  of  you."     You  might  have  been 
even  worse;  you  might  have  been  in  the  harlot's 
house ;  you  might  have  been  violating  the  laws  of 
man  as  well  as  the  laws  of  God,  "for  even  such" 
were  some  of  you,  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are 
sanctified.     Where  might  you  not  have  been  with- 
out Christ?     You  might  have  been  in  hell;  you 
might  have  been  shut  out  forever  from  all  mercy, 
condemned  to  eternal  banishment  from  the  pres- 
ence of  God.     I    think  the   Indian's  picture    is    a 
very   fair   one    of    where   we    should    have    been 
without   Christ.     When    asked    what    Christ    had 
done  for  him,  he  picked  up  a  worm,  put  it  on  the 
ground,  and  made  a  ring  of  straw  and    wood  round 
it,   which  he  set  alight.     As    the  wood    began   to 
glow  the  poor  worm  began  to  twist  and  wriggle  in 
agony,  whereupon  he  stooped  down,  took  it  gently 
up  with  his  finger  and  said — "That  is  what  Jesns 
did  for  me;  I  was  surrounded,  without  power  to 
help  myself,  by  a  ring  of  dreadful   fire  that  must 
have  been  my  ruin,  but  his  pierced  hand  lifted  me 
out  of  the  burning."     Think  of  that,  Christians,  and 


282  STORM  SIGNALS. 

as  your  hearts  melt,  come  to  his  table,  and  praise 
him  that  you  are  not  now  without  Christ. 

Then  think  lokat  Ids  hlood  has  done  for  you.  Take 
only  one  thing  out  of  a  thousand.  It  has  put 
away  your  many,  many  sins.  You  were  without 
Christ,  and  your  sins  stood  like  yonder  mountain, 
whose  black  and  rugged  cliff  threatens  the  very 
skies.  There  fell  a  drop  of  Jesu's  blood  upon  it, 
and  it  all  vanished  in  a  moment.  The  sins  of  all 
your  days  had  gone  in  an  instant  by  the  application 
of  the  precious  blood  !  Oh  !  bless  Jehovah's  name, 
that  you  can  say — 

*'  Now  freed  from  sin,  I  walk  at  large, 
My  Saviour's  blood  my  full  discharge; 
Content  at  his  dear  feet  I  lay, 
A  sinner  saved,  and  homage  pay." 

Bethink  you,  too,  now  that  you  have  Christ,  of 
tlie  loay  in  ivhich  he  came  and  made  you  partaker  of 
himself  Oh !  how  long  he  stood  in  the  cold, 
knocking  at  the  door  of  your  heart.  You  would 
not  have  him;  you  despised  him;  you  resisted  him; 
you  kicked  against  him ;  you  did,  as  it  were,  spit 
in  his  face,  and  put  him  to  open  shame  to  be  rid  of 
him.  Yet  he  would  have  you,  and  so,  overcoming 
all  your  objections,  and  overlooking  all  your  un- 
worthiness,  at  length  he  rescued  you  and  avouched 
you  to  be  his  own. 

Consider,  beloved,  what  might  have  been  your 
case  had  he  left  you  to  your  own  free  agency. 
You  might  have  had  his  blood  on  your  head  in 
aggravation  of  your  guilt.     Instead  of  that  you 


A  SOUL-STIRRING    MEDITATION.  283 

have  got  his  blood  applied  to  your  heart,  in  token 
of  your  pardon.  You  know  right  well  what  a  dif- 
ference that  makes.  Oh !  that  was  a  dreadful  cry 
in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  "  His  blood  be  on  us, 
and  on  our  children,"  and  Jerusalem's  streets  flow- 
ing Avith  gore  witnessed  how  terrible  a  thing  it  is 
to  have  Christ's  blood  visited  on  his  enemies.  But, 
beloved,  you  have  that  precious  blood  for  the 
cleansing  of  your  conscience.  It  has  sealed  your 
acceptance,  and  you  can,  therefore,  rejoice  in  the 
ransom  he  has  paid,  and  the  remission  you  have 
received  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 

And  I  would  not  have  you  forget  the  vast  ex- 
pense  ivhicli  it  cost  to  procure  this  priceless  boon. 
Christ  could  not  have  been  yours  had  he  lived  in 
heaven.  He  must  come  down  to  earth,  and  even 
then  he  could  not  be  fully  yours  till  he  had  bled 
and  died.  Oh  !  the  dreadful  portals  through  which 
Christ  had  to  pass  before  he  could  find  his  way 
to  you !  He  finds  you  now  quite  easily,  but  be- 
fore he  could  come  to  you  he  must  himself 
pass  through  the  grave.  Think  of  that,  and  be 
astonished  ! 

And  why  are  you  not  left  to  he  loithout  Christ  ?  I 
suppose  there  are  some  persons  whose  minds  nat- 
urally incline  towards  the  doctrines  of  free  will.  I 
can  only  say  that  mine  inclines  as  naturally  to- 
ward the  doctrines  of  sovereign  grace.  I  cannot 
understand  the  reason  why  T  am  saved,  except  up- 
on the  ground  that  God  would  have  it  so.  I  can- 
not, if  I  look  ever  so  earnestly,  discover  any  kind 


STORM   SIGNALS. 

of  reason  in  myself  why  /  should  be  a  partaker  of 
divine  grace.  If  I  am  not  to-night  without  Christ, 
it  is  only  because  Christ  Jesus  would  have  his  will 
with  me,  and  that  will  was  that  1  should  be  with 
him  where  he  is,  and  should  share  his  glory.  I 
can  put  the  crown  nowhere  but  upon  the  head  of 
him  whose  mighty  grace  has  saved  me  from  going 
down  into  the  pit. 

Beloved,  let  us  mention  one  thing  more  out  of 
the  thousand  things  which  we  must  leave  unsaid. 
'Remember  loliat  you  have  got  to-night  noiv  that  you 
have  got  Christ.  No,  no,  no,  do  not  be  telling  me 
what  you  have  not  got.  You  have  not  got  a  cer- 
tain income,  you  say;  you  have  not  got  a  compe- 
tence; you  have  not  got  wealth;  you  have  not  got 
friends;  you  have  not  got  a  comfortable  house. 
No,  but  you  have  got  your  Saviour;  you  have  got 
Christ;  and  what  does  that  mean?  ''He  that 
spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  freely  delivered  him  up 
for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him,  also,  freely 
give  us  all  things?  The  man  who  has  got  Christ 
has  got  everything.  There  are  all  things  in  one 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  if  you  once  get  hini  you  are 
rich  to  all  the  intents  of  bliss.  What,  have  Christ 
Jesus,  and  be  discontented  ?  Have  Christ  and 
murmur?  Beloved,  let  tne  chide  you  gently,  and 
pray  you  to  lay  aside  that  evil  habit.  If  you  have 
Christ  then  you  have  God  the  Father  to  be  your 
protector,  and  God  the  Spirit  to  be  yonr  comforter. 
Yon  have  present  things  working  together  for 
your  good,  and  future  things  to  unravel  your  hap- 


A    SOUL-STIRRING    MEDITATION.  285 

pier  portion ;  you  have  angels  to  be  your  servitors 
both  on  earth  and  in  heaven.  You  have  all  the 
wheels  of  Providence  revolving  for  your  benefit; 
you  have  the  stones  of  the  field  in  league  with  you ; 
you  have  your  daily  trials  sanctified  for  your  ben- 
efit; and  you  have  your  earthly  joys  hallowed  with 
a  blessing;  your  gains  and  your  losses  are  aUke 
profitable  to  you;  your  additions  and  your  diminu- 
tions shall  alike  swell  the  tide  of  your  soul's  satis- 
faction; you  have  more  than  any  other  creatures 
can  boast  as  their  portion;  you  have  more  than 
all  the  world  beside  could  yield  to  regale  your 
pure  taste,  and  ravish  your  happy  spirits.  And 
now,  will  you  not  be  glad  V  I  would  have  you 
come  to  this  feasting  table  this  evening  saying 
within  yourselves,  "  Since  I  am  not  without  Christ, 
but  Jesus  Christ  is  mine,  I  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  I 
will  rejoice." 

And  oh,  dear  Christian  friends,  if  you  have  lost 
your  evidences,  go  to  Christ  to  find  them  all.  Do 
not  go  striking  your  matches  to  light  your  candles, 
but  go  direct  to  the  sun  and  get  your  light  from 
his  full  orb.  You  who  are  doubting,  desponding, 
and  cast  down,  do  not  get  foraging  up  the 
mouldy  bread  of  yesterday,  but  go  and  get  the 
manna  which  falls  fresh  to-day  at  the  foot  of  the 
cross.  Now,  you  have  been  wandering  and  back- 
shding,  do  not  stay  away  from  Jesus  because  of 
your  unworthiness,  but  let  your  very  sins  impel  you 
to  come  the  faster  to  your  Saviour  s  feet.  Come,  ye 
sinners;  come,  ye  saints;  come,  ye  who  dare  not 


286  STORM   SIGNALS. 

Bay  that  ye  are  his  people;  come,  you  whose  faith 
is  but  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed;  come,  you  who 
have  not  any  faith  at  all;  come  now  to  Jesus,  who 
says,  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come,  and  take  of 
the  water  of  life  freely." 

May  God  grant  that  some  who  feel  that  they  are 
without  Christ  because  they  have  no  enjoyment, 
nor  any  sense  of  communion  with  him,  may  now 
take  hold  of  his  name,  his  covenant,  his  promises 
with  a  lively  faith,  nay  more,  may  they  find  him 
to  the  rapture  of  their  souls,  and  he  shall  have  all 
the  praise. 


*^  As  a  bird  that  wander eth  from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man  that  wan- 
der eth  from  his  placed — Prov.  xxvii.  8. 

SOLOMON  spoke  from  observation.  He  had 
seen  certain  persons  of  a  vagrant  kind;  and 
lie  perceived  that  they  seldom  or  never  prospered. 
Moreover,  he  spoke  from  inspiration  as  well  as 
from  observation,  hence  the  sagacity  of  the  philos- 
opher is  in  this  case  supported  by  the  authority  of 
the  preacher.  We  may,  therefore,  take  this  pro- 
verb, first,  as  the  dictate  of  human  wisdom 
gathered  by  long  experience;  and  then  next  as  the 
testimony  of  divine  wisdom,  commended  to  us  by 
infallible  revelation.  The  principle  it  inculcates  is 
alike  applicable  to  the  common  affairs  of  life  and 
to  the  higher  pursuits  which  belong  to  our  spiritual 
interests. 

I.  In  the  common  affairs  of  life  we  believe 
Solomon  to  be  correct  in  his  statement  that  "  As  a 
bird  that  wandereth  from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man  that 
wandereth  from  his  place."  The  unrest  of  that 
man's  mind  and  the  instability  of  his  conduct,  who 
is  constantly  making  a  change  of  his  position  and 
purpose,  augurs  no  success  for  any  of  his  adven- 


288  STORM   SIGNALS. 

tnres.  Unless  he  maketh  the  change  very  wisely, 
and  hath  abundant  reason  for  it,  he  will  make  a 
change  for  the  worse,  as  the  bird  doth  that  leaveth 
her  nest.  Some  people  are  eager  to  leave  their 
country  and  fly  from  their  native  shores.  This  is 
not  always  an  ill  thing  for  men  to  do;  for  thereby 
nations  have  been  formed  and  deserts  have  been 
peopled.  When  a  man  finds  it  impossible  to  pro- 
vide bread  for  an  increasing  family  in  this  country, 
one  of  the  wisest  courses  he  can  adopt  is  to  cross 
the  sea  and  seek  profitable  employment  in  another 
land.  But  there  are  some  spirits  of  such  a  roving 
caste  that  they  seem  never  to  be  satisfied  at  home. 
They  feel  persuaded  that  if  they  were  under  other 
skies  they  would  succeed ;  whereas,  as  a  matter  of 
general  fact,  a  man  who  cannot  prosper  in  Eng- 
land will  not  prosper  anywhere,  and  many  of  those 
who  have  gone  abroad  would  be  but  too  glad  to 
get  home  again.  Without  taking  counsel  from 
God,  and  weighing  the  matter  long,  it  is  perilous 
for  a  man  to  leave  the  Christian  privileges  of  this 
country.  Let  alone  other  considerations,  it  is  no 
light  thing  to  turn  aside  from  the  land  where  sanc- 
tuaries are  so  numerous,  and  where  the  gospel  is 
so  clearly  proclaimed,  to  go  abroad,  where  there 
may  be  some  pecuniary  advantages,  but  where 
there  must  be  much  spiritual  loss.  Well  may  the 
man  take  anxious  thought  before  he  goes,  or  else, 
mayhap,  when  he  finds  himself  in  Australia,  he 
will  long  to  be  in  New  Zealand,  and  when  he  does 
not  prosper  there  he  will  pant  for  the  United  States, 


THE    WANDERING    BIRD.  289 

and  not  getting  on  there  he  will,  perhaps,  be  want- 
ing to  come  back  to  Old  England,  and  so  he  will 
spend  the  best  of  his  days  in  vacillating  as  to 
where  he  shall  spend  them. 

The  like  is  also  true  with  respect  to  a  change  of 
occupation.  Some  persons  are  one  thing  to-day, 
but  you  do  not  know  what  they  will  be  to-morrow. 
Evidently  they  were  not  cut  out  for  this,  and  there- 
fore they  think  they  must  have  been  ordained  for 
that,  and,  as  they  have  not  thrived  in  one  line  of 
business,  they  feel  certain  that  they  must  have 
made  a  little  mistake,  and  that  if  they  could  get 
into  another  line  they  would  prosper.  Well,  when 
a  man  is  in  error  about  his  calling,  if  it  really  be 
not  his  calling,  let  him  leave  it;  but  let  him  first 
be  sure  that  it  is  not  his  calling,  for  otherwise  he 
will  sin  against  the  express  words  of  inspiration. 
The  apostle  Paul  says,  "  Let  every  man  abide  in 
the  same  calling  wherein  he  was  called," — that  is 
to  say,  the  occupation  or  profession  in  life  you 
were  engaged  in  when  you  were  converted  need 
not  be  rashly  abandoned.  Therein  you  may  enjoy 
communion  with  God.  But  if  you  go  running  be- 
fore the  cloud,  and  with  presumptuous  self-will  get 
out  of  the  path  that  Providence  has  assigned  you, 
you  will  be  sure  to  smart  for  it.  It  is  ours  to 
follow,  never  to  lead.  When  we  clearly  see  our 
way,  let  us  walk  therein;  but  unless  we  have  that 
way  clearly  manifested  to  us,  let  us  abide  still  in 
our  nest. 

This  also  applies  to  those  who  want  to  be  always 


290  STORM  SIGNALS. 

changing  their  situation  and  their  acquaintance — 
masters  never  satisfied  with  their  servants,  and 
servants  always  discontented  with  their  employers. 
We  know  many  who  say,  *'  There  are  so  many 
temptations  in  the  place  where  I  am ;  I  will  try 
another."  Well,  I  am  not  at  all  sure,  dear  friends, 
that  you  are  right.  As  for  the  temptations  that 
trouble  me,  I  would  rather  endure  them  than  en- 
counter any  fresh  ones.  I  may  know  something 
about  my  weakness  in  the  present  trial,  but  I  can- 
not tell  how  I  might  stagger  under  another.  I 
should  recommend  you  to  be  rather  chary  of 
changing  your  trials.  To  exchange  one  trial  for 
another  is  all  the  relief  you  will  get  in  this  world. 
All  is  vanity  under  the  sun.  The  whole  creation 
groaneth  together.  Amidst  sorrow  and  sighing 
thus  universal  our  lot  is  cast.  From  the  sick 
man's  bitter  experience  we  cannot  escape — 

♦*  We  toss  from  side  to  side  in  pain 
But  'tis  a  poor  relief  we  gain, 
To  shift  the  place  but  not  the  pain." 

You  may  change  your  position  o'er  and  o'er  again, 
but  you  will  always  be  exposed  to  temptation. 
Until  you  get  beyond  yonder  azure  sky  you  will 
never  be  out  of  gunshot  of  the  devil.  Evil  spirits 
molest  every  rank  in  life.  The  poor  man  is  sore 
beset  with  grievous  hardships,  and  the  rich  man  is 
encompassed  with  seductive  snares.  He  who  toils 
with  his  hand  may  have  some  cause  to  complain, 
but  he  who  toils  with  his  brain  will  become  the 
victim  of  a  sorer  complaint.     Should  you  fly  to  the 


THE    WANDERING    BIRD.  291 

utmost  verge  of  the  green  earth,  temptation  would 
still  pursue  you.  Everywhere,  while  you  are  in 
the  body,  you  must  keep  guard,  for  temptations 
and  trials  are  the  common  portion  of  all  that  on 
this  earth  do  dwell.  Be  not  in  a  hurry,  therefore,  to 
fly  from  one  scene  of  temptation  to  another.  If 
God  ordains  that  your  lot  should  be  altered,  be  it 
so.  It  is  yours  to  accept  his  allotment  either  with 
resignation  or  with  gratitude.  But  be  not  hasty 
or  heedless  in  running  from  one  place  to  another, 
lest  in  yielding  to  the  impulse  of  a  moment  you 
forfeit  the  comfort  of  a  lifetime. 

It  may  be  that  these  remarks  are  peculiarly  ap- 
plicable to  some  people  here  present.  I  cannot 
tell.  When  talking  about  such  homely  things,  our 
words  have  sometimes  proved  to  be  like  an  oracle 
for  the  guidance  of  those  that  have  come  up  to 
God's  house  to  inquire  in  his  temple.  At  any  rate, 
dear  friends,  when  the  mind  is  unhinged,  or  the 
feelings  chafed,  it  is  not  easy  to  exercise  a  wise 
discretion.  Wait  upon  God  for  guidance  as  to  any 
change  in  your  life  you  may  determine,  and  if  the 
two  things  be  equal — to  remain  where  you  are,  or 
to  remove  elsewhere — choose  to  abide  still,  for  the 
chances  are,  speaking  according  to  man's  judg- 
ment, in  its  favor.  Reason  seems  to  say  that,  as 
it  is  unwise  for  the  bird  to  wander  from  her  nest, 
so  it  is  not  desirable  for  you  to  wander  from  your 
place. 

Still  keeping  to  the  common  use  of  these  words, 
let  us  now  turn  them  to  another  account.     This  is 


292  STORM   SIGNALS. 

most  certainly  true  in  changing  one's  religious  ser- 
vice in  the  cause  of  God.  We  have  a  niche,  per- 
haps, in  which  God  has  placed  us,  and  we  have 
had  some  little  honor  in  filling  it;  but  by-and-by 
another  sphere  of  labor  opens  up  before  us,  and, 
like  children,  easily  charmed  with  novelty,  we 
think  we  could  be  more  useful  in  doing  something 
else,  and  leaving  our  old  work.  Let  us  be  very 
careful  in  this  matter,  for  "  As  a  bird  that  wander- 
eth  from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man  that  wandereth  from 
his  place."  I  admired  one  thing  greatly  in  our  de- 
ceased friend,  Mr.  Worcester,  who  for  so  long  a 
time  kept  the  gate  outside.  When  I  once  asked 
him  whether  he  could  not  be  serviceable  to  the 
church  as  an  elder,  he  said  that  if  he  were  elected 
to  it  he  should  decline  the  office,  because,  he  said, 
"  I  can  do  my  work  as  a  gate-keeper,  but  I  do  not 
know  what  I  could  do  as  an  elder."  So  he  resolved 
to  stick  to  the  work  in  which  he  was  acknowledged 
to  do  good  service.  I  would  have  each  Christian 
man  do  the  same. 

Some  brethren,  we  know,  have  such  an  itching 
to  get  into  the  pulpit  that  they  are  impatient  of 
any  other  office  than  the  preacher's.  But  there  are 
many  in  the  pulpit  nowadays  who  had  better  have 
kept  out  of  it.  They  were  excellent  people  at 
prayer-meetings;  they  were  very  serviceable  indeed 
to  give  a  little  address  now  and  then  at  a  cottage- 
meeting;  they  would  have  been  useful  deacons, 
exemplary  visitors  of  the  sick,  and  perhaps  good 
city  missionaries.   .  But  they  thought  within  them- 


THE    WANDERING    BIRD.  293 

selves  that  the  pulpit  ought  to  be  blessed  by  their 
distinguished  abilities,  and  so  they  crept  up  the 
pulpit  stairs,  as  little  to  their  own  comfort  as  to 
the  church's  edification;  and  now,  had  they  but 
the  wisdom  and  the  humility  to  come  down  again, 
never  more  to  mount  them,  it  would  be  well.  If 
you  be  really  called  to  the  ministry,  then,  in  God's 
name,  do  not  stand  back  from  it;  and  if  a  new 
sphere  of  labor  opens  to  you,  accept  it,  resting  on 
your  God,  who  can  make  his  strength  perfect  in 
your  weakness;  but  be  not  forever  panting  after 
the  highest  seats  in  the  synagogue:  do  not  always 
want  the  uppermost  place  at  the  feast,  lest,  when 
the  King  cometh  in,  thou  shouldst  have,  with 
shame,  to  take  a  lower  room.  Wait  till  the  King 
says — "Friend,  come  up  higher;"  never  go  up 
higher  till  you  have  the  King's  friendly  admoni- 
tion that  the  higher  place  is  yours  by  a  call  other 
than  your  own  choice,  remembering  that  "As  a 
bird  that  wandereth  from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man 
that  wandereth  from  his  place," — from  his  place, 
from  his  proper  place  in  the  Church  of  God,  his 
proper  position  in  the  ranks  of  the  Lord's  hosts. 

Again,  I  will  use  it  as  a  proverb  very  often  ap- 
plicable to  ministers.  There  may  be  some  here  to 
whom  this  may  come  as  a  powerful  rebuke.  It  is 
a  crying  evil  just  now,  especially  in  our  own  denom- 
ination, that  ministers  are  changing  their  places. 
The  good  old  ministers  used  to  occupy  one  charge 
for  fifty  years,  and  the  people  used  to  love  them, 
and  to  hold  fast  to  them.     They  did  not  think  of 


294  STORM   SIGNALS. 

moving;  they  never  spoke  of  resigning,  any  more 
than  fathers  speak  of  resigning  their  fatherhood 
because  their  boys  and  girls  are  sometimes  dis- 
obedient. They  weathered  the  storm.  They  knew 
that  all  parts  of  the  sea  are  rough,  so  they  did  not 
want  to  get  out  of  one  bay  into  another  as  soon  as 
a  Httle  storm  came  on.  1  do  not  know  but  that 
some  preachers  are  better  moving;  and  probably 
they  would  be  better  if  they  were  moved  off  alto- 
gether. I  think  when  a  man  seldom  or  never  re- 
mains in  service  at  one  place  for  more  than  about 
two  years  he  has  need  to  question  whether  he  was 
called  into  the  ministry  at  all.  Our  heavenly 
Husbandman  does  not  generally  plant  trees  in  his 
vineyard  that  need  shifting  every  two  years. 
God's  trees  are  full  of  sap,  the  cedars  of  Lebanon 
which  he  hath  planted.  They  can  stand  on  the 
bare  mountain's  brow,  and  see  the  ages  of  mortals 
swept  away  into  the  tomb.  And  so  a  God-sent 
minister  may  stand  many  years  in  one  place,  and 
see  man-made  ministers  swept  away,  like  gen- 
erations of  lichens  and  mosses,  because  they  have 
no  divine  life  in  them.  I  love  to  see  a  Christian 
minister,  I  must  say,  standing  fast  in  his  place. 
We  are  not  to  get  into  a  great  pet  because  there 
was  a  little  disagreement  at  a  church  meeting,  or 
turn  round  offended  because  some  deacon  will  not 
be  quite  as  pliable  as  we  could  wish,  or  because 
the  neighborhood  does  not  seem  to  increase,  or  be- 
cause there  are  not  quite  so  many  conversions  as  we 
want.     No,  sirs,  if  God  shall  move  us,  let  us  move ; 


THE    WANDERING   BIRD.  295 

but  if  he  doth  not  move  us,  let  not  the  devil  do  it. 
Do  you  know  what  happens  when  the  bird  wan- 
ders from  her  nest.  Why,  there  are  her  own  eggs 
in  the  nest,  and  there  is  no  bird  which  can  sit  so 
well  on  the  eggs  as  the  bird  that  laid  thera.  And 
BO  a  Christian  minister  should  recollect  that  there 
are  some  young  converts  who  are  his  own  spiritual 
children.  They  are  of  his  own  bringing  in,  through 
divine  grace,  and,  ordinarily  speaking,  there  is  no 
man  who  can  by  any  means  nurture  the  young  con- 
verts like  the  man  who  was  the  means  of  their 
conversion.  It  is  well  for  infants  to  be  brought 
up  by  their  own  mother,  and  it  is  a  good  thing  for 
young  converts  to  be  fed  under  their  own  spiritual 
parents.  I  should  not  like  to  trust  mine  to  any- 
body else  for  any  great  len-gth  of  time.  There  is 
always  a  fear  when  the  parent  bird  is  away  that 
the  eggs  will  grow  cold  and  addled,  so  that  w4ien 
she  comes  back  she  will  find  that  she  has  lost  all 
her  trouble.  And  so  when  the  minister  leaves  his 
people  and  goes  away  to  some  other  place,  there 
are  many  of  those  who  did  seem  to  run  well  who 
will  turn  back.  This  is  a  sad  result — a  tale  of 
wasted  labor.  Besides,  the  bird  knows  that,  how- 
ever uncomfortable  its  nest  may  be,  there  is  no 
other  nest  in  the  world  so  comfortable  as  the  one 
which  it  has  made  itself  And  the  Christian  min- 
ister must  know  that  there  is  no  other  church  so 
comfortable  for  him  as  the  church  which  he  was 
the  means  of  forming.  *'  I  dwell  among  mine  own 
people,"  saith  the  Shunammite.     That  is  my  hap- 


296  STORM   SIGNALS. 

piness  and  my  joy  to  dwell  among  my  own  people, 
and  if  any  man  should  say  to  me,  "  Is  there  any- 
thing in  life  that  thou  desirest?  Wouldest  thou 
be  spoken  for  to  the  king,  or  to  the  captain  of  the 
hosts?"  I  would  answer.  No,  there  is  nothing  I 
desire  under  heaven  but  to  dwell  among  my  own 
people;  if  I  may  but  seek  their  good,  and  see  the 
Church  of  God  prosper  here,  it  shall  be  all  that  I 
ask  of  my  God  this  side  heaven.  Brethren,  let 
those  of  us  who  are  in  the  ministry,  as  far  as  possi- 
ble cling  to  our  churches,  and  to  our  fields  of 
labor,  remembering  that,  "  As  a  bird  that  wan- 
dereth  from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man  that  wandereth 
from  his  place." 

This  is  equally  true  (and  I  am  still  keeping  to 
the  common  sense  of  the  passage)  of  our  hearers. 
Oh  !  there  are  some  hearers  who  are  sad,  sad  va- 
grants. We  can  have  no  objection  to  our  hearers 
going  to  listen  to  other  ministers,  if  ever  they  can 
be  edified  thereby,  for  the  bird  that  sits  best  on 
the  nest  must  come  ofi*  sometimes,  especially  if 
there  is  any  food  to  be  had  elsewhere.  Hear 
anybody  that  can  profit  you.  I  am  sure  nothing 
can  gratify  me  more  than  to  know  that  you  grow 
in  grace,  and  that  your  souls  are  fed  on  the  pure 
word  of  truth.  If  a  Church  of  England  minister 
preaches  the  gospel  in  your  neighborhood  better 
than  the  Baptist  minister  does,  do  not  go  and  hear 
the  Baptist;  and  if  you  find  either  Baptist  or  Inde- 
pendent treating  you  to  free-will  instead  of  free- 
grace,  do  not  listen  to  them,  but  seek  out  the  Pres- 


THE    WANDERING    BIRD.  297 

byterian  and  hear  him,  if  you  find  him  more  sound 
in  the  faith;  for,  after  all,  your  souls  must  be  fed. 
That  is  a  matter  of  necessity.  Where  you  can 
have  all  the  points  of  truth,  prefer  it,  prefer  it  in- 
finitely; but  if  you  cannot  have  them  all,  give  your 
chief  care  to  those  which  possess  the  greatest  im- 
portance. Seek  first,  in  this  case,  those  things 
which  make  most  for  your  soul's  prosperity.  But 
what  I  do  not  like  is  this — certain  people  will  join 
a  church,  and  then  after  about  six  months  will  re- 
move their  membership  to  another  church,  and 
then  another,  and  so  they  flit  about.  They  ought 
to  have  no  moss  on  them,  and  I  suppose  they  have 
none,  for  they  have  been  always  rolling  stones. 
And  then,  if  the  minister  should  die,  how  many 
there  are  who  go  off  directly,  for  now  that  the 
church  is  in  a  little  difficulty  they  will  all  get  out 
of  it.  Brave  sailors  these  !  They  want  to  get  out 
of  the  boat  when  the  ship  is  in  a  little  bit  of  a  gale, 
and  they  leave  the  Church  of  God  just  when  their 
help  is  most  wanted.  Oh !  they  will  come  and 
join  the  church  when  the  church  prospers ;  yes  any 
quantity  of  them :  but  I  wonder,  if  the  pastor  went 
away,  whether  we  should  find  them  all  remaining 
faithful?  Too  many  London  churches  are  a  sort 
of  flying  camp,  congregations  composed  of  people 
always  flying  from  one  place  to  another — a  set  of 
gypsy-christians  who  have  no  settled  abode  and  no 
local  habitation.  They  are  about  as  respectable  as 
the  gypsies  with  whom  1  have  compared  them. 
Oh !  let  not  this  ever  be  said  of  any  of  you  who 


298  STORM   SIGNALS. 

love  your  Lord,  and  who  consequently  love  his 
church,  but  when  you  are  united  with  his  people 
say,— 

**  Here  would  I  make  my  settled  rest, 
While  others  go  and  come; 
No  more  a  stranger,  or  a  guest, 
But  like  a  child  at  home." 

If  you  are  willful  in  your  wandering,  you  will 
constantly  make  worse  and  worse  your  condition. 
By  a  permanent  adhesion  to  the  Church,  and  a 
diligent  casting  in  of  your  whole  efforts  into  the 
cause  of  God  you  shall,  through  the  Holy  Spirit, 
get  peace  to  your  own  soul  and  bring  prosperity  to 
your  companions  in  Christian  fellowship. 

II.  But  now  1  shall  take  my  text  in  another 
way,  and  try  to  use  the  general  principle  in  an- 
other sense.  There  are  some  men  who  wander 
from  their  place  in  spiritual  things. 

Where  is  the  "  place"  for  a  sinner  ?  The  place 
for  a  sinner  is  always  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  look- 
ing unto  Jesus.  Alas,  then,  the  tendency  in  us  all 
is  to  be  looking  for  evidences,  signs,  marks,  experi- 
ences, graces,  and  coincidences  of  one  kind  or  an- 
other. Having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  we  are  so  fool- 
ish and  so  bewitched  that  we  try  to  get  perfect  in 
the  flesh.  We  know  that  at  the  first  our  only 
comfort  came  from  simply  depending  upon  the 
finished  work  of  Jesus,  and  yet  we  are  so  demented 
that  we  try  to  get  comfort  from  that  poor  flesh  of 
ours,  which  has  already  been  our  encumbrance, 
and  will  be  our  plague  till  it  dies.     The  moment  a 


THE    WANDERING    BIRD.  299 

Christian  wanders  away  from  his  place, — that  is, 
from  the  simplicity  of  his  faith  in  Jesus, — that 
moment  he  departs  from  his  safe  shelter  in  the 
solid  rock.  What  Christ  did,  what  Christ  is,  what 
Christ  has  promised  we  cling  to  as  the  home  of 
our  faith.  The  sinner  that  seeks  solace  elsewhere, 
that  moment  he  is  like  a  bird  that  wanders  from 
her  nest.  The  bird  away  from  her  nest  has 
no  comfort;  the  instincts  of  nature  make  her 
feel  during  her  incubation  that  the  nest  is  her 
proper  place.  And  when  the  Christian  gets 
away  from  the  cross,  the  new-born  instincts 
within  him  make  him  feel  that  he  is  out  of 
his  proper  position.  The  cross  is  the  true  rest 
of  a  Christian.  We  are  like  Noah's  dove,  there 
is  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  our  feet  except  in  the 
ark;  we  may  search  the  world  around,  and  fly 
over  the  great  waste  of  waters,  but  there  never 
shall  be  found  rest  for  ns  anywhere  but  at  the 
cross.  I  confess  I  sometimes  get  into  that  sorry 
/  state  of  feeling,  rather  as  a  Christian  professor, 
/  or  a  minister,  than  as  a  sinner  saved  by  grace; 
I  but  I  find  that  I  have  to  come  back  again  to 
that  same  place,  and  to  sing  the  old  ditty  over 
again, — 

**  Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring; 
Simply  to  Thy  cross  I  cling; 
Naked,  come  to  Thee  for  dress; 
Helpless,  look  to  Thee  for  grace." 

There  is  no  living  comfortably,  there  is  no  living 
with  the  peace  and  joy  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 


/ 


300  STORM   SIGNALS. 

heart,  if  we  once  wander  from  the  simplicity  of 
our  confidence  in  Christ. 

Further:  there  are  many  believers  who  also 
wander  out  of  their  place.  What,  now,  is  a  be- 
liever's place?  A  believer's  place  is  in  the  bosom 
of  his  Lord,  or  at  the  right  hand  of  his  Master,  or 
sitting  at  his  feet  with  Mary.  Now,  some  of  us 
have  had  times  in  which  we  did  come  very  near 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Ah  !  some  of  you  never 
woke  in  the  morning  without  thinking  of  him  and 
all  day  long  a  sense  of  his  presence  was  in  your 
heart.  How  you  grudged  the  world  the  hours  you 
had  to  give  to  business;  and  when  you  locked  up 
your  heart  at  night,  you  always  gave  Jesus  Christ 
the  key.  How  sweet  his  ordinances  were  to  you 
then,  because  you  could  see  Christ  through  them, 
as  through  windows  of  agates  and  gates  of  car- 
buncles!  How  delightful  were  prayer-meetings 
and  Bible-classes  then,  because  you  saw  Jesus 
there,  and  talked  with  him  !  But  what  about 
your  present  state  ?  Perhaps,  my  dear  friend,  you 
have  wandered  from  your  place;  you  are  not  liv- 
ing near  to  Christ,  as  you  used  to  do.  Hence 
ordinances  have  but  very  little  comfort  in  them; 
they  are  dull  and  tedious;  and  services  which  were 
once  as  marrow  and  fatness  to  you  have  now  be- 
come as  dry  bones.  Your  closet,  too,  is  much 
neglected ;  your  Bible  is  not  studied  as  it  was.  You 
have  lost  your  first  love;  and,  I  appeal  to  you, 
have  you  not  also  lost  your  first  comfort  ?  Are 
you  not  like  a  bird  that  has  wandered  from  her 


THE    WANDERING    BIRD.  301 

nest  ?  Believe  me,  there  is  no  solid  joy,  no  sera- 
phic rapture,  no  hallowed  peace  this  side  heaven, 
exc'ept  by  living  close  under  the  shadow  of  the 
cross,  and  nestling  in  the  wounds  of  Jesus.  Oh, 
that  we  should  be  so  foolish  !  The  bird  doth  not 
forget  her  nest,  but  we  do  forget  our  Lord.  We 
have  need  to  say  with  the  Psalmist — "  Return  unto 
thy  rest,  0  my  soul,  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  boun- 
tifully with  thee  !  "    We  have  need  to  cry  to-night — 

"  Keturn,  oh  holy  Dove  !  return, 
Sweet  messenger  of  rest  ! 
I  hate  the  sins  that  made  Thee  mourn, 
And  drove  Thee  from  my  breast." 

We  have  wandered  from  our  place,  you  see ;  for  our 
place  is  at  Jesu's  feet  with  Mary,  or  on  Jesu's 
bosom  with  John,  or  at  Jesu's  lips  with  the  spouse 
in  tlie  Canticles,  saying — "  Let  him  kiss  me  with 
the  kisses  of  his  mouth;"  but,  roaming  hither  and 
thither,  we  are  like  a  bird  that  has  wandered  from 
her  nest. 

And  does  not  this  wandering  imply  a  lack  of 
watchfulness  ?  Do  I  not  observe  the  Christian  who 
was  so  jealous  of  himself  once  that  he  did  not 
haste  to  put  one  foot  before  the  other  for  fear  he 
should  take  a  step  away ;  he  would  not  even  talk 
without  saying — "  0  Lord,  open  Thou  my  lips  !  " 
But  now  he  thinks  that  he  is  sure  to  stand,  and  he 
forgets  to  guard  himself  with  jealousy.  He  thinks, 
perhaps,  that  his  experience  has  made  him  so  wise 
that  he  will  not  fall  into  his  former  errors,  and  so 
he  getteth  a  carnal  confidence,  and  forgetteth  to 


302  STORM   SIGjVALS. 

stand  upon  his  watch-tower  day  and  night,  and 
watch  against  his  foes.  Do  you  know  what  some- 
times happens  to  the  bird  if  it  leaves  its  nest? 
Why,  while  the  bird  is  away  the  cuckoo  comes  and 
drops  its  Qgg  in,  and  so  the  poor  bird  when  it 
comes  back  has  to  hatch  its  enemy.  And  often- 
times when  we  are  not  watchful,  and  permit  the  en- 
emy to  take  an  advantage  over  us,  Satan  comes  in, 
and  drops  some  foul  temptation  into  our  nest,  which 
our  hearts  help  to  hatch,  and  which  will  give  us 
trouble  all  our  lives.  As  sure  as  ever  we  wander 
in  the  matter  of  watchfulness  it  will  be  for  our 
hurt.  We  may  sleep,  bat  Satan  does  not.  Never 
was  he  detected  napping  yet.  There  is  slothful- 
ness  among  believers,  but  there  is  no  slothfalness 
on  the  part  of  their  adversary.  He  ever  watcheth, 
going  "  about  like  a  roaring  lion,  seeking  whom 
he  may  devour."  Though  you  should  leave  off 
watchfulness,  he  never  will.  Oh,  Christian !  do 
not  leave  your  nest;  for  you  do  not  know  what  may 
come  of  it,  what  good  things  may  be  destroyed,  or 
what  bad  things  may  be  deposited,  while  your  heart 
is  away. 

Some  Christians,  too,  wander  in  a  yet  more 
melancholy  manner  as  to  its  outward  effect,  for  we 
see  them  wander  from  holiness.  Unhappy  church 
that  hath  in  it  many  such  inconsistent  professors. 
But,  alas !  they  are  too  common  in  the  world. 
They  "did  for  a  time  run  well;  what,  then,  did 
hinder  them  that  they  should  not  obey  the  truth  ?  " 
The  root  of  the  matter  was  scarcely  in  them,  for 


THE    WANDERING    BIRD.  303 

they  brought  forth  fruit  only  for  a  season,  and  by- 
and  by  they  withered  away.  Ah,  well !  if  there  be 
a  Christian  here — a  real  Christian — who  has  back- 
slidden and  gone  into  the  world,  he  never  will  be 
happy  in  his  sin.  A  reprobate,  after  making  a 
profession,  may  perhaps  go  back  and  be  comfort- 
able, but  a  Christian  never  can.  Tell  me  that  you 
are  happy  in  your  sin,  and  I  tell  you  at  once  that 
you  are  dead  in  sin,  for  he  who  puts  on  guilt  must 
cast  ofi'  shame.  You  are  in  your  own  element; 
like  a  fish  in  the  water  you  will  find  it  suits  your 
constitution.  As  a  bird  could  not  be  happy  down 
in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  it  must  drown,  unless  it 
soon  be  delivered,  so  the  saint  of  God  is  wretched 
in  the  depths  of  iniquity;  he  must  speedily  perish 
unless  he  is  brought  out.  If  he  falleth  into  sin 
through  infirmity,  or  be  dragged  into  it  througb 
the  force  of  sudden  temptation,  he  yearneth  to  be 
delivered,  and  groaneth  and  crieth  unto  God,  till 
once  more  the  bones  that  were  broken  are  made  to 
rejoice.  If  you  wander  from  holiness,  you  w^ander 
from  your  place.  I  have  known  some  people  who, 
in  order  to  avoid  trouble,  have  committed  a  tres- 
pass. A  Christian  man,  for  instance,  has  kept  his 
shop  open  on  a  Sunday  to  prevent  bankruptcy,  and 
a  mass  of  troubles  rolled  in  upon  him  ten  times 
heavier  than  those  he  had  sought  to  avert.  We 
have  heard  of  some  who  have  done  violence  to 
their  conscience  just  once.  In  sheer  despondency 
they  shut  their  eyes,  and  swallowed  the  bitter  pill. 
It  did  not  take  five  minutes  to  do  it.     Their  friends 


304  STORM   SIGNALS. 

said  it  was  wise.  Jll-advisers  told  them  it  was 
necessary.  They  thus  attempted  to  extricate  them- 
selves from  some  trying  position.  But  the  con- 
sequence was  that  to  then-  dying-day  the  worm  of 
conscience  still  did  gnaw  their  soul.  They  have 
made  the  rod  wherewith  God  hath  scourged  them. 
Mind  what  you  are  at,  then,  lest  in  wandering 
from  holiness  you  prove  yourself  like  a  bird  that 
wandereth  from  her  nest.  Oh,  how  blessed  it  will 
be  if  you  and  I  shall  be  kept  by  mighty  grace, 
simply  relying  upon  Christ,  constantly  communing 
with  his  person,  watchful  against  the  inroads  of 
temptation,  and  persevering  in  holiness  even  to 
the  end !  Without  this  there  can  be  no  comfort 
to  us. 

III.  And  now,  what  persuasions  shall  I  use  to 
make  every  one  of  you  who  is  a  true  Christian 
cling  close  to  his  nest? 

Consider,  dear  friends,  the  joy  which  you  and  I 

Jb^ave    had    when  we  have  been  clinging  close  to 

•  Christ.     Where  else  can  such  sweetness  be  found 

as  we  have  found  in  the  love  of  Jesus?     Will  a 

man  leave  the  cool,  flowing  waters  from  Lebanon 

to  go  and  drink  of  the  muddy  river    of  another 

place  ?     Shall  a  man  turn  away  from  the  bubbling 

fountain  to  seek  out  for  himself  a  broken  cistern  ? 

Oh,  let  it  not  be  !     We  who  have  fed  on  angels' 

food  cannot  be  content  with  the  husks  that  swine 

.  eat.     Let  us  say  with  Rutherford — "  Ever  since  I 

have  eaten  the  wheaten  bread  of  heaven  my  mouth 

has  been  out  of  taste  for  the  brown  bread  of  earth, 


THE    WANDERING    BIRD.  305 

which  is  full  of  grit  and  gravel-stones.  I  can  no 
longer  find  sweetness  in  this  world's  joys,  for  I 
have  tasted  of  joys  celestial  that  are  beyond  all 
that  earth  can  give."  Let  the  joy  we  have  had  in 
Christ  constrain  us  still  to  cling  to  him. 

Think  again  of  the  sorrow  we  have  felt  when- 
ever we  have  wandered.  You  and  1  have  had 
backsliding  times;  let  us  confess  it  mournfully. 
But  what  wretched  times  they  have  always  been! 
What  have  we  ever  gained  by  going  away  from 
our  Lord  but  broken  bones  and  sorrow  of  heart  ? 
As  we  have  been  burned,  let  us  dread  the  fire; 
and  as  we  have  had  to  smart  for  our  wanderings 
when  the  watchmen  have  plucked  off  our  veil  and 
smitten  us,  let  us  henceforth  cling  close  to  our 
Beloved.  What  reason  has  he  ever  given  us  to  be 
discontented  and  go  away  ?  Has  he  been  unfaith- 
ful to  us  ?  "  Have  I  been  a  wilderness  unto  you  ?" 
he  asks,  in  what  respect  has  he  aggrieved  us? 
Has  he  ever  smitten  us  in  his  wrath,  or  treated  us 
harshly  for  our  follies  ?  Never  has  a  friend  be- 
haved better  to  his  friend  than  Christ  has  behaved 
to  us;  and  as  we  can  never  find  a  better  Saviour, 
let  us  cling  to  him  all  our  days.  Or  can  you  think 
that  the  outlook  is  dreary  ?  When  we  think  of 
the  joy  that  is  yet  to  come,  we  have  a  yet  stronger 
motive  to  cling  to  the  Saviour.  We  may  have  to 
walk  with  him  to-day  when  the  snow  blows  in  our 
faces;  but,  oh!  what  will  it  be  to  walk  with  him 
in  the  sunshine  ?  It  may  be  hard  work  to  keep 
pace  with  him;  faint  may  be  our  heart,  and  flesh 


306  STORM  SIGNALS. 

and  blood  are  frail,  walking,  as  we  now  do,  with 
him  throug'h  the  mire  and  dirt,  but  what  will  it  be 
to  walk  in  silver  slippers  upon  the  golden  pave- 
ment of  the  celestial  city  ?  It  is  not  so  easy  to 
stand  with  him  in  the  pillory  when  the  multitudes 
are  hooting  him;  but,  oh!  how  joyous  it  \vill  be  to 
be  with  him  when  the  angels  are  rending  the 
heavens  with  acclamations,  and  all  the  saints  are 
casting  their  crowns  at  his  feet !  To  be  with  him 
in  his  trouble  is  not  very  palatable  to  our  natural 
feelings,  I  know;  but  what  will  it  be  to  be  with 
him  in  his  triumph  ?  To  be  partners  in  his  cross 
— from  that  w^e  may  shrink;  but  to  sit  with  him 
upon  his  throne — for  that  we  must  eagerly  long. 
Well,  as  we  cannot  be  crown-bearers  without 
being  cross-bearers,  let  us  espouse  his  cross  as  we 
would  enjoy  his  crown.  Yet  be  it  known  that  his 
cross  droppeth  with  myrrh,  and  that  they  who 
carry  it  will  find  it  so  sweetly  perfumed  that  they 
shall  love  the  very  cross  itself  because  Christ  has 
touched  it.  From  this  nest  let  us  never  wander, 
because  of  the  "  rest "  which  "  remaineth  for  the 
people  of  God." 

Wander  from  this  nest — methinks  we  cannot  if 
the  love  of  Christ  inflames  us  and  our  love  to 
Christ  sustains  us.  What,  wander  from  him  who 
died  for  us,  that  we  might  never  die;  who  lives 
for  us,  that  we  might  ever  live  ?  What  base  in- 
gratitude is  ours  that  we  do  not  cling  closer  to 
him  !  Can  we  give  him  up  ?  Christians,  he  gave 
you  the  light  that  cheered  your  darkness,  and  can 


THE    WANDERING    BIRD.  307 

you  turn  away  from  the  brightness  of  his  face  ? 
With  pitying  eye  he  saw  you  when  you  were  lying 
in  your  blood,  an  outcast  all  forlorn,  and  he  said 
unto  you,  "  Live,"  and  can  you  ever  forsake  him  ? 
He  passed  by  thee,  he  looked  upon  thee,  he  spread 
his  skirt  over  thee,  he  covered  thy  nakedness,  he 
sware  unto  thee,  he  entered  into  a  covenant  with 
thee — and  canst  thou  now  prove  treacherous  ?  He 
redeemed  thee,  he  opened  his  veins  that  he  might 
pour  forth  the  purple  drops  of  his  precious  blood 
as  the  price  for  your  inestimable  ransom,  and  can 
you  turn  away  from  him  ?  "  Despised  and  rejected 
of  men"  as  he  was,  will  you  hide  your  face  from 
him  ?  And  while  he  is  still  pleading  for  you,  will 
you  cease  to  plead  for  him  ?  Now  that  his  chariots 
are  making  haste  to  bring  him  in  the  glory  of  his 
second  advent,  will  you  turn  away  from  him  when 
his  kingdom  is  so  near?  Shall  the  wife  leave  a 
husband  who  cherishes  her  with  utmost  tenders 
ness?  Shall  the  child  neglect  its  parents,  under  \ 
whose  roof  his  every  want  is  supplied  ?  Shall  the 
limbs  of  one's  body  abhor  the  head  ?  Such  strange 
vagaries  were  not  half  so  unnatural  as  for  a  Chris- 
tian to  turn  vagrant  and  forsake  his  Saviour.  Ah 
me  1  unnatural  and  brutish  as  it  must  seem,  you 
and  I  would  do  this,  and  more  also,  did  not  grace 
prevent.  The  love  which  has  made  us  one  with 
Christ  must  keep  us  one  with  him,  or  else  we  shall 
never  hold  on  our  way.  Be  it  then  your  constant 
prayer,  "  Hold  Thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe." 
Let  this  be  your  heart's  cry,  "Abide  with  us;"  for 


308  STORM   SIGNALS. 

except  he  abide  with  us,  and  make  our  hearts  his 
nest,  we  shall  never  abide  with  him,  but  shall  be 
as  a  bird  that  wandereth  from  her  nest. 

Mayhap  I  speak  to  some  poor  bird  which  has 
wandered  from  its  nest.  You  are  a  stranger,  and 
you  have  strayed  in  hither.  You  recollect  a  nest 
in  some  happy  family  circle  where  prayer  was 
wont  to  be  made.  You  remember  the  nest  in 
which  you  were  wont  to  nestle — a  little  village 
church  where  you  worshipped  God  with  kindred 
dear.  But  you  have  wandered  from  your  nest. 
You  have  lost  your  friends;  you  have  gone  into 
the  world;  you  are  a  sinner.  Conscious  you  are 
that  you  scarcely  dare  to  face  the  home  of  your 
childhood.  You  have  come  away  from  your  old 
haunts,  for  you  are  ashamed  to  continue  in  them. 
You  have  wandered  from  your  nest.  And  do  you 
mean  to  wander  on  ?  Is  yours  to  be  forever  the 
flight  of  a  bird  that  hath  no  roost  ?  "  Foxes  have 
holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air  have  nests;"  will 
you  never  have  a  place  to  lay  your  head  ?  Are 
you  condemned,  like  the  unclean  spirit,  to  wander 
through  dry  places,  seeking  rest  and  finding  none? 
Are  you  a  pilgrim  who  shall  never  have  a  city 
that  hath  foundations,  whose  Builder  and  Maker 
is  God  ?  Are  you  like  the  phantom  ship  of  which 
the  mariners  talk,  which  flits  across  the  sea  for 
aye,  but  never  reaches  a  port  ?  Nay,  friend,  you 
are  not  so  to  account  yourself,  though  the  devil 
hath  told  you  that  there  is  no  hope;  though  he 
hath   driven   you  to  desperation,   and   persuaded 


THE    WANDERING    BIRD.  309 

you  that  you  are  given  up  of  God  and  man.  It  is 
not  so;  it  is  not  so.  The  Eternal  Father,  bending 
from  high  heaven,  looks  down  upon  you,  and  by 
these  lips  talks  to  you.  Little  as  you  were  think- 
ing that  you  would  be  found  out,  he  saith  to  you, 
"  Return,  return,  return."  'Tis  he  who  makes 
you  say,  '*  I  will  arise  and  go  unto  my  Father." 
He  meets  you,  prodigal;  he  falls  about  your  neck; 
he  gives  you  the  kiss  of  reconciliation.  He  cries 
to-day  to  the  messengers  of  mercy,  "Take  off  his 
rags,  and  bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on 
him ;  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet, 
and  let  us  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry,  for  he  that 
was  dead  is  come  alive,  and  he  that  was  lost  is 
found."  The  bird  has  come  back,  and  has  found 
her  nest;  and  as  the  mother-bird  is  happy  when 
that  little  fledgeling  which  she  thought  had  fallen 
on  the  ground,  or  had  been  swallowed  by  the 
hawk,  comes  back,  and  she  covers  it  with  her 
feathers,  and  bids  it  nestle  under  her  warm  bosom, 
so  is  the  Eternal  Father  happy;  and  as  she  rejoices, 
so,  nay  infinitely  more,  does  the  Eternal  Father  re- 
joice when  the  wanderer  comes  back  to  him,  and 
finds  comfort  in  his  love. 

Believe  thou  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Trust 
thou  in  the  Father's  grace  as  manifest  in  the  Sa- 
viour's wounds,  and  so  thou  shalt  find  an  eternal 
nest  from  which  thou  shalt  never  wander  till  thou 
shalt  build  thy  happy  nest  in  heaven.     Amen. 


5ri}e  Strait  ffiate. 

"  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate;  for  many,  I  say  unto  yoUy 
will  seek  to  etiter  in,  and  shall  not  be  able." — LuKE  xiii.  24. 

^  I  ^HE  precepts  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  dic- 
-*■  tated  by  the  soundest  wisdom.  He  has  given 
us  divine  prescriptions  for  the  health  of  our  souls, 
and  his  commandments,  though  clothed  with 
sovereign  authority,  are  spoken  in  such  infinite 
kindness  that  we  may  regard  them  as  the  advice 
of  a  true  and  faithful  friend.  This  is  not  a  legal 
but  a  gospel  exhortation — "  Strive  to  enter  in  at 
the  strait  gate."  He  himself  is  the  only  gate  or  the 
door  by  which  we  can  find  admission,  and  the  way 
to  enter  in  through  Jesus  Christ  is  not  by  working, 
but  by  believing.  Then,  as  to  the  strife  we  are 
urged  to  carry  on,  it  is  an  earnest  endeavor  to  steer 
clear  of  all  the  rocks,  and  shoals,  and  quicksands 
of  popular  fallacies  and  deceitful  traditions,  and  to 
sail  in  the  deep  waters,  with  his  covenant  for  our 
chart,  and  his  word  for  our  compass,  in  simple  obe- 
dience to  his  statutes,  trusting  to  him  as  our  pilot, 
whose  voice  we  always  hear,  though  his  face  we 
cannot  see.  The  storm  signal  ma}'  well  rouse  your 
fears;  the  cry  of  peril  had  need  excite  your  cau- 


THE    STRAIT    GATE.  311 

tion.  The  mere  mention  sounds  like  a  menace. 
"  Many  shall  seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be 
able."  Listen  to  that  warning,  lest  ye  be  amongst 
the  "  many  "  that  founder — mayhap  you  shall  be 
among  the  few  that  escape.  Hearken  to  what 
Jesus  tells  you  shall  come  to  pass  with  the  mul- 
titude, that  it  may  never  come  to  pass  with  you 
as  individuals. 

Mark  now —  a  gate  which  it  is  most  desirable  to 

ENTER. 

Surely  "  many  "  would  not  seek  to  enter  if  they 
were  not  convinced  of  the  desirableness  of  passing 
through  it.  The  very  fact  that  so  many,  although 
they  fail,  will  at  least  seek  to  enter,  proves  that  there 
is  a  desire,  a  reason,  and  a  motive  why  men  should 
aim  to  enter. 

This  gate — that  is,  Christ — it  is  most  desirable 
for  us  to  pass  through,  because  it  is  the  gate  of  the 
city  of  refuge.  Cities  of  refuge  were  appointed  for 
menslayers,  that  when  they  were  pursued  by  the 
avenger  of  blood,  they  might  pass  the  gate  and  be 
secure  within  the  sanctuary  or  city.  The  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  intended  as  a  refuge  for  those 
who  have  broken  the  law  of  God,  whom  vengeance 
is  pursuing,  who  will  certainly  be  overtaken,  to 
their  eternal  destruction,  unless  they  fly  to  Christ 
and  find  shelter  in  him.  Outside  of  Christ  the 
sword  of  fire  pursues  us  swift  and  sharp.  From 
God's  wrath  there  is  but  one  escape,  and  that  is  by 
a  simple  faith  in  Christ.  Believe  in  him,  and  the 
sword  is  sheathed,  and  the  mercy  and  the  love  of 


312  STORM   SIGNALS. 

God  will  become  your  everlasting  portion ;  but  re- 
fuse to  believe  in  Jesue,  and  your  innumerable 
sins,  written  in  his  book,  shall  be  laid  at  your  door 
in  that  day  when  the  pillars  of  heaven  shall  reel, 
and  the  stars  shall  fall  like  withered  fig-leaves  from 
the  tree.  Oh !  who  would  not  wish  to  escape  from 
the  wrath  to  come  ?  ]\Ir.  Whitefield,  when  preach- 
ing, would  often  hold  up  his  hands  and  cry,  "  Oh  ! 
the  wrath  to  come  !  the  wrath  to  come !  the  wrath 
to  come !  "  There  is  more  weight  and  meaning  in 
those  words  than  tongue  can  tell  or  heart  conceive. 
The  wrath  to  come !  the  wrath  to  come  !  When 
past  that  gate,  like  Noah  after  he  had  passed  into 
the  ark,  you  are  safe  from  the  overwhelming 
deluge,  you  are  sheltered  from  the  devouring  con- 
flagration which  shall  consume  the  earth,  you  are 
rescued  from  the  death  and  the  doom  that  await 
the  countless  multitudes  of  the  impenitent.  AVho 
would  not  wish  to  enter  where  there  is  salvation, 
the  only  place  where  salvation  can  be  found  ? 

It  is  desirable  to  enter  this  gate,  because  it  is  the 
gate  of  a  home.  What  sweet  music  there  is  in  that 
word  "  home  !  "  Jesus  is  the  home  of  his  people's 
hearts.  We  are  at  rest,  when  we  get  to  Christ. 
We  have  all  we  want  when  we  have  Jesus.  Hap- 
piness is  the  portion  of  the  Christian  in  this  pre- 
sent life  while  he  lives  upon  his  Saviour.  I  have 
seen  outside  the  night  refuges  crowds  of  persona 
waiting  an  hour  beforehand,  till  the  doors  were 
opened.  Poor  souls !  Shivering  in  the  cold,  but  so- 
laced by  the  expectation  of  being  warmed  and  com- 


THE    STRAIT    GATE.  313 

forted  in  a  little  time  for  a  little  while,  when  they 
should  be  admitted.  What  think  ye,  0  homeless 
men  and  women  I  were  there  the  prospect  of  a  per- 
manent home  for  you,  a  home  from  which  you 
never  could  be  banished,  a  home  into  which  you 
could  be  introduced  as  dear  children — would  it  not 
be  worth  your  while  to  wait  long  at  the  door,  and 
to  knock  again  and  again  right  vehemently,  could 
ye  but  be  certaia  ultimately  to  gain  admission  ? 
Jesus  is  a  home  for  the  homeless,  a  rest  for  the 
weary,  a  comfort  for  the  comfortless.  Is  your 
heart  broken  ?  Jesus  can  comfort  you :  have  you 
been  banished  from  your  family,  or  one  by  one 
have  the  dear  ones  been  taken  to  their  last  resting 
place  ?  Do  you  feel  solitary,  friendless,  cheerless, 
accounting  "the  black  flowing  river"  to  be  pre- 
ferred before  this  troubled  stream  of  life,  and  that 
pitiless  society  of  men  and  women,  eager  all  for 
gain  and  gaiety,  recking  nothing  of  your  griefs  or 
your  groans?  Oh!  come  to  Jesus;  trust  in  him,  and 
he  will  light  up  a  star  in  the  black  midnight  sky; 
he  will  kindle  a  fire  in  your  hearts  that  shall  make 
them  glow  with  joy  and  gladness  even  now.  It 
were  worth  while  to  be  a  Christian,  irrespective  of 
the  hereafter.  Such  present  comfort  as  a  belief  vol 
Jesus  imparts  is  an  inestimable  compensation. 
This  is  the  gate  of  refuge,  and  it  is  the  gate  of  a 
home. 

Moreover,  it  hads  to  a  blessed  feast.  We  read  to 
you  just  now  of  the  supper  that  was  spread.  Jesus 
does  not  merely  feed  our  bodies,  but  he  does  what 


314  STORM   SIGNALS. 

is  better,  he  feeds  our  minds.     A  hungry  stomach 
is  terrible,  but  a  hungry  heart  is  far  more  dreadful, 
for  while  a  loaf  of  bread  will  fill  the  one,  who  can 
tell   what   will   stay   the  other?     Oh !   when    the 
heart  gets  craving,  and  pining,  and  yearning  after 
something  it  cannot  get,  it  is  like  the  sea  that  can- 
not rest;  it  is  like  the  grave  that  never  can  be  filled: 
it  is   like  the   horse-leech,  whose   daughters   cry, 
*'  Give,  give,  give."     Happy  the  man  who  believes 
in  Jesus,  for  he  becomes  at  once  content,  compla- 
cent, and  at  ease.     Not  only  does  he  find  rest  in 
Christ,  but  good  cheer  and  great  delight;  halcyon 
peace,  and  hallowed  satisfaction  are  the  portion  of 
his  lot.     I  tell  you  what  I  do  know — and  I  would 
not  lie  w^illfuUy  for  a  whim  of  language ;  nay,  nor 
yet  for  the  love  of  life — I  tell  you  that  there  is  a 
holy  mirth  to  be  found  in  the  faith  of  those  who 
meditate  on  Christ   which  cannot   be  matched,  oh 
sensualists,  by  the  sunshine  of  your  brightest  days, 
or  by  all  your  sounds  of  revelry  at  night !     Speak 
ye  of  their  buoyant  spirits  who  make  merry  in  the 
dance,  or  of  the  festive  glee  of  those  that  are  filled 
with  wine  ?     Theirs  is  but  the  crackling  of  a  hand- 
ful of  thorns  under  a  pot — how  soon  'tis  gone! — 
a  cloud  of  sparks,  and  then  a  cloud  of  smoke.     But 
the  joy  of  the  man  who  apprehends  the  love  of 
Christ  which  embraces  him,  the  blood  of  Christ 
which  cleanses  him,  the  arm  of  Christ  which  up- 
holds him,  the  hand  of  Christ  which  leads  him,  the 
crown  of  Christ,  which  is  to  be  his  portion — the 
joy  of  such  a  man  is  constant,  deep,  overflowing 


THE    STRAIT    GATE.  315 

beyond  the  power  of  expression.  The  meanest 
Christian  in  all  the  world,  bed-ridden,  living  on 
parish  allowance,  fall  of  pain  and  ready  to  die, 
when  his  heart  is  stayed  upon  Christ,  would  not 
change  places  with  the  youngest,  brightest,  rich- 
est, noblest  spirit  to  be  found  outside  the  church 
of  God.  Nay,  kings  and  emperors,  boast  no  more 
of  your  beggarly  crowns,  their  glitter  will  soon  fade, 
your  purple  robes  will  soon  be  moth-eaten,  your 
silver  shall  soon  be  cankered,  of  your  palaces  not  a 
stone  shall  be  left  upon  its  fellow.  Bitter  shall  be 
the  dregs  of  your  wine-cups,  and  all  your  music 
shall  end  in  discord.  I  tell  you  that  the  poorest  of 
all  the  company  of  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus  excel 
you,  nor  would  they  change  their  blest  estate  for 
all  that  earth  calls  good  or  great.  So  abundantly 
worth  while  is  it  to  come  to  Christ  for  the  hap- 
piness, as  well  as  the  repose,  which  we  find  in 
him. 

Well  likewise,  dear  friends,  may  men  desire  to 
pass  through  the  strait  gate,  knowing  it  is  the  gate 
which  leads  to  Paradise.  There  was  one  gate  of 
Paradise  through  which  our  father — Adam — and 
our  mother — Eve — went  weeping  as  they  left  the 
garden  all  behind  them,  to  wander  into  the  desert 
world.  Can  you  picture  them  to  yourselves,  with 
the  cherubim  behind  them  and  the  flaming  sword 
bidding  them  begone,  for  Paradise  was  no  place  for 
rebels?  Men  have  wandered  up  and  down  the 
world  since  then  to  find  the  gate  of  Paradise,  that 
they  might  enter  yet  again.     They  have  scaled  the 


316  STORM   SIGNALS. 

peaks  of  Sinai,  but  they  have  not  found  it  there. 
They  have  traversed  the  tracks  of  the  wilderness, 
weary  and  footsore,  jaded  and  faint,  but  they  have 
found  no  gate  to  Paradise  anywhere  in  all  their  ex- 
peditions. The  scholar  has  searched  for  it  in  the 
ancient  books;  the  astronomer  has  hunted  for  it 
among  the  stars;  sages,  as  they  were  called,  have 
sought  to  find  it  by  studying  their  arts,  and  fools 
have  tried  to  find  it  among  their  viols  and  their 
bowls.  But  there  is  only  one  gate.  See,  there  it 
is.  It  is  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  and  he  that  will 
find  the  gate  of  heaven  finds  the  cross  and  the  Man 
that  did  hang  thereon.  Happy  he  who  can  come 
up  to  it  and  pass  through  it,  reposing  all  his  confi- 
dence in  the  atonement  once  made  by  the  Man  of 
sorrows  sufiering  on  Calvary's  tree.  On  earth  he 
is  saved,  and  in  the  article  of  death  he  shall  pass 
through  that  gate  of  pearl  unchallenged,  walk  the 
streets  of  gold  unabashed,  and  bow  before  the  ex- 
cellent glory  without  a  fear.  He  is  free  of  heaven. 
The  cross  is  the  mark  of  a  citizen  of  the  skies. 
Having  truly  believed  in  Jesus,  everlasting  felicity 
is  his  beyond  all  doubt.  Who  then  would  not  pass 
through  the  strait  gate  ? 

And  who  would  not  wish  to  pass  through  it 
when  he  considers  the  lot  of  those  outside  the  gate  ? 
How  we  tremble  at  the  thought  of  that  outer  dark- 
ness, where  shall  be  weeping,  and  wailing,  and 
gnashing  of  teeth  !  There  are  many  inquiries  now- 
adays about  eternal  punishment.  Oh,  men  and 
brethren,  do  not  rashly  or  carelessly  challenge  the 


THE    STRAIT   GATE.  317 

bitter  experience  of  such  condemnation !  Specu- 
late as  you  will  about  the  doctrine,  but  I  pray  you 
do  not  trifle  with  the  reality.  To  be  lost  forever, 
let  that  mean  what  it  may,  will  be  more  than  you 
can  bear,  though  your  ribs  were  iron  and  your 
bones  were  brass.  Tempt  not  the  avenging  angel. 
Beware  that  ye  forget  not  God,  lest  he  tear  you  in 
pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver.  By  the  living 
God,  I  pray  you  fear  and  tremble  lest  you  be  found 
out  of  Christ  in  the  day  of  his  appearing.  Rest 
not,  be  not  patient,  much  less  merry,  till  you  aro 
saved.  To  be  in  danger  of  hell-tire  is  a  peril  that 
no  heart  can  adequately  realize,  no  language  fitly 
paint.  Oh,  I  beseech  you,  halt  not,  give  yourself 
no  rest,  till  you  have  got  beyond  that  danger ! 
Flee  for  your  lives,  for  the  fiery  shower  will  soon 
descend !  Escape !  God  in  his  mercy  quicken 
your  pace  that  you  may  escape  full  soon,  lest  the 
hour  of  mercy  cease  and  the  Day  of  Judgment 
come !  Surely,  these  are  reasons  enough  for  want- 
ing to  pass  in  at  the  strait  gate. 

Observe  still  further  what  our  Lord  tells  us. 
There  is  a  crowd  of  people  who  will  seek  to  enter 
and  will  not  be  able. 

Who  are  these  ?  If  you  look  closely  at  the  crotoa 
that  this  day  seeks  to  pass,  methinks  you  will  see  a 
considerable  difi*erence  between  seeking  and  striv- 
ing. You  are  not  merely  advised  to  seek;  you  are 
urgently  bidden  to  strive.  Striving  is  a  more  ve- 
hement exercise  than  seeking.  Are  you  amongst 
those  who  coolly  seek  admission  because,  forsooth, 


318  STORM  SIGNALS, 

they  suppose  it  is  the  proper  thing  ?  Many  there 
be  who  come  iip  to  the  gate  of  mercy  and  seek  to 
enter,  not  striving,  not  particularly  anxious,  cer- 
tainly far  enough  from  being  agitated.  And  when 
they  look  at  the  gate  they  object  to  the  lintel  be- 
cause it  is  too  low,  nor  will  they  deign  to  stoop. 
There  is  no  believing  in  Jesus  with  a  proud  heart. 
He  that  trusts  Christ  must  feel  himself  to  be  guilty, 
and  acknowledge  it.  No  man  can  savingly  believe 
till  he  has  been  thoroughly  convinced  of  sin.  But 
many  say:  "I  will  never  stoop  to  that.  Unless  I 
have  something  to  do  in  the  work,  and  share  some 
of  the  merit,  I  cannot  enter."  No,  sirs,  some  of 
you  are  quite  unable  to  believe  in  Christ  because 
you  believe  in  yourselves.  As  long  as  a  man 
thinks  himself  a  fine  fellow,  how  can  he  think  well 
of  Jesus?  You  eclipse  the  sun,  you  hold  up  your 
own  little  hands  before  the  great  orb  of  light,  how 
can  you  expect  to  see  ?  You  are  too  good  to  go  to 
heaven,  or,  at  least,  too  good  in  your  own  appre- 
hension. Oh,  man!  I  pray  God  prick  that  bub- 
ble, that  blown-up  bladder,  and  let  out  the  gas, 
that  you  may  discern  what  you  really  are;  for  you 
are  nothing  after  all  but  a  poor  worm,  contempt- 
ible, notwithstanding  your  conceit;  desperately  poor 
in  spite  of  your  pretention,  an  arrogant  worm,  that 
dares  to  lift  up  its  head  when  it  has  nothing  but  its 
own  abject  worthlessness  to  glory  in.  Oh,  bow 
thyself  in  lowly  self-abhorrence,  else  thou  mayest 
seek  to  enter,  but  shalt  not  be  able. 

Some  are  unable  to  enter  because  the  pride  of  life 


THE    STRAIT   GATE.  319 

wUl  not  let  them.     They  come  to  this  gate  in  their 
carriage  and  pair,  and  expect  to  drive  in,  but  they 
cannot  get  admission.     There  is  no  different  way 
of  salvation  for  a  peer  of  the  realm  than  for  a  pau- 
per in   the  workhouse.     The  greatest  prince  that 
ever  lived  must   trust  Jesus  just  as  the  meanest 
peasant  does.     I  recollect  a  minister  once  telling 
me  that  he  attended  the  bedside  of  a  very  proud 
woman,  of  considerable  wealth,  and  she  said  to 
him :  "  Do  you  think,  sir,  that,  when  I  am  in  hea- 
ven, such  a  person  as  Betty — my  maid — will  be  in 
the  same  place  as  I  am  ?     I  never  could  endure  her 
company  here.     She  is  a  good  servant  in  her  way, 
but  I  am  sure  I  could  not  put  up  with  her  in  hea- 
ven."   "No,  madam,"  said  he,  "  I  do  not  suppose  you 
will  ever  be  where  Betty  will  be."     He  knew  Betty 
to  be  one  of  the  humblest  and  most  consistent  of 
Christian  women  anywhere;   and  he  might  have 
told  her  proud  mistress  that  in  the  sight  of  God 
meekness   is    preferable    to    majesty.     The    Lord 
Jesus,  in  the  day  of  his  coming,  will  wipe  out  all 
such  distinctions  as   may  very  properly  exist   on 
earth,  though  they  cannot  be  recognized  beyond 
the  skies.     Oh,  rich  man,  glory  not  in  thy  riches ! 
All  thy  wealth,  if  thou  couldest  take  it  with  thee, 
would  not  buy  a  single  paving-stone  in  the  streets 
of  heaven.     This   poor  stuff — do   not   trust  in   it. 
Oh,  lay  it  aside  as  a  crown  of  glorying,  and  pass 
humbly  through  the  gate  with  Lazarus  ! 

Some  are  unable  to  enter  because  they  carry  con- 
traband goods  with  them.    When  you  land  in  France, 


320  STORM  SIGNALS. 

there  stands  the  gendarme  who  wants  to  see  what 
you  are  carrying  in  that  basket.  If  you  attempt 
to  push  by  you  will  soon  find  yourself  in  custody. 
He  must  know  what  is  there;  contraband  goods 
cannot  be  taken  in.  So  at  the  gate  of  mercy — 
which  is  Christ — no  man  can  be  saved  if  he  desire 
to  keep  his  sins.  He  must  give  up  every  false  way. 
"Oh,"  saith  the  drunkard,  "I'd  like  to  get  to 
heaven,  but  I  must  smuggle  in  this  bottle  some- 
how." "  I  would  like  to  be  a  Christian,"  says  an- 
other, "  I  do  not  mind  taking  Dr.  Watts's  Hymns 
with  me,  but  I  should  like  sometimes  to  sing  a 
Bacchanalian  song,  or  a  lightsome  serenade." 
"Well,"  cries  another,  "I  enjoy  myself  on  Sunday 
with  God's  people,  but  you  must  not  deny  me  the 
amusements  of  the  world  during  the  week;  I  cannot 
give  them  up."  Well,  then,  you  cannot  enter,  for 
Jesus  Christ  never  saves  us  m  our  sins;  he  saves  us 
frovfi  our  sins.  "  Doctor,"  says  the  fool,  "  make  me 
well,  but  I'd  like  to  keep  my  fever."  "No,"  saith 
the  doctor,  "how  can  you  be  well  while  you  keep 
the  fever  ?  "  How  can  a  man  be  saved  from  his 
sins  while  he  clings  to  his  sins  ?  What  is  salva- 
tion but  to  be  delivered  from  sin  ?  Sin-lovers  may 
seek  to  be  saved,  but  they  shall  not  be  able. 
While  they  hug  their  sins  they  cannot  have  Christ. 
Some  of  you  are  in  this  grievous  predicament. 
You  have  been  attending  this  house  of  prayer  a 
good  long  time.  I  do  not  know  what  hinders  you, 
but  this  I  do  know,  there  is  a  worm  somewhere 
eating   out  the  heart   of  that   fair-looking   apple. 


THE    STRAIT    GATE.  321 

Some  private  sin  that  you  pamper  is  destroying 
your  souls.  Oh  that  you  had  grace  to  give  it  up, 
and  to  come  in  by  the  strait  gate  trusting  in 
Jesus  Christ ! 

Not  a  few  are  unable  to  enter  in  because  they 
want  to  postpone  the  matter  until  to-morrow.  To- 
day, at  any  rate,  you  are  engaged  with  other  plans 
and  projects.  "A  little  longer  let  me  revel  in  some 
of  the  sensual  enjoyments  of  life,  and  afterwards  I 
will  come  in."  Procrastinators  are  among  the  most 
hopeless  of  people.  He  that  hath  "  to-morrow " 
quivering  on  his  lips  is  never  likely  to  have  grace 
reigning  in  his  heart. 

Others,  and  these  are  in  the  worst  plight  of  all, 
thiiik  that  they  are  in,  and  that  they  have  entered. 
They  mistake  the  outside  of  the  gate  for  the  inside. 
A  strange  mistake  to  fall  into,  but  many  do  thus 
delude  themselves.  They  rub  their  backs  against 
the  post,  and  then  they  tell  us  they  are  "  as  near 
heaven  as  anybody  else."  They  have  never  passed 
the  threshold;  they  have  never  found  shelter  in 
Christ,  albeit  they  may  have  felt  wonderfully  ex- 
cited at  a  revival  meeting,  and  sung  as  loudly  and 
lustily  as  any  of  the  congregation, 

**I  do  believe,  I  will  believe." 

There  is  a  considerable  show  of  reformation 
about  them.  Although  they  have  not  got  a  new 
garment,  they  have  mended  up  the  old  one.  They 
are  not  new  creatures,  but  still  they^  are  better  be- 
haved creatures  than  they  were  before.     And  they 


322  STORM   SIGNALS. 

are  "  all  right."  Be  not  deceived,  my  dear  friends ; 
do  beware  of  mistaking  a  work  of  nature  for  the 
operation  of  God's  grace.  Do  not  be  taken  in  by 
the  devil's  counterfeits.  They  are  well  made — they 
look  like  genuine;  when  they  are  bran  new  they 
shine  and  glitter  like  fine  gold,  but  they  will  not 
stand  the  test;  every  one  of  them  will  have  a  nail 
driven  through  them  one  day;  they  will  never  pass 
current  with  God.  If  you  have  a  religion,  let  it  be 
real  and  true,  not  feigned  and  hypocritical.  Of 
all  cheats  the  man  who  cheats  himself  is  certainly 
the  least  wise,  and,  as  I  think,  he  is  the  least 
honest.  Do  not  play  the  knave  with  thine  own 
soul.  Suspect  thyself  too  much  rather  than  too 
little.  Better  journey  to  heaven  in  terror  of 
hell  than  dream  of  the  happy  land  while  drifting 
in  the  other  direction.  Ah,  that  deceit  should 
steal  such  gentle  shapes!  Be  on  j^our  guard, 
every  one  of  you.  Let  not  any  man  deceive 
himself 

Thus  it  is  that  a  crowd — I  had  almost  said  a 
countless  crowd — of  people  nowadays  seek  to  enter 
in,  but  for  manifold  reasons  thev  are  not  able  to  do 
so.  And  yet  there  is  a  more  appalling  aspect  to 
the  same  fact.  "  Many,  I  say  unto  you,  icill  seek 
to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be  able."  Panic-stricken, 
the  dying  man  sends  for  the  minister  whom  he 
never  went  to  hear  when  his  health  was  good  and 
hours  hung  heavy  on  his  hands.  The  charm  of 
Sundays  lay  in  their  dissipation ;  an  excursion  up 
the  river,  or  a  cheap  trip  to  Brighton  and  back; 


THE    STRAIT    GATE.  323 

anything — everything  sooner  than  hear  the  gospel. 
He  never  read  his  Bible ;  he  never  prayed.  Now 
the  doctor  shakes  his  head,  and  the  nurse  suggests 
that  they  "  fetch  a  clergyman."  Poor  soul !  she 
means  right;  but  what,  think  you,  can  he  do? 
What  can  we  ministers  do  for  you?  What  can 
any  man  do  for  his  fellow-creature  ?  "None  of  us  can 
by  any  means  redeem  his  brother,  nor  give  to  God 
a  ransom  for  him."  He  begins  to  seek,  when  alas ! 
he  cannot  think,  poor  fellow,  for  he  is  in  articulo 
mortis^  with  the  throes  of  his  last  struggle.  His 
head  swims,  pains  grow  at  his  vitals,  a  glass}^  film 
is  o'er  his  eyes,  rambling  words  fall  from  his  lips. 
Could  he  think,  he  has  got  something  else  to  think 
about  than  the  dread  future  that  awaits  him. 
Look  at  his  weeping  wife.  See  those  dear  chil- 
dren, brought  in  to  get  a  last  kiss  from  their 
father.  Were  his  mind  more  vigorous  it  were  not 
likely  to  be  taken  up  with  spiritual  thoughts,  there 
is  too  much  in  the  solemn  farewell  to  occupy  the 
moments  left  in  preparation  for  the  future.  "  Pray 
for  me,  sir,"  he  says,  with  fainting,  failing  breath. 
Yes,  he  is  seeking  to  enter  in.  In  ninety-nine 
cases  out  of  a  hundred  I  fear  the  answer  is:  he 
shall  not  be  able.  Little  hope  have  I  for  death- 
bed repentances.  Never  trust  to  them,  I  beseech 
you.  Such  a  vestibule  as  a  death-bed  you  may 
never  have.  To  die  in  the  street  may  be  your  lot. 
Should  you  have  a  death-bed  you  will  have  some- 
thing else  to  think  about  besides  religion.  Oh, 
how  often  have  I  heard  Christian  men  say,   when 


324  STORM  SIGNALS. 

they  have  been  dying,  "  Ah,  sir,  if  I  had  a  God  to 
seek  now,  what  a  misery  it  would  be !  What 
a  blessing  it  is  that  with  all  the  cares  that  now 
come  on  me  I  have  a  sure  and  certain  hope  in 
Christ,  for  1  found  him  yeai's  ago ! "  Oh,  dear 
hearers,  do  not  be  among  those  who  postpone 
and  procrastinate,  till,  in  your  dying  hour,  after  a 
fashion  you  seek  to  enter  and  find  you  shall  not 
be  able. 

Some  years  ago  I  was  awakened  about  three 
o'clock  in  the  morning  by  a  sharp  ring  of  the  door- 
bell. 1  was  urged  without  delay  to  visit  a  house 
not  very  far  from  London  Bridge.  I  went;  and  up 
two  pair  of  stairs  I  was  shown  into  a  room  the  oc- 
cupants of  which  were  a  nurse  and  a  dying  man. 
There  was  nobody  else.  "  Oh,  sir,"  said  she, 
"Mr.  So-and-so,  about  half-an-hour  ago,  begged 
me  to  send  for  you."  "  What  does  he  want  ?  "  I 
asked.  "  He  is  dying,  sir,"  she  replied.  I  said, 
"  1  see  that.  What  sort  of  a  man  was  he  ?  "  "  He 
came  home  last  night,  sir,  from  Brighton.  He 
had  been  out  all  day.  I  looked  for  a  Bible,  sir,  but 
there  is  not  one  in  the  house;  I  hope  you  have 
got  one  with  you."  "  Oh,"  I  said,  "  a  Bible  would 
be  of  no  use  to  him  now.  If  he  could  under- 
stand me  I  could  tell  him  the  way  of  salvation  in 
the  very  words  of  Holy  Scripture."  I  spoke  to 
him,  but  he  gave  me  no  answer.  I  spoke  again; 
still  there  was  no  reply.  All  sense  had  fled.  I 
stood  a  few  minutes  gazing  at  his  face,  till  I  per- 
ceived he  was  dead.     His  soul  had  departed.     That 


THE    STRAIT   GATE.  325 

man  in  his  lifetime  had  been  wont  to  jeer  at  me. 
In  strong  language  he  had  often  denounced  me  as 
a  hypocrite.     Yet  he  was  no  sooner  smitten  with 
the  darts  of  death  than  he  sought  my  presence  and 
my  counsel,  feeling  no  doubt  in  his  heart  t^at  1  was 
a  servant  of  God,  though  he  did  not  care  to  own  it 
with  his  hps.     There  I  stood,  unable  to  help  him. 
Promptly  as  I  had   responded   to   his   call,  what 
could  I  do,  but  look  at  his  corpse,  and  go  home 
again.     He  had,  when  too  late,  sighed  for  the  min- 
istry of  reconciliation,  sought  to  enter  in,  but  he 
was  not  able.     There  was  no  space  left  him  then 
for  repentance;   he  had  wasted  the   opportunity. 
Therefore  I  pray  and  beseech  you,  my  dear  hearers, 
by  the  near  approach  of  death— it  may  be  much 
nearer  than  you  think— give  earnest  heed  to  these 
things.     I  look  round  on  this  building,  and  note 
the  pews'and  sittings  from  which  hearers,  whose 
faces  were  once  familiar  to  us,  have  gone— some 
to  glory,  some  I  know  not  where.     God  knoweth. 
Oh,   let   not    the   next    removal,   if   it    be   yours, 
vacate   the   seat   of  a   scoffer   or  of  a  neglecter, 
or  of  one  who,  having  been  touched  in  his  con- 
science,   silenced   the   secret   monitor  and   would 
not  turn.     As  the  Lord  liveth  you  must  turn  or 
burn;  you   must  either  repent  or  be   ruined   for- 
ever.    May  God  give  you  wisdom  to  choose  the 

better  part. 

It  appears  from  Scripture  that  even  after  death 
there  will  be  some  who  will  seek  to  enter  in,  nnd 
shall  not   be  able.     I   do   not  attempt   to  explain 


326  STORM   SIGNALS. 

what  I  cannot  understand,  but  I  find  the  Master 
represents  those  on  the  left  hand  asking  a  question, 
— -'When  saw  we  thee  hungry,  and  fed  thee  not?" 
as  if  they  had  some  glimmering  hope  that  the  sen- 
tence upon  them  might  be  reversed.  And  I  read 
in  another  place  of  those  who  will  come  and  knock 
at  the  door,  and  say,  "  Lord^  Lord,  open  to  us." 
But  the  Master  of  the  house,  having  already  risen 
lip  and  shut  the  door,  will  answer,  "Verily,  I  say 
unto  you,  I  know  you  not."  Is  there,  then,  such  a 
thing  as  prayer  in  hell  ?  When  the  soul  has  passed 
out  of  the  body  without  hope,  will  it  seek  for  hope 
hereafter?  Perhaps  so.  Did  not  the  rich  man 
pray  to  Abraham  to  send  Lazarus?  It  is  but  nat- 
ural to  expect  that  as  they  doubted  God's  promises 
on  earth,  they  may  doubt  God's  threatenings  in 
hell,  and  may  hope,  peradventure,  that  there  will 
be  a  way  of  escape.  They  will  seek,  they  will 
seek,  but  they  shall  not  be  able,  not  able  to  enter 
heaven.  They  said  they  were  not  able  on  earth : 
they  shall  find  they  are  not  able  in  hell.  Non  pos- 
sumus  is  the  sinner's  cry.  "We  are  not  able  to 
leave  our  sins;  we  are  not  able  to  believe;  we  are 
not  able  to  be  serious;  we  are  not  able  to  be  pray- 
erful;" and  then,  how  will  it  be  thrown  back  into 
their  teeth!  not  able  to  enter  heaven;  not  able  to 
escape  from  torment;  not  able  to  live;  not  able  to 
die;  not  able  because  the  gate  of  heaven  admits  no 
sinner  who  has  not  been  washed  in  the  Redeemer's 
blood.  Back  with  you,  sir !  You  would  not  come 
to  the  fountain,  you  would  not  wash.     Back  with 


THE    STRAIT    GATE.  327 

you.  You  are  not  able,  not  able  because  heaven  is 
a  prepared  place  for  a  prepared  people,  and  you 
never  thought  of  preparation.  Away  with  you, 
sir !  How  can  you  enter  when  you  are  not  pre- 
pared ?  Heaven  is  a  place  for  which  a  fitness  is 
needed.  Men  cannot  enjoy  that  which  would  be 
contrary  to  their  natures.  Away  with  you,  sirs! 
You  could  not  enjoy  heaven  if  you  were  admitted, 
for  you  are  not  changed  in  heart.  Away  with 
you!  What!  do  you  linger?  do  you  cry?  do  you 
pray  ?  do  you  weep  ?  do  you  entreat  ?  Away  with 
you !  Nay,  the  angels  shall  sweep  you  away,  for 
is  it  not  written — You  yourselves  shall  be  thrust 
out — unceremoniously  driven  and  scourged  away 
from  the  gate  of  glory  because  you  would  not  come 
to  the  gate  of  grace  ?  These  are  terrible  things  to 
utter.  I  well  might  shrink  from  speaking  thus, 
were  it  not  that  fidelity  to  your  souls  makes  such 
demands  that  1  must  ring  the  warning.  If  ye  die 
without  faith  in  Christ,  behold,  there  is  a  gulf  fixed 
between  you  and  heaven.  I  do  not  know  what 
that  means,  but  I  know  what  idea  it  gives  to  me 
and  should  give  to  you.  Between  heaven  and  hell 
there  is  no  traffic.  None  ever  passed  from  hell  to 
heaven. 

*'  There  are  no  acts  of  pardon  passed 
In  the  cold  grave  to  which  we  haste; 
But  darkness,  death,  and  long  despair 
Eeign  in  eternal  silence  there." 

They  would  fain  pass  the  gulf — were  it  fire  they 
would  be  glad  to  pass  it;  were  it  full  of  torments, 


328  STORM   SIGNALS. 

many  and  manifold  as  a  Spanish  Inquisition  could 
invent,  they  would  be  glad  to  bear  them;   could 
they  but  hope  to  cross  the  gulf.     But  no,  the  voice 
is  heard — an  angel's  voice:  "He  that  is  filthy,  let 
him  be  filthy  still;  he  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  un- 
just still."     The  wax  has  cooled;  you  cannot  alter 
the  impression.     The  die  is  cast;  you  cannot  re- 
mould  it.     The  tree   has  fallen;   there   it  lies.     I 
wish  I  could  speak  now  in  words  that  should  burn 
their  way  right  into  your  inmost  hearts.     Alas!   I 
cannot!     I    must,   however,  just    repeat    the   text 
again,  and  leave  it  with  you.     Many  shall  seek  in 
that  dread  day  to  enter,  but  shall  not  be  able.     Oh, 
enter  then,  enter  ye !     Enter  now,  while  yet  the 
gate  stands  open  wide,  and  mercy  bids  you  come ! 
Make  haste  to  enter  while  yet  the  avenging  angel 
lingers,  and  the  angel  of  mercy  stands  with  out- 
stretched arms  and  cries:  "Whosoever  will,  let  him 
come  and  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely."     May 
God,    the   ever-blessed   Spirit,   without   whom   no 
warning  can  be  effectual,  and  no  invitation  can  be 
attractive,  sweetly  constrain  you  to  trust   Christ 
to-night.     Here   is   the    gospel   in    a   few    words. 
Jesus  suffered  the  wrath  and  torment  we  justly 
merited.     He  doubtless  bore  the  penalty  of  your 
transgressions,  if  so  be  you  penitently  believe  in 
his  sacrifice.     When  you  trust  in  him  for  pardon, 
'tis  proof  your  sins  were   laid  on  him    for  judg- 
ment.    You    are,    therefore,    a    forgiven    man,    a 
pardoned  woman;  you  are  saved — saved  forever. 
If  you  have  a  simple,   child-like  trust,  you  may 


THE    STRAIT   GATE.  329 

go  home,  singing  for  joy  of  heart,  knowing 
that  you  have  already  entered  the  strait  gate, 
and  before  you  lay  grace  on  earth  and  glory  in 
heaven.  May  God  bless  you  richly,  and  may  you 
adore  him  gratefully,  for  his  dear  name's  sake. 
Amen. 


Cries  of  JBtstiTSS* 

"  I  cried  zuitk  my  whole  heart;  hear  ?)ie,  O  Lord:  I  will  keep  thy 
statutes.  I  cried  unto  thee;  save  me,  and  I  shall  keep  thy  testimo- 
nies.''^— Psalm  cxix.  145,  146. 

nr^HE  fear  of  punishment  leads  many  people  to 
-*■  think  about  their  sins,  and  a  dread  of  hell  ia 
tlie  future  fills  the  retrospect  of  their  past  life  with 
gloom  and  remorse.  This  is  natural.  It  may  hap- 
pen to  any  one,  as  it  has  happened  to  tens  of  thou- 
sands, that  the  peril  has  haunted  them  till  at  length 
the  penalty  has  overtaken  them.  Although  they 
have  been  constantly  terrified  with  a  sense  of  the 
Divine  wrath,  they  have  never  penitently  looked 
to  the  Divine  mercy.  Thus  they  have  continued 
to  despond,  and  they  have  gone  on  to  despair,  and 
that  utter  desperation  has  curdled  into  a  bitter  re- 
morse, which  has  been  the  forecast  of  their  eternal 
torment.  But  it  appears  to  me  that  there  is  a 
work  of  grace  in  the  heart  where  there  is  a  fear  of 
sin  rather  than  a  fear  of  hell, — where  the  desire  of 
the  soul  is  not  so  much  to  escape  from  the  punish- 
ment as  to  escape  from  the  guilt  which  is  the  cause 
of  the  punishment.  What  thief,  what  murderer, 
when  he  has  been  arrested,  convicted,  sentenced, 
and  brought  to  the  gallows,  does  not  wish  he  had 


CRIES    OF  DISTRESS.  331 

not  committed  the  crime  that  seals  his  doom  ?  Yet 
there  is  a  wide  difference  between  the  dread  of 
suffering  for  the  wrong  you  have  done  and  a  dread 
of  doing  wrong.  Judge  yourselves,  if  you  are  un- 
der religious  impressions  of  any  sort,  whether  you 
have  merely  a  fear  of  punishment,  for  that  is  an 
instinct  of  nature,  or  whether  you  have  a  fear  and 
an  abhorrence  of  sin,  for  that  is  a  work  of  Divine 
grace. 

Now,  our  text  exhibits  to  us  the  frame  of  mind 
of  one  whose  chief  prayer  was  that  he  might  keep 
God's  statutes,  and  his  chief  anxiety  lest  he  should 
fail  to  observe  them.  Oh,  that  you  might  be 
brought  to  this  state  of  heart,  those  of  you  who 
are  not  saved,  and  may  those  of  you  who  are  saved 
have  this  state  of  heart  perpetually  in  exercise  ! 
A  tender  heart,  a  scrupulous  conscience,  a  tenacity 
of  offending  God  in  thought,  in  word,  or  in  deed, 
should  hold  us  in  check  every  day  and  every  hour. 
Let  us  continually  cry  unto  God  to  save  us  from 
violating  his  precepts,  and  constrain  us  to  keep  his 
testimonies.  I  address  myself  very  indiscrim- 
inately to  all  who  hear  my  voice,  desiring  that  the 
text  may  prove  a  test  whereby  every  one  should 
examine  himself.  Do  we,  or  do  we  not,  desire  to 
get  rid  of  every  evil  way  ?  Are  we  anxious  to  be 
sincere  and  without  offence,  holy  in  our  character, 
andobedient  to  God's  statutes  in  our  lives  ?  The  man 
who  really  does  desire  this  will  be  sure  to  pray  for 
it.  "I  cried,"  says  the  Psalmist;  and  then  again 
he   says,    '*  I    cried."     Moreover   he  combines  his 


332  STORM   SIGNALS. 

prayer  with  strong  resolution.  "  I  cried  unto  thee; 
hear  me,  0  Lord:  I  will  keep  thy  statutes."  Still 
further,  he  seasons  his  prayer  with  a  deep  sense  of 
his  own  weakness,  for  he  puts  it  thus:  "  1  cried  unto 
thee;  save  me,  and  1  shall  keep  thy  statutes." 

I.  Well,  then,  every  man  who  desires  purity  of 
heart  and  character  will  betake  himself  to  prayer. 
While  struggling  after  purity  he  will  soon  dis- 
cover that  he  is  unable  to  reach  it  of  himself 
Plave  you  never  thought  that  you  had  destroyed 
an  evil  tendency  in  your  disposition,  and  then 
found  in  an  unguarded  moment  that  you  fell  into 
the  temptation,  from  the  coils  of  which  you  had  sup- 
posed yourself  to  have  fully  escaped  ?  You  have 
resolved  in  the  morning,  may  be  at  the  hour  of 
prayer,  that  throughout  the  day  your  temper  should 
be  calm  and  quiet..  Yet  very  likely  before  break- 
fast was  over  you  were  more  ruffled  than  usual. 
Where  you  fancied  you  had  set  a  double  guard, 
there  it  was  that  you  were  taken  by  surprise. 
You  thought  yourself  weak  in  one  point,  but  it 
did  not  happen  to  be  that  on  which  you  were  be- 
set. Where  you  said  to  yourself,  "  I  am  safe,"  there 
you  were  betrayed.  You  must  have  found  this 
out,  if  you  are  striving  against  sin.  When  it  has 
occurred  many  times,  you  will  have  a  habitual  mis- 
trust of  yourself  Does  it  happen  but  once,  you 
will  be  driven  by  a  sense  of  your  own  incompetence 
to  call  in  the  sacred,  might  of  God,  that  with  the 
arms  of  the  Eternal  you  may  defeat  the  infernal  ad- 
versary, prevail  over  your  evil  passions,  and  conquer 


CRIES    OF   DISTRESS.  333 

your  besetting  sin.  "  I  cried  unto  thee,"  says  David ; 
not  as  though  it  were  a  trifling  skirmish,  but  as 
one  who  felt  that  he  was  perilously  besieged.  "I 
cried  unto  thee  with  my  whole  heart,  for  1  must 
vanquish  this  sin,  or  be  vanquished  by  it.  I  could 
not  conquer  it  by  myself,  so  1  cried  unto  thee,  0 
my  God,  and  I  said,  Oh,  display  thy  power,  and  by 
the  irresistible  might  of  thy  Holy  Spirit  crush  this 
dragon  within  my  nature;  beat  it  down,  that  it 
may  rise  up  no  more." 

The  importunity  of  this  prayer  shows  the  Psal- 
mist's estimate  of  the  value  he  set  on  the  blessing 
he  craved.  Read  verses  145,  146,  and  147,  and 
you  will  perceive  how  he  repeats  himself — "  I 
cried;*'  "  I  cried  unto  thee;"'  "  I  prevented  the  dawn 
of  the  morning,  and  cried."  Three  times  does  he 
reiterate  it.  He  was  not  to  be  put  off.  He  felt  he 
must  get  the  mastery  of  sin.  There  it  stands. 
Sin  will  destroy  us  if  we  do  not  destroy  it.  It  will 
be  our  ruin  if  we  do  not  fight  against  it,  and  get 
the  mastery  over  it.  Hence,  in  sheer  desperation, 
the  good  man  cries  again,  and  again,  and  again: 
"  0  God,  deliver  me,  that  I  may  keep  thy  testimo- 
nies." Pray  often,  beloved,  for  sin  will  tempt  often. 
Cry  mightily,  for  Satan  will  tempt  mightily.  In- 
numerable snares  will  he  place  in  your  path;  let 
your  countless  entreaties  outnumber  his  devices. 

The  expression  by  which  he  memorializes  his 
prayer  shows  us  the  intensity  of  it.  "  I  cried;"  "  I 
cried;"  ''  I  cried."  1  do  not  know  a  better  form  of 
prayer  than  crying.     It  implies  that  the  whole  na- 


334  STORM  SIGNALS. 

ture  is  full  of  anguish.  Crying  is  the  consequence 
of  pain.  His  entire  soul  was  stirred  up.  A  cry  is 
the  expression  of  desire.  It  is  a  natural  unpre- 
meditated utterance.  There  is  no  affectation  about 
it.  A  man  that  knows  no  Latin  or  Greek  can  cry. 
He  that  cannot  speak  with  eloquence  may  yet  give 
eloquent  vent  to  his  feelings  in  tears  and  entreaties. 
There  are  some  with  whom  prayer  is  a  ceremony. 
They  call  the  servants  together;  they  march  in, 
and  they  march  out  to  the  routine  of  family  wor- 
ship. They  read  out  of  a  book  some  form  of  words, 
or  else  they  compose  a  little  piece  themselves,  and 
say  it;  and  that  is  their  idea  of  prayer!  Not  so. 
Prayer  is  crying,  laying  hold  on  God,  and  spread- 
ing our  wants  before  him  with  an  earnest  entreaty 
that  he  would  not  reject  us,  but  would  give  us 
what  we  ask  of  him.  It  is  a  wrestling  with  the 
covenant  angel;  it  is  a  sacred  resolve,  "  I  will  not 
let  thee  go  except  thou  bless  me."  If  you  want  to 
conquer  sin,  know  that  it  cannot  be  overcome  by 
cold  prayers,  muttered  in  a  heartless  manner;  it 
will  not  yield  to  empty  ceremonies.  It  is  unmoved 
by  your  litanies  and  your  collects,  your  postures 
and  your  vestments.  Sin  only  flies  before  the 
blood  of  Christ  and  the  power  of  the  Eternal  Spirit. 
These  come  to  our  rescue  when,  with  cries  and 
tears,  we  importune  the  Lord  to  help  us.  "  I  cried ;" 
''I  cried;"  "I  cried."  Thrice  does  he  repeat  the 
words.  His  whole  heart  cried  to  God  that  he 
might  be  delivered  from  sin. 
Wherever  there  is  a  real  and  -^true  prayer  about 


CRIES    OF  DISTRESS.  335 

this  matter,  it  must  be  a  prayer  of  faith.  God  can, 
in  answer  to  prayer,  help  me  to  conquer  sin.  Be- 
loved, you  pray  in  vain  unless  you  steadfastly  be- 
lieve that  there  is  no  sin  which  you  cannot  overcome. 
I  meet  with  men  who  say,  "  I  can  never  give  up 
drink."  My  dear  friend,  God  can  make  you.  1 
meet  with  a  man  who  has  a  violent  temper;  and 
he  thinks  he  never  can  curb  or  subdue  it.  Surely 
vou  do  not  think  of  takinsj  it  to  heaven  with  you. 
They  have  no  passionate  people  in  that  happy 
clime.  You  will  have  to  get  that  anger  put  away, 
and  God  can  accomplish  it.  Do  you  say — ''  It 
M^ould  be  like  turning  a  lion  into  a  lamb  "?  That 
is  just  what  his  grace  is  able  to  do.  He  can  bring 
you  from  darkness  to  light.  He  can  work  such  a 
transformation  in  you  that  you  would  not  know 
yourself  if  you  could  see  yourself  after  you  have 
passed  under  the  divine  hand.  Resolve  in  your 
soul  that  sin  must  be  conquered,  believe  that  it  is 
possible,  and  cry  to  God  with  a  full  conviction  that 
he  is  able  to  save  you  from  it.  Yet  methinks  there 
are  some  w^ho  v^ould  not  like  to  have  their  prayers 
answered.  They  ask  for  a  humble  heart.  Well,  1 
question  whether  they  would  like  it,  if  it  was  sent 
them, — whether  they  would  not  want  to  send  it 
back.  They  pray  that  they  may  have  a  pure  con- 
science ;  but  how,  then,  could  they  carry  on  that 
business  of  theirs  ?  They  ask  that  they  may  be 
upright  in  God's  statutes,  and  they  know  very  well 
that  they  preferfollowing  their  own  crooked  devices. 
There  are  thousands  of  prayers  that  are  insults  to 


336  STORM   SIGNALS. 

heaven ;  but  where  the  Spirit  of  God  really  is  at 
work,  the  man  who  wants  to  be  pure  prays  sin- 
cerely, and  cries  mightily  to  God  for  purity;  nor 
will  he  be  content  to  tolerate  anything,  either  in 
his  disposition  or  in  his  daily  life,  which  would  be 
inconsistent  with  the  perfect  holiness  of  God.  Oh, 
that  God  might  implant  in  all  of  us  this  desire,  and 
then  set  us  a-praying  that  we  might  secure  the 
blessing  we  crave  ! 

II.  Now,  secondly,  the  man  who  desires  to  walk 
in  God's  way,  not  merely  prays,  but  he  resolves. 
*'I  cried  with  my  whole  heart;  hear  me,  0  Lord. 
I  will  keep  thy  statutes."  He  puts  his  whole  heart 
into  it.  His  prayer  is  no  deceit.  Then  he  throws 
that  same  heart  into  a  strong  resolution  that  he 
will  find  out  what  God's  statutes  are;  and  when  he 
has  found  them  out,  he  will  keep  them,  cost  what- 
ever it  may.  Need  I  say  that  nobody  becomes 
holy  against  his  will  ?  No  man  keeps  God's 
statutes  without  he  exercises  a  resolve  to  do  so. 
The  very  essence  of  obedience  to  God  lies  in  the 
heart,  so  the  heart  must  be  set  upon  obedience. 
It  must  be  a  sincere,  willing,  cheerful  obedience, 
or  else  it  is  not  a  genuine  submission  to  the  Al- 
mighty. Do  I  address  any  one  who  is  living  in  sin, 
and  yet  saying,  "  I  wish  I  could  get  rid  of  it "  ?  I 
have  often  heard  such  a  wish  expressed  by  persons 
who  must  themselves  have  known  that  they  were 
uttering  an  untruth.  A  man  says,  "  1  wish  I  could 
be  set  free  from  sin  to-night,"  and  to-morrow  he 
will  mix  with  gay  associates  and  loose  companions. 


CRIES    OF  DISTRESS.  337 

and  go  to  places  of  amusement  where  he  is  as  sure 
he  will  be  led  into  sin  as  he  is  sure  that  his  coat 
would  burn  if  he  put  it  into  the  fire.  He  goes  into 
the  middle  of  the  mischief;  he  takes  the  tinder  of 
his  heart  where  he  knows  there  are  sparks,  and  he 
says,  "There  will  come  no  harm  of  it."  He  puts 
a  candle  near  the  gunpowder,  and  he  hopes  he  will 
not  be  blown  away.  That  is  what  he  says,  and 
this  is  what  he  does.  Do  you  perceive  the  incon- 
sistency V  If  you  do  not  want  to  be  besmeared,  do 
not  go  amongst  the  pitch  and  the  tar.  If  you  do 
not  want  to  be  defiled  avoid  all  ungodly  fellow- 
ships. The  man  who  means  to  conquer  sin,  and 
resolves  to  conquer  it,  will  keep  himself  out  of 
mischiefs  way,  that  he  may  be  clean  before  the 
living  God.  Such  a  man  will  give  up  everything 
that  tempts  him.  If  there  is  any  weak  point  of 
which  he  is  conscious,  he  will  just  mortify  himself 
rather  than  offend  his  conscience.  He  cuts  off  his 
right  arm,  and  plucks  out  his  right  eye,  according 
to  the  gospel  precept,  which  means,  I  suppose, 
whatever  he  is  fond  of,  if  it  becomes  a  temptation 
to  sin,  he  will  forthwith  have  done  with  it  once  for 
all.  It  does  not  matter  what  it  is,— whether  it  be 
drunkenness  or  gluttony,  levity  or  lust,  ambition  or 
avarice— whatever  is  his  besetting  sin— he  just 
gays,  ''  No ;  this  may  be  allowable  to  some  men  to 
go  just  so  far,  but  I  cannot  go  as  far  without  going 
farther;  therefore  I  will  have  nothing  to  do 
with  it."  He  is  ready  to  deny  himself  anything 
and  everything.   -He  completely  reforms  his  habits, 


338  STORM   SIGNALS. 

lest  he  should  be  decoyed  into  sin.  '*  I  will  keep 
thy  testimonies."  Oh,  what  a  blessed  thing  it  is 
when  a  man  really  resolves  to  be  upright !  when 
he  says,  "  I  will  keep  out  of  the  way  of  temptation, 
and  I  will  deny  myself  aught  that  charms,  entices, 
or  allures  me,  lest  by  any  means  1  grieve  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God."  And  he  will  be  sure,  if  his  resolu- 
tion be  of  the  true  metal,  to  follow  that  course 
which  strengthens  it.  He  knows  that  to  hear  the 
gospel  keeps  his  conscience  in  exercise;  therefore 
he  will  not  waste  the  morning  hours  of  the  Lord's- 
da}^  in  slothful  sleep;  but  he  will  welcome  the 
assembly  of  the  saints  and  rejoice  in  the  preaching 
of  the  word.  He  knows  that  reading  good  books 
will  often  be  helpful  to  make  his  thoughts  active, 
and  his  imagination  pure;  therefore  he  prefers 
sound  study  to  light  literature.  He  knows  that 
association  with  Christian  people  will  stimulate 
his  piety,  so  he  consorts  with  those  whose  con- 
versation is  edifying.  He  knows  that  to  lift  up 
his  heart  in  prayer  to  God,  not  occasionally,  but 
regularly  at  set  intervals,  has  often  proved  an  aid  to 
faith  and  an  incentive  to  courage,  and  he  accord- 
ingly endeavors  to  maintain  such  secret  engage- 
ments as  strictly  as  circumstances  will  allow.  If 
there  be  anything  of  good  repute  to  enable  him  to 
get  rid  of  sin,  he  is  enamored  of  it.  When  he 
prays  to  God  to  keep  him  pure,  he  takes  care  to 
choose  all  such  means  as  God  may  put  in  his  way 
to  resist  evil  and  to  follow  after  holiness.  Such  a 
man  will  achieve  his  purpose.     You  may  laugh  at 


CRIES    OF  DISTRESS.  339 

him  for  being  too  precise.  His  heart  will  not  be 
wounded  by  your  ridicule.  He  will  lose  the  Sun- 
day trade  if  thereby  he  lose  half  his  living  rather 
than  break  God's  command.  It  may  be  that  his 
association  with  some  worldly  persons  contributed 
much  to  his  prosperity,  though  it  involved  him  in 
serious  temptations:  he  falters  not,  for  he  would 
sooner  run  the  risk  of  losing  all  the  world  than 
stake  his  reputation  or  jeopardize  his  soul,  for  he 
is  bent  upon  getting  rid  of  sin.  Sin  is  the  plague 
he  hates.  He  would  sooner  be  poor  as  Lazarus, 
and  even  covered  with  sores,  and  licked  by  dogs, 
than  have  the  sins  of  the  rich  man  upon  him.  He 
wants  to  be  clean  delivered  from  every  foul  thing 
and  every  false  way.  One  thing  has  he  asked  of 
the  Lord,  and  that  one  thing  has  he  set  his  heart 
upon  that  he  may  possess  himself  in  righteousness, 
that  he  may  be  without  offence,  that  he  may 
maintain  his  integrity.  To  obtain  this,  through 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  being  cleansed  by 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  he  will  cheerfully  suffer  any 
imaginable  privation.  I  hail  such  a  man,  and  I 
honor  him.  He  has  the  courage,  and  the  com- 
posure, the  manliness  and  the  meekness,  of  which 
martyrs  were  made  in  days  of  yore,  though  he 
has  not  actually  given  his  body  to  be  burned.  To 
that  noble  army,  in  my  belief,  he  belongs,  though 
only  one  of  the  file. 

Do  observe  how  David  sought  after  a  thorough 
allegiance  and  a  perfect  conformity  to  the  will  of 
God.     He  says,  ''  I  cried  with  my  whole  heart;  I 


340  STORM  SIGNALS. 

will  keep  thj  statutes;"  not  some  of  the  statutes 
that  were  agreeable  to  him,  but  all  of  the  statutes 
that  had  the  Divine  sanction.     I  do  not  intend  to 
be  uncharitable  when  I  suspect  that  some  Chris- 
tians do  not  wish  to  know  too  much,  or  to  inquire 
too  minutely  into  the  Lord's  demands  upon  their 
resources.     I  have  noticed  a  great   many   people 
lately  who  have  looked  upon  perfection  as  a  prize 
within  their  reach,  and  even  as  an  attainment  to 
which   they  have   already  come.     This  conceit  is 
getting  rather  common.     They  profess  to  be  per- 
fectly sanctified.     But  what  can  I  think  of  some 
of  them  who,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  are  pos- 
sessed of  fortunes  to  the  extent   of  two  or  three 
hundred  thousand  pounds  ?     Were  they  perfectly 
sanctified,  could  they  look  on  the  outlying  world, 
living  in  vice  and  ignorance,  out  of  which  a  chosen 
people  are  being  saved  by  the  gospel,  without  sup- 
porting those  agents  and  agencies  that  have  the 
Divine  blessing  manifestly  resting  upon  them  to 
the  utmost  of  their  ability  ?     They  look  to  me  as 
if  they  were  a  long  way  off  from  that  degree  of 
consecration  illustrated  for  all  the  ages  by  the  poor 
widow  who  gave  "  all  her  living  "  to  the   Lord's 
treasury.     I  do  not  believe  in  a  perfect  sanctifica- 
tion  which  allows  a  man  to  lay  up  so  much  treas- 
ure on  earth,  while  so  many  works  for  the  Lord 
Jesus    need    his    help.     Systematic    hoarding   of 
wealth,  to  my  mind,  does   not   indicate   a   'perfect 
character.     I  am  not  judging  ordinary   Christian 
men,  but  only  those  who  talk  of  full  consecration, 


CRIES    OF  DISTRESS.  341 

a  ad  I  can  never  accredit  their  sterling  sincerity 
till  I  see  their  gold,  and  their  silver,  dedicated  to 
a  larger,  ay,  even  to  a  perfect  degree.  I  like  to  see 
the  hall-mark  on  every  link  of  the  chain.  Do  not 
let  them  boast,  but  give.  As  to  those  who  are  sat- 
isfied that  they  are  perfect  in  spirit,  soul,  and  body, 
we  wait  for  their  last  testament,  to  see  what  their 
wills  look  like  when  they  die.  A  man  who  is  per- 
fect before  the  Lord  lays  out  his  substance  for 
God's  cause,  depend  on  that.  He  does  not  merely 
attend  conferences,  and  talk  of  unfulfilled  pro- 
phesies and  plausible  unravelings  of  spirituality 
of  mind,  and  sanctification  by  faith,  and  listen 
to  the  like  glittering  subjects  descanted  upon  in 
glowing  periods;  but  he  lives  for  Jesus  in  some 
practical  work,  and  gives  himself  up,  and  his  sub- 
stan-ce  too,  for  the  honor  of  the  Redeemer's  name 
and  the  diffusion  of  the  glorious  gospel.  I  have 
no  leading  member  of  any  of  these  guilds  in  my 
mind's  eye  at  the  present  moment,  but  I  am  deeply 
concerned  for  certain  of  their  disciples.  Far  less 
do  I  find  fault  with  them  for  their  searching  the 
Scriptures;  but  I  do  challenge  them  to  reconcile 
their  large  wealth  with  their  still  larger  profes- 
sions of  perfect  consecration. 

The  true  seeker  for  holiness  is  one  who,  while  he 
resolves  on  obedience  to  God,  will  dare  to  be  sin- 
gular, if  no  man  will  accompany  him  in  it.  "  I 
cried  with  my  whole  heart:  I  will  keep  thy  stat- 
utes." He  meant  to  do  it,  though  he  should  be 
without  a  companion.     He  was  prepared  to  stand 


342  STORM  SIGNALS. 

alone.  I  always  admire  that  speech  of  Atlianasius, 
when  he,  seeing  others  had  turned  aside  to  Arian- 
ism,  said,  "  I,  Athanasius,  against  the  world."  He 
is  a  true  man  who  can  be  a  true  man  by  himself. 
Give  me  no  semi-detached  cottage,  but  a  house 
that  stands  compact  on  its  foundation,  and  give  me 
such  a  man  as  can  let  the  wind  blow  all  around 
him,  and  yet  stand  upright.  He  will  hold  his  own 
whether  men  will  bear  or  forbear.  Let  his  fellow- 
creatures  applaud  or  hiss  him,  he  will  remain  true 
to  his  own  convictions.  If  they  bear  him  on  their 
shoulders  in  triumph,  it  is  the  truth  he  has  espoused 
they  honor,  or  if  they  trample  him  under  their  feet 
in  contempt,  it  is  for  righteousness'  sake  he  suffers. 
But,  like  Luther,  he  will  defy  devil,  death,  and 
hell,  to  withstand  his  purpose  to  keep  God's  stat- 
utes. Now,  the  word  of  God  animates  a  man's 
soul,  and  the  work  of  God  is  the  enterprise  of  his 
life  when  this  is  the  strong  desire  of  his  spirit. 
He  prays  to  God,  and  invokes  his  aid;  yet  at  the 
same  time  he  records  his  vow  with  a  mind  that  is 
not  given  to  vacillate.  He  has  put  his  foot  down 
where  he  meant  to  stand.  He  has  knit  his  brow 
and  closed  his  teeth,  and  set  all  his  features  to  the 
aspect  of  defiance,  for  he  means  to  hold  out  till  he 
does  achieve  the  victory.  He  is  not  going  to  com- 
promise himself,  or  to  tolerate  any  wrong  thing. 
He  will  foil  temptation,  master  evil  propensities, 
and  slay  the  sin  that  offends,  and  aggrieves,  and 
harasses  him.  In  the  armor  of  God  he  arrays  him- 
self, and  through  the  grace  of  God  he  will  prevail. 


CRIES    OF  DISTRESS,  343 

III.  The  man  who  is  thus  seeking  purity,  while 
he  prays  and  resolves,  if  he  be  really  wise  and 
taught  of  the  Spirit,  will  have  a  deep  sense  of  his 
own  weakness  and  depravity;  therefore  he  suppli- 
cates the  Lord  in  the  language  of  the  one  hundred 
and  forty-sixth  verse:  "I  cried  unto  thee;  hear  me; 
I  shall  keep  thy  testimonies."  His  tender  misgiv- 
ings are  an  incentive  to  his  restless  importunities. 
As  though  he  should  say,  "Oh,  Lord,  I  am  praying 
and  resolving:  but  my  prayers  want  thine  answers, 
and  my  resolutions  need  thy  might  to  fulfill  them. 
My  prayers — what  are  they  ?  My  resolves — what 
can  they  do  ?  I  am  a  frail  leaf,  and  I  bend  before 
the  wind  of  temptation.  My  righteousness  is  like 
the  sere  leaf  of  autumn:  it  is  soon  carried  away; 
yea,  it  is  like  a  filthy  rag  that  ought  to  be  set  aside 
and  hidden  from  view.  My  God,  I  want  sifting,  I 
want  sifting.  Oh,  save  me,  and  then  I  shall  keep 
thy  testimonies."  There  is  no  holiness  in  any  man 
by  nature,  and  never  will  be.  Some  ingenious  au- 
thor has  said  that  man  is  not  dead  like  a  stone,  but 
dead  like  an  ^^^.  There  was  some  disposition  to 
life  in  him  that  wanted  brooding  over  to  develop. 
Well,  I  shoul4  not  like  to  be  the  hen  that  had  to 
sit  on  that  ^^^  till  it  was  hatched !  That  a  long 
eternity  of  disappointed  hopes  would  spread  out 
before  me,  I  am  quite  certain.  It  is  a  stone  ^^^^ 
this  humanity  of  ours.  There  is  no  real  spiritual 
life  whatever  in  it.  Who  shall  bring  a  clean  thing 
out  of  an  unclean  ?  No  one.  And  they  may  set 
on  that  unclean  ^^^  as  long  as  they  like,  but  a 


344  STORM  SIGNALS. 

vile  unclean  chick  will  be  the  only  result  of  it. 
Before  ever  we  can  keep  God's  testimonies  we  must 
be  saved.  AVe  must  be  saved  first  from  the  guilt 
of  the  past.  By  substitution,  by  redemption,  by 
the  application  of  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus,  by 
that  expiatory  sacrifice  in  which  our  blessed  Lord 
bore  for  us  the  vengeance  of  God  that  was  due  to 
our  sin,  must  our  salvation  be  procured.  Sinner, 
you  will  never  go  out  of  the  Egypt  of  your  bond- 
age to  sin  till  the  blood  of  the  Paschal  Lamb  has 
been  sprinkled  on  the  lintel  and  the  two  side-posts. 
You  may  strive  against  sin  as  you  will,  but  you 
will  never  overcome  it  except  through  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb.  Inquire  of  those  in  heaven  who  have 
conquered  sin,  and  do  now  wear  the  snow  white 
garments. 

"  I  asked  them  whence  their  victory  came  ? 
They,  with  united  breath, 
Ascribe  their  conquest  to  the  Lamb, 
Their  triumph  to  his  death." 

Never  till  you  see  a  bleeding  Saviour  will  you  be 
able  to  put  your  sins  to  death.  They  may  be 
crucified  on  the  Cross.  They  will  die  nowhere 
else  than  there.  "  Save  me,  and  I  shall  keep  thy 
testimonies." 

We  need  to  be  saved,  however,  not  only  from 
the  guilt  of  sin,  but  saved  from  our  sinful  selves. 
We  whose  nature  is  evil  cannot  do  much  with  so 
bad  a  nature  to  baffle  all  our  efforts  to  cleanse  our 
way.  This  nature  must  be  removed  and  a  new  one 
implanted,  or  else,  whilst  the  old  nature  is  extant 


CRIES    OF  DISTRESS.  345 

the  old  evil  will  assert  itself.  There  are  different 
ways  of  treating  diseases.  A  man  has  a  bad  mal- 
ady upon  hiui,  and  it  breaks  out  in  his  flesh.  He 
goes  to  a  quack,  Avho  gives  him  an  ointment, 
which  he  applies  outwardly  to  heal  the  sore  till  the 
morbid  appearances  vanish,  and  he  congratulates 
himself  on  the  cure,  and  commends  the  charlatan 
for  his  skill.  •'  What  a  capital  doctor  he  is,  and 
how  well  my  money  was  expended,"  he  says;  "he 
has  taken  away  all  that  eruption."  B3"-and-by  the 
man  is  lying  so  grievously  sick  and  ill  that  he  does 
not  know  what  to  do.  "Oh,"  thinks  he  to  himself, 
"have  I  made  a  mistake?"  And  when  the  true 
physician  comes  he  says,  "  What  have  been  your 
symptoms  ?  "  He  tells  the  tale  of  an  eruption  on 
his  skin,  and  the  remedies  he  resorted  to.  "  Ah," 
says  the  physician,  "the  disease  is  driven  inwards; 
you  have  taken  the  wrong  course;  your  present 
symptoms  are  fatal;  you  will  die.  It  was  well  that 
it  should  come  out  on  your  flesh,  seeing  it  lurked 
in  your  constitution.  When  you  have  a  disease, 
you  had  need  lay  the  axe  at  the  root,  and  not  at 
the  branches.  It  is  not  the  disfigurement  of  the 
skin  that  is  so  alarming  as  the  blood-poisoning 
that  caused  it."  Forthwith  he  begins  to  deal  with 
the  real  evil. 

So,  my  dear  friends,  you  are  only  tinkering  with 
the  symtoms,  the  mere  eruption  on  the  skin,  while 
you  aim  at  outward  reformation.  You  must  be 
born  again :  that  is  the  only  cure  for  the  leprosy  of 
sin.     I  am  glad  to  hear  of  people  insisting  on  the 


346  STORM   SIGNALS. 

importance  of  reforming  every  kind  of  vicious  cus- 
tom and  evil  habit;  but  they  do  not  go  to  the  root 
of  the  Upas-tree  unless  they  resort  to  the  gospel, 
which  lays  the  axe  right  at  the  root  of  all  manner 
of  sin  and  blasphemy  with  its  imperative  demand 
that  ye  repent  and  be  converted,  that  your  sins 
may  be  blotted  out.  This  is  the  vital  and  vitaliz- 
ing process  that  will  turn  out  to  be  a  radical  bless- 
ing. Lord,  save  me,  save  me;  change  my  heart; 
renew  my  spirit;  make  the  fountain  clear;  set  the 
mainspring  right !  Oh,  Holy  Ghost,  regenerate 
me,  and,  if  thou  do  this,  then,  not  till  then,  shall  I 
keep  thy  testimonies. 

The  hke  is  true  in  respect  to  every  Christian,  be- 
loved. We  require  God  to  keep  on  sifting  us. 
Unless  his  spiritual  work  be  carried  on  every  day 
in  us,  we  shall  be  unable  to  keep  his  testimonies. 
We  are  to  be  resolved  against  sin;  I  have  told  you 
that.  We  are  to  pray  against  it:  I  have  enlarged 
upon  that.  Still  we  must  fall  back  upon  the  naked 
fact  that  a  real  conquest  of  sin  is  the  work  of  God 
himself  "1  cried  unto  thee;  hear  me:  I  shall 
keep  thy  testimonies." 

Brethren,  beloved  in  Christ,  live  near  to  God; 
live  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  Go  every  day  to  Jesus. 
Never  get  away  from  the  spot  on  which  you 
stood  when  you  first  believed.  There  and  then 
you  looked  as  sinners,  to  find  everything  in 
him  and  nothing  in  yourselves.  Do  not  expect  to 
overcome  sin  by  any  other  means  but  by  the  aton- 
ing blood.     Do  not  seek  anything  like  perfection 


CRIES    OF   DISTRESS.  347 

apart  from  Jesus  Christ,  who  "is  made  unto  us 
wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctifi cation,  and 
redemption."     Oh,  I  would  charge  upon  the  mem- 
bers of  this  church  to  labor  after  holy   walking. 
It  cuts  me  to  the  quick  when   I  hear  it  said  of  any 
one  of  the  members  of  this  church,  *' Well,  they 
may  be  professors  of  religion,  but  they  are  not  hon- 
est in  their  dealings,  or  they  are  not  choice  in  their 
language,    or  they  do  not   govern  their  tempers. 
They   may  be    saints  at  the   prayer-meeting,  but 
they  are   devils  at   home.     They   may  look   very 
amiable  at  the  communion-table,  but  they  are  very 
cross  at  their  own  tables."     Do  not  let  it  be  so; 
give  no  cause  for  such  an  evil  report,  I  pray  you. 
I  do  invite  all  that  attend  my  ministry,  who  are 
truly  converted,  to  cast  in  their  lot  with  us  and 
join  the  church,  for  so  you  ought  to  do ;  but,  oh,  do 
not  bring  dishonor— 1  will  not  say  upon  us;  that 
is  of  small  consequence — but  do  not  bring  dishon- 
or upon  the  gospel  that  we  preach,  and  the  Christ 
whom  we  love.     The  world  will  not  say,  "  There, 
that  is  a  false  professor."     They  ought  to  say  it, 
and  if  they  were  honest  that  is  how  they  would 
put  it;  but,  in  general,  they  will  saj^  "  That  is  your 
religion !"  and  the  Cross   of  Christ  will  be  evilly 
spoken    of;  and   many  a  poor  believer,   who   has 
trouble  enough  as  it  is,  finds  it  more  difficult  to 
give  an  answer  to  the  scoffer  through  having  the 
inconsistencies  of  others  thrown  in  his  teeth.     Bet- 
ter die  than  deny  the  Saviour!     Better  that  we  lie 
sick  at  home,  covered  with  boils  and  blains,  than 


348  STORM   SIGNALS. 

that  we  go  al)ont  the  world  grieving  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  puting  an  evil  word  into  the  mouth  of 
the  ungodly.  Follow  after  holiness,  I  charge  you. 
You  are  not  saved  by  works.  We  give  no  uncer- 
tain sound  about  that  doctrine.  We  have  told  you, 
and  we  continually  do  tell  you,  that  you  are  only 
to  be  saved  by  the  blood  of  Jesus;  but,  remember, 
Jesus  came  to  save  us  from  our  sins.  If  we  hug 
our  sins  we  cannot  have  Christ  to  be  our  Saviour. 
Christ  and  you  must  part,  unless  you  and  your  sins 
part.  Jesus  Christ  will  take  any  sinner  to  heaven, 
but  he  will  not  take  any  sin  to  heaven.  He  will 
spare  the  sinner,  but  he  will  not  spare  his  sin. 
If  you  want  to  spare  your  own  sins,  depend  upon 
it  you  will  lose  your  souls.  Watch,  I  pray  you, 
against  what  are  called  *'  little  "  sins.  Remember, 
when  thieves  want  to  get  into  the  house,  if  they 
cannot  find  a  ready  entrance  they  will  often  put  a 
child  through  a  little  window,  and  then  he  opena 
the  front  or  the  back  door.  And  so  a  little  sin  will 
often  open  the  door  to  a  big  sin.  Watch,  1  pray 
you — watch  against  secret  sins.  We  have  heard 
of  some  who  barred  the  door  at  night,  and  fastened 
the  windows,  but  there  was  a  thief  under  the  bed. 
Mind  that  it  is  not  so  with  you — some  hidden  evil 
— some  secret  lust.  Watch,  pray,  resolve,  but  still 
come  back  to  this,  "  Lord,  help  me;  Lord,  save  me; 
Lord,  keep  me."  The  old  plowman  whom  I 
sometimes  used  to  talk  with  before  he  went  to  hea- 
ven, said  to  me,  "Depend  upon  it,  if  you  and  I  get 
one  inch  above  the  ground,  we  shall  get  that  inch 


CRIES    OF  DISTRESS.  349 

too  high."  There  is  much  truth  in  his  plain  remark. 
If  we  get  any  high  notions  of  what  we  are,  we 
shall  soon  sink  below  what  we  should  be.  Lie 
low;  aspire  high;  be  nothing;  take  Christ  to  be 
your  all  in  all;  renounce  self  coniidence,  and  have 
faith  in  God.  In  this  way  you  shall  conquer  sin. 
Your  prayer  shall  be  accepted,  your  resolution 
shall  be  carried  out,  the  purpose  of  your  heart  shall 
be  verified.  "I  will  keep  thy  statutes."  Amen, 
and  amen. 


**Js  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  " 
Zechariah.  iii.  2 

T  T  may  be  well  to  explain  these  words,  for,  sim- 
-*-  pie  as  they  are,  a  few  words  of  exposition  may 
be  useful  to  open  up  the  metaphor,  and  enforce 
the  thrilling  truth  that  underlies  it. 

There  is  mention  of  a  fire,  A  cry  of  "  Fire  !  " 
has  something  fearful  in  it.  When  a  fire  begins 
to  get  the  upper  hand  with  us,  it  is  terrible  in  its 
destructiveness.  The  fire  here  meant  is  more  aw- 
ful than  any  flame  that  makes  havoc  of  matter, 
and  its  devastations  ten  thousand  times  more  ap- 
palling. It  is  the  fire  of  sin.  It  blazed  in  the 
heart  of  an  angel,  and  he  became  a  devil.  Its 
sparks  fell  into  the  bosom  of  mother  Eve,  and  into 
the  heart  of  father  Adam,  and  paradise  was  burned 
up,  and  the  world  became  a  wilderness.  Sin  is  a 
fire  which  destroys  the  comfort  of  mankind  here, 
and  all  the  joy  of  mankind  hereafter.  It  is  a  flame 
which  jdelds  no  comfortable  warmth.  The  sinner 
may  dance  in  the  light  of  it  for  a  moment,  but  in 
sorrow  will  he  have  to  lie  down  in  it  forever. 
Woe  unto  those  who  have  to  make  their  bed  in 


A    FIREBRAND  351 

this  fire,  to  dwell  with  these  consuming  flames  for 
a  term  that  knows  no  ending. 

There  is  further  mention  of  a  brand.  Nothing 
can  be  more  suitable  to  burn  in  the  fire  than  a 
brand.  It  is  not  a  branch  just  taken  from  the  tree, 
full  of  sap;  it  is  a  brand — dry,  sere  timber,  fit  for 
the  burning;  it  is  not  a  mass  of  stone  or  iron,  but 
a  combustible  brand.  And  what  does  this  indicate 
but  man's  natural  heart,  which  is  so  congenial  to 
the  fire  of  sin  ?  Our  heart  is  like  the  tinder,  and 
Satan  has  but  to  strike  the  spark,  and  how  readily 
does  the  spark  find  a  nest  within  our  bosom  !  As 
the  firebrand  fits  the  fire,  so  does  the  sinner  fit 
in  with  sin.  When  sin  and  the  sinner  come  in  con- 
tact, it  is  "  Hail  fellow,  well  met !  "  They  are  boon 
companions.  The  sinner's  heart  is  the  nest  well 
prepared,  and  sins  are  the  foul  birds  which  come 
to  nestle  there.  Not  to  go  a  step  without  a  par- 
ticular application,  it  will  be  well  for  us  all  to 
understand  that  we  are  ourselves  like  the  brands; 
there  is  a  fitness  between  us  and  sin ;  if  we  burn 
in  the  fire  of  sin  it  is  no  wonder;  with  our  fallen 
nature,  it  is  no  greater  marvel  that  we  should  be 
instigated  by  sin  than  that  the  firebrand  should 
kindle  in  the  flame. 

Beyond  the  distinct  allusion  to  a  fire  and  a 
brand,  we  read  of  a  brand  in  the  fire.  Nor  is  it 
merely  a  brand  hitherto  lying  upon  the  heap,  to 
be  by-and-by  put  upon  the  flames;  it  is  "a  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fire."  It  has  been  in  the  fire. 
Does  not  this  portray  our  condition — not  only  con- 


352  STORM   SIGNALS. 

genial  for  the  fire  of  sin,  but  actually  burning  and 
blazing  in  it  ?  We  began  very  early.  Disobe- 
dience to  parents,  angry  tempers,  petty  falsehoods, 
many  sorts  of  childish  obstinacies  and  wrong-do- 
ings— all  these  were  like  the  first  catchings  on 
fire  of  the  brand.  We  have  blazed  away  the  re- 
verse of  merrily  since  then;  some  have  become 
charred  with  sin,  till  their  very  bodies  contain  the 
marks  of  that  tremendous  fire,  while  in  every  case 
the  soul  receives  a  charring  and  blackening  from 
the  flame.  Not  one  of  us  has  been  able,  even  with 
Godly  training  and  Christian  parentage,  to  escape 
from  burning  to  some  extent  in  this  fire.  Alas ! 
alas!  for  those  who  are  even  now  in  it!  What 
with  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  or  pride,  or  unbelief,  or 
some  other  form  of  departing  from  the  living  God, 
how  many  are  still  like  the  firebrand,  blazing  and 
flashing  in  the  flame  ! 

There  is  a  fair  side  to  the  picture.  It  is  not  al- 
together gloomy.  While  we  have  a  fire,  and  a 
brand,  and  a  brand  in  the  fire,  we  also  have,  blessed 
be  God !  ahrand  plucked  out  of  the  fire.  Sinners  these, 
w^ho  though  they  have  still  within  them  the  pro- 
pensity to  sin,  are  no  longer  in  the  fire  of  sin. 
They  have  been  taken  away  from  it.  They  sin 
through  infirmity,  but  willful  sin  they  do  not  com- 
mit. Their  nature  has  been  changed.  They  have 
received  the  renewing  grace  of  God.  The  fire  that 
once  burned  within  them  has  been  quenched. 
They  recollect,  to  their  grief  and  sorrow,  the  mis- 
chief that  sin  did  to  them,  but  it  is  not  doing  them 


A    FIREBRAND.  353 

the  same  mischief  now.  They  are  delivered  from 
the  body  of  sin  and  death.  They  are,  in  short, 
rescued  from  that  fire  which  once  threatened  their 
everUisting  destruction.  They  are  brands  still,  but 
they  are  brands  no  longer  in  the  lire;  they  are  out 
of  the  fire  now. 

Still,  the  force  of  the  passage  seems  to  lie  in  the 
words — ''plucked  out  of''  You  may  sit  down  on 
the  settle  by  the  hearth  in  one  of  those  good  old 
country  fire-places  where  they  still  burn  the  logs, 
and  perhaps  a  brand  drops  out  upon  the  hearth, 
where  it  flames  a  little  while  and  then  goes  out. 
This  is  not  a  picture  that  we  can  appropriate,  for 
there  never  was  an  instance  known  of  a  man  by 
himself  dropping  out  of  the  fire  of  sin.  Alas  !  we 
love  it  too  well.  "  The  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire," 
says  the  proverb;  but  we  are  like  the  silly  moth 
that  flies  at  the  candle  and  singes  its  wings,  but 
useth  those  wings  to  mount  up  again  into  the 
flame,  and  if  it  falls  all  full  of  pain  and  torment, 
with  burnt  legs,  and  with  almost  all  his  wings 
gone,  it  struggles,  it  pants,  it  labors  to  get  into 
the  fire  again.  Such  is  man.  He  loves  the  fire 
which  is  his  destruction.  In  youth  we  put  our  finger 
into  the  flame.  We  feel  it  is  burnt;  yet  again  we 
put  our  hand  into  it.  Then  in  after  years  we  per- 
sist deliberately  till  that  sin  has  consumed  us  from 
head  to  foot,  and  we  lie  down  in  our  grave  with 
our  bones  filled  with  disease — foul  fruit  of  the  sins 
of  our  youth ;  our  very  corpses  in  their  mortality 
bearing  witness  to  the  corruption  of  our  morals. 


354  STORM   SIGNALS. 

Albeit  the  Christian  is  relieved  of  that  peril,  he 
does  not  escape  by  his  own  free  will.  He  is  plucked 
out  of  it.  To  be  plucked  out  there  needs  a  hand 
quick  to  rescue.  You  know  that  pierced  hand, 
and  how  it  burnt  itselt  when  it  was  thrust  into  the 
hot  coals  to  pluck  us  out  like  brands  from  the 
burning.  It  was  no  use  waiting  till  we  dropped 
out,  for  we  should  never  have  done  so.  There  was 
no  hope  of  that.  With  all  the  appliances  of  grace 
and  of  judgment,  the  two  together  could  not  bring 
us  out.  But  effectual  vocation  did  it,  when  the 
Spirit  of  the  living  God  took  the  firebrand  by  the 
hand,  and  without  asking  it  whether  it  would  or 
not,  by  the  sweet  and  irresistible  compulsions  of 
divine  grace  plucked  the  brand  out  of  the  fire. 
Now,  every  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  is  to-night 
a  trophy  of  the  strength  as  well  as  of  the  mercy  of 
God.  It  took  as  much  omnipotence  to  snatch  him 
from  the  fire  as  it  needs  to  make  a  world,  and 
every  believer  may  feel  that  he  is  to-night  a  brand 
plucked  from  the  fire. 

We  come  now  to  take  the  matter  up  as  a  whole,. 
God  helping  us.  May  he  bless  the  words  we  speak 
to  some  here  who  are  still  in  the  fire  ! 

This  question,  as  it  appears  to  me,  will  bear  three 
renderings;  first  it  may  he  looked  wpon  as  an  ex- 
clamation of  ivonder.  *'  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked 
out  of  the  fire  ?  "  Secondly,  as  an  inquiry  or  hope 
—  "Is  not  tJiis  a  brand" — this  one  particularly — 
*'  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ? "  And  in  the  third 
place,  it  is  certainly  a  defiance  for  us,  assured  of 


A    FIREBRAND.  355 

our   safety,   to   throw   into  the  face   of  Satan,    the 
accuser.     "Is   not  this   a   brand  plucked   out   of 

the  fire  ?  " 

I.  The  text  bears  the  sense  of  wonderment — "  Is 
not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  " 

It  was  said  of  Joshua,  the  high  priest.     There 
was  such   astonishment  at  his  preservation,  that, 
with  hands  uplifted,  the  question  was  asked,   "  Is 
not  this  man  just  like  a  firebrand  snatched  from 
among  the  glowing  coals?"     Nor  is  this  marvel 
confined  to  Joshua.     I  believe  this  is  a  matter  of 
tuonder   in   the   case  of  every   saved    sinner.     Was 
there  ever  a  man  saved  by  grace  who  was  not  a 
wonder?     Is  not  every   Christian   conscious   that 
there  is  some  peculiarity  about  his  own  salvation 
\vhich    makes   it   marvelous?     If  you   cannot   all 
chime  in  with  "Yes,"  I  must  at  last  lead  the  chorus, 
in  which  an  overwhelming  multitude  will  join,  con- 
fessing that  it  was  so  with  myself.     I  could  not  be- 
lieve that  it  v^as  possible  that  my  sins  could  be  for- 
given.    I  do  not  know  why,  but  I  seemed  to  be 
the  odd  person  in  the  world.     When  the  catalogue 
was   made  out,  it  seemed   to   me   that   for   some 
reason  I  must  be  left  out.     If  God  had  saved  me, 
and   not  the  world,  I   should   have  wondered  in- 
deed, but  if  he  had  saved  all  the  world  and  not  me, 
that  would  have  seemed  to  be   according   to  the 
common  course;  and  a  course  of  right  too.     And 
now,    being  saved   by  grace,    I    cannot  help   say- 
ing, "  Yes,  I  am  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire!  " 
And  does  not  each  believer  say  the  same  ?     Why, 


356  STORM   SIGNALS. 

look  at  the  believer.  He  is  fallen,  and  yet,  though 
lost,  in  his  first  parent,  he  is  saved  in  Christ. 
The  believer's  own  nature  is  depraved  like  that  of 
other  men,  and  yet,  contrary  to  nature,  he  is  made 
a  new  creature.  As  though  Niagara  were  suddenly 
made  to  leap  upwards  instead  of  down,  our  nature, 
so  mighty  for  sin,  has  been  suddenly  turned  into 
the  opposite  direction,  and  we  have  been  con- 
strained to  seek  after  grace  and  holiness. 

Out  of  the  state  of  our  natural  depravity  we 
have  been  plucked,  so  that  every  man  who  is  de- 
livered from  its  sway  may  well  say — "  Am  not  I 
a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  Each  Christian 
knowing  his  own  heart,  and  having  a  special  ac- 
quaintance with  his  own  peculiar  besetting  sin, 
feels  as  if  the  conquest  of  his  own  will  by  the  grace 
of  God  were  a  more  illustrious  trophy  of  that 
grace  than  the  conquest  of  a  thousand  others.  I 
can  well  understand  that  none  of  us  will  yield  the 
palm  in  heaven  to  any  other  as  to  our  indebtedness 
to  the  mercy  of  God.  You  may  sing,  and  sing 
loudly,  each  one  of  you,  and  each  one  say — "I  owe 
more  to  God's  grace  than  any  other;"  but  there  is 
not  one  of  us  who  will  concede  the  point.  We 
shall  each  strike  up  our  own  peculiar  note,  and 
louder  yet,  and  louder  yet,  and  louder  still  our 
notes  of  gratitude  will  rise  to  the  seventh  heaven 
"  unto  him  that  loved  us  and  washed  us  from  oui 
sins  in  his  blood,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and 
ever."  Each  Christian,  then,  for  some  reason,  will 
feel  that  he  is  peculiarly  a  brand  plucked  out  of 


A    FIREBRAND.  357 

the  fire.  I  envy  not  the  feeling  of  any  believer 
who  should  dispute  this.  May  you  and  I  be  more 
thoroughly  baptized  into  the  spirit  of  humility, 
that  with  deeper  gratitude  we  may  feel  how  pecu- 
liarly we  are  indebted  to  the  grace  of  God. 

Though   this  is  the   case  universally,  there  are 
instances  so  uncommon  that  they  excite  surprise 
in   the  minds   of  all  who   hear.     In  the  cases  of 
extraordinary  conversion,  one  of  the  first  is  the  sal- 
vation of  the  extremely  aged.     Imagine  a  person  here 
who  has  lived  to  be  seventy  or  eighty  years  old, 
and  all   this  time  his  heart  has  never  heard  the 
sigh  of  repentance,  and  never  felt  the  joy  of  pardon. 
You  have  lived  only  to    cumber   the   ground    all 
these  years,  and  you  are  still  an  enemy  to  God; 
while   on  the  borders  of  the  grave  you  have    no 
hope  of  heaven.     Oh,  soul,  your  case  is  very  sad  ! 
It  were  enough  to  make  angels  weep,  if  weep  they 
could,  to  think  that  ^ch  a  one  as  you,  after  so 
many  years  of  long-suffering,  should  not  be  melted 
thereby.     Now,  suppose  the  Lord  should  appear  to 
you  to-night,  and  say  to  you — *'  I  have  loved  thee 
with  an  everlasting  love,  and,  therefore,  with  lov- 
ing-kindness have  I  drawn  thee."  I  took  thee  into 
the   house   of  God   to-night   on  purpose   that  the 
word  might  come  with  power  to  thy  soul,  and  I 
have  this  to  say   to  thee — Come  now,  and  let  us 
reason  together :  though  thy  sins  be  as  scarlet  they 
shall  be  as  white  as  wool,  though  they  be  red  like 
crimson  they  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."     What 
eayest  thou,  thou  hoary  Jacob,  but  without  Jacob's 


358  STORM  SIGNALS. 

faith,  leaning  upon  thy  staff — would  it  not  be  a 
wonder  if  now  thou  shouldest  begin  to  love — begin 
to  believe  ?  Oh,  may  God  give  thee  grace  to  do 
so,  and  then  I  am  sure  thou  wilt  say  to  thy  kins- 
folk and  acquaintance — "  Is  not  this  a  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fire?"  There  have  been  in- 
stances of  persons  converted  at  the  most  advanced 
age.  There  was  one  who  went  to  hear,  I  believe, 
Mr.  Toplady  preach,  the  very  day  when  he  was 
aged  a  hundred.  He  had  been  a  constant  neglecter 
of  the  house  of  God,  but  when  he  arrived  at  the 
age  of  a  hundred,  attracted  by  the  fame  of  Mr.  Top- 
lady,  who  was  an  exceedingly  popular,  as  he  cer- 
tainly was  a  highly  evangelical,  preacher,  and  hap- 
pened to  be  preaching  in  the  town  where  the  man 
lived,  he  said  he  would  go  on  that  day  to  hear  him, 
that  he  might  recollect  his  birthday.  He  went, 
and  that  day  God  in  his  grace  met  with  him.  I 
remember,  too,  the  instance  of  a  man  who  was 
converted  by  a  sermon  which  he  heard  Mr.  Flavel 
preach,  and  which  was  blessed  to  him  eighty-three 
years  after  he  had  heard  it,  when  he  was  at  the 
age  of  ninety-eight.  The  word  came  with  power 
to  his  soul  after  all  that  interval  of  time.  Just  as 
he  was  on  the  borders  of  the  tomb,  he  was  made 
to  enter  into  eternal  life.  May  the  God  of  infinite 
mercy  give  such  a  blessing  to  aged  ones  here,  and 
they  will  be  brands  plucked  out  of  the  fire. 

Remarkable,  too — I  might  almost  say  excep- 
tional— is  the  conversion  of  feople  ivJio  have  been 
accu3ix)med  to  hear  the  gospel  from  their  youth  tip,  who^ 


A    FIREBRAND.  359 

though  not,  perhaps,  absolutely  aged,  have  nevertheless 
been  for  years  receiving  gospel  privileges  without  any 
result.  They  have  been  l3^ing  at  Bethesda's  pool, 
with  its  many  porches,  now  for  forty  or  fifty  years. 
Oh  !  there  are  some  such  here.  You  have  not 
heard  me  all  that  time.  Some  other  ministry  has, 
in  times  past,  fallen  upon  your  ear,  and  perhaps 
our  own  voice  is  now  familiar  to  you  through  your 
having  heard  it  these  ten  or  twelve  years.  You 
listened  to  it  at  first  with  attention.  You  were 
riveted  for  a  little  while.  Then  it  grew  to  be  an 
ordinary  thing,  and  though  still  you  give  the 
preacher  a  fair  hearing,  there  is  very  little  of  that 
drinking  in  of  the  word  which  there  once  seemed 
to  be.  Some  of  you,  perhaps,  will  almost  even  go 
to  sleep  now.  I  wish  sometimes  that  you  were 
elsewhere;  perhaps  another  voice  would  make  your 
ears  to  tingle;  you  know  my  voice  full  well.  It  is 
quite  possible  for  a  minister  to  preach  too  long  to 
any  one  set  of  people,  if  they  get  so  accustomed  to 
the  tones  of  his  voice  that  they  are  never  aroused. 
The  "  click,  click"  of  the  mill  gets  to  be  so  custom- 
ary to  the  miller  that  he  goes  to  sleep.  Over  in 
Bankside,  I  am  told,  when  a  man  is  first  put  inside 
a  boiler  while  the  rivets  are  being  fastened,  he  can- 
not stop  long,  the  noise  is  so  dreadful,  but  after  a 
time  the  boiler-maker  gets  so  used  to  the  horrible 
din  that  he  can  almost  go  to  sleep  inside.  Well, 
now,  so  it  really  is  under  any  ministry  when  the 
people  get  gospel-hardened.  The  same  sun  which 
melts   wax   hardens   clay.     The  influences   which 


360  STORM   SIGNALS. 

tend  to  make  some  people  better  make  other  peo- 
ple a  great  deal  worse.  Some  of  you  have  thus 
trifled  with  your  own  conscience.  Should  you  be 
saved  to-night  you  would  be  brands  plucked  out  of 
the  fire;  and  may  we  not  hope  that  you  shall  be? 
Will  not  some  of  us  pray  for  it?  Will  not  all  of 
us  breathe  the  prayer,  •'  Lord,  thy  minister  has 
been  firing  his  arrows,  drawing  his  bow  at  a  ven- 
ture, but  what  can  he  do  ?  He  does  not  know 
where  the  joints  in  the  harness  are.  0  Lord  !  draw 
the  bow  thyself"  Where  God's  arrows  go  they 
are  sharp  in  the  hearts  of  the  King's  enemies.  He 
finds  their  hearts  out.  He  takes  such  a  good  aim 
that  he  is  sure  to  reach  the  heart.  May  he  take 
such  an  aim  to-night  !  May  some  fall  down  slain 
under  hinri  who  have  hitherto  resisted  the  gospel ! 
If  such  should  be  the  case,  we  shall  say  of  you — 
"  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  " 

Further  still,  and  apparently  the  wonder  in- 
creases. There  have  been  cases  of  gross  sinners  in 
ivhich  this  marvel  has  been  still  more  exciting.  It  is  a 
merciful  thing  that  God  forgives  drunkenness. 
Some  of  those  who  have  wallowed  in  it  have  been 
saved.  We  sometimes  talk  of  a  man  being  "as 
drunk  as  a  beast,"  but  who  ever  heard  of  a  beast 
being  drunk  ?  W^hy,  it  is  more  beastly  than  any- 
thing a  beast  ever  does.  I  do  not  believe  that  the 
devil  himself  is  ever  guilty  of  anything  like  that. 
I  never  heard  even  him  charged  with  being  drunk. 
It  is  a  sin  which  has  no  sort  of  excuse;  those  who 
fall  into  it  generally  fall  into  other  deadly  vices. 


A    FIREBRAND.  361 

It  is  the  devil's  back-door  to  hell,  and  everything 
that  is  hellish;  for  he  that  once  gives  away  his 
brains  to  drink  is  ready  to  be  caught  by  Satan  for 
anything.  Oh  !  but  while  the  drunkard  cannot 
have  eternal  life  abiding  in  him  while  he  is  such, 
is  it  not  a  joy  to  think  of  the  many  drunkards  who 
have  been  washed  and  saved  ?  This  night  there 
are  sitting  here  those  who  have  done  with  their 
cups,  who  have  left  behind  their  strong  drink, 
and  who  have  renounced  the  haunts  of  their 
debauchery.  They  are  washed  and  cleansed,  and 
when  they  think  of  the  contrast  between  where 
they  used  to  be  on  Sunday  night,  and  where  they 
now  are,  they  give  echo  to  the  question,  "  Is  not 
this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ? "  Very 
frequently  where  this  sin  comes,  blasphemy  is 
added  to  it;  and  how  many  we  have  who,  though 
now  saved  by  grace,  were  once  fearful  swearers, 
and  could  defy  the  God  that  made  them  to  destroy 
them,  or  to  inflict  the  most  horrible  judgments  upon 
them,  which  it  were  a  shame  even  to  mention  ! 
Oh !  but  the  mighty  grace  that  takes  the  swearer, 
and  says  to  him — "  You  shall  curse  no  longer,  for 
I  have  blessed;  I  do  not  intend  that  you  should 
imprecate  curses  on  yourself;  you  shall  now  begin 
to  plead  with  me  for  saving  mercy  !  "  Many,  many, 
many  such,  whose  tongues  might  well  have  rotted 
in  their  mouths  through  blasphemy,  have  been 
cleansed  by  Jesu's  blood;  and  the  tongue  can  sing 
that  once  could  curse,  and  the  lips  can  pray  that 
once   could   utter   oaths.     "  Is   not   this   a   brand 


362  STORM  SIGNALS. 

plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  "  Oh  !  you  are  here,  Jack, 
are  you  ?  You  can  swear.  Sometimes  when  you 
are  at  sea  you  roll  out  an  oath  or  two,  and  when 
you  are  on  shore  you  know  what  you  are  !  Oh  ! 
but  may  my  Master  meet  you,  and  may  he  once 
for  all  transform  you,  and  put  his  Holy  Spirit  to 
dwell  in  you,  instead  of  the  seven  devils  that  are 
there  now;  and  then  you  will  say,  '*  Is  not  this  a 
brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  " 

Can  we  pass  over  the  case  of  some  icho  have  given 
themselves  up  to  sin,  to  tvork  it  icith  greediness  ? 
Alas  !  how  men  turn  aside  with  scorn  from  the 
harlot  in  the  street,  and  they  think  of  her  as  though 
she  must  be  consigned  to  the  seventh  hell,  albeit 
they  themselves,  perhaps,  are  viler  still !  But 
how  shall  we  give  a  preference  to  one  sinner  ra- 
ther than  to  another,  w^hen  it  must  take  two  to 
commit  this  iniquity  ?  But,  alas  !  we  know  that  in 
London  our  streets  abound  with  those  whose  very 
names  seem  to  make  the  cheek  of  modesty  to  man- 
tle with  a  blush.  Well,  should  there  be  such  a 
one  strayed  in  here — sister — for  thou  art  a  sister 
still — the  Lord  Jesus  receiveth  sinners,  and  though 
thou  hast  sinned  very  foully,  "there  is  forgiveness 
wdth  him  that  he  may  be  feared,"  and  his  voice  is 
to-night,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and 
are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Who- 
ever you  may  be  that  have  fallen  into  these  pollut- 
ing sins  which  do  mischief,  and  which  bring  down 
God's  anger  upon  men,  yet  still  the  heart  of  God 
melts  with  pity  to  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  he  criea. 


A    FIREBRAND.  363 

"  How  can  I  give  thee  up  ?  "  and  lets  the  lifted 
thunder  drop.  Oh  !  when  such  are  saved — and 
there  are  scores,  and  scores,  and  scores,  to  our 
knowledge,  now  rejoicing  in  Christ,  who  have 
found  peace  in  this  house,  though  once  the  chief 
of  sinners — when  such  are  saved,  we  say  of  them, 
"  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  burning  ?  " 

Or,  what  if  you  have  even  worn  the  felon's  dress? 
What  if  you  have  ever  plunged  into  such  sin  that 
the  very  thought  of  it  makes  your  ears  to  tingle? 
What  if  the  darkness  of  the  night  could  tell  of  such 
hideous  crime  that  the  brightness  of  day  seems  all 
too  good  for  such  an  offender  as  you  have  been ; 
still,  the  mountains  and  floods  of  mercy  can  break 
forth  and  rise  above  the  loftiest  Alps  and  Andes  of 
iniquity.  The  deluge  of  the  Saviour's  pardoning 
mercy  shall  mount  to  twenty  cubits  upwards,  the 
tops  of  the  mountains  of  sin  are  covered,  and  you, 
the  chief  of  sinners,  shall  have  it  said  of  you, — "  Is 
not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  " 

We  have  gone  a  good  length  in  the  way  of  won- 
derment, yet  one  wonder,  I  think,  is  greater  than 
all  these.  I  have  almost  ceased  to  wonder  when 
the  swearer  is  converted,  when  the  harlot  is  saved ; 
not  because  it  is  a  mighty  act  of  grace,  but  because 
it  is  common  enough  to  be  often  repeated.  God's 
mercy  extends  very  freely  to  these;  but  there  is  a 
wonder  which  I  do  not  often  see.  I  do  see  it, 
though  not  often.  I  wish  I  could.  It  is  icJien  a 
self-righteous  religious  man  gets  saved.  "What,"  say 
you,  "  do  you  mean  by  that  ?  " 


864  STORM   SIGNALS, 

Why,   I   mean   those   good   people   who   go   to 
church  and  chapel  regularly,  have  family  prayers, 
and  say  their  own  prayers,  and  think  themselves 
upright.     They  will  not  confess  that  they  have  sin- 
ned, except  in  the  mere  complimentary   way  in 
which  they  are  accustomed  to  say  that  they  are 
"  miserable  sinners,"  though  they  do  not  look  very 
miserable.     Peradventure,    I   address    some    such 
now,  who  felt  while  I  was  preaching  to  the  sinner 
as    if  their   dainty   holiness   was   quite   shocked. 
They  are  double-distilled  in  their  refinement,  they 
are  unutterably  holy  and  free  from  hypocrisy,  their 
heart  all  the  while  loathing  the  plan  of  salvation, 
and  rejecting  the  grace  of  God,  because  they  be- 
lieve that  they  are  as  good  as  they  need  be.     To 
talk  to  them  of  crying,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner,"  is  to  insult  them.     Have   they  not  been 
baptized?     Have  they  not  been  confirmed  ?     Have 
they  not  gone  through  all  the  means  ?     It  must  be 
right  with  them,  they  are  so  good.     Besides,  who 
could  think  of  finding  fault  with  them?     Now,  if 
ever  such  people  as  those  are  saved  from  this  terri- 
ble disease  of  self-righteousness,  we  should  have  to 
say  indeed,  "  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of 
the  fire  ?  "     And  nowada3^s  it  is  getting  so  common 
that  it  ought  to  be  a  subject  of  prayer  with  God's 
people  that  God  would  deliver  this  land  from  the 
spreading  miasma,  the  Romanism,  alias  Puseyism, 
which  has  covered  it  everywhere.     If  a  man  wants 
to  make  sure  of  everlasting  wrath,  let  him  fall  into 
the  deep  ditch  of  Puseyism,  for  the  abhorred  of  the 


A    FIREBRAND.  365 

Lord  do  fall  therein.  You  may  get  out  the  com- 
mon sinner,  but  those  who  wrap  themselves  about 
with  vestments  and  fine  garments  of  ceremony, 
who  shall  reach  these?  The  hocus-pocus  of  the 
priesthood,  the  gewgaws,  the  ceremonies,  the 
trumpery  mummery  which  they  designate  worship 
— these  things  form  the  refuge  of  lies  behind  which 
they  hide  themselves,  and  the  true  gospel  of  the 
blessed  God  is  scarcely  heard.  What  with  their 
chantings  and  intonings,  how  can  the  still  small 
voice  of  the  gospel  be  heard  ?  Through  the  dim 
smoke  of  incense,  and  the  glare  of  gorgeous  vest- 
ments, how  shall  Christ  have  a  hearing?  The 
Man  of  Nazareth  is  he  alone  who  can  save  sinners. 
May  he,  in  his  mighty  power  to  save,  rend  away 
these  rags  of  Rome  from  before  his  cross,  and  let 
the  naked  beauty  and  simplicity  of  the  gospel 
shine  out  again.  Once  more  may  we  have  to  say, 
in  the  words  of  Cowper — 

*'  Legible  ODly  by  the  light  they  give 
Stand  the  soul-quickening  words — 
*  Believe  and  live.'  " 

If  a  priest  should  get  saved,  if  one  of  these  preten- 
ders to  apostolical  succession  should  be  brought 
down  to  humble  himself  before  Almighty  mercy, 
then  will  we  say  of  such,  "  Is  not  this  a  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?  " 

II.  With  more  brevity  than  the  preacher  likes, 
though  with  perhaps  as  muoh  amplitude  as  will  be 
be  pleasant  to  yourselves,  we  shall  now  take  the 

text  BY  WAY  OF  INQUIRYT  OR  HOPE. 


366  STORM  SIGNALS. 

Our  time  is  so  far  gone  that  I  can  only  hint  at 
what  I  meant  to  say. 

When  a  sinner's  eye  is  suffused  with  tears,  and  a 
sigh  breaks  forth,  "  Alas !  woe  is  me  1 "  you  may  then 
say,  "Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?" 
for  the  tear  of  sorrow  for  sin  is  a  blessed  omen  of 
mercy's  dawning.  May  mercy  reach  her  noontide 
soon !  And  when  alone  the  knee  is  bent,  and  the 
soft  prayer  goes  up,  "  Jesus,  Master,  pity  me ;  save 
me,  or  I  die,"  the  angels  recognize  the  voice  of 
prayer.  They  say,  "Behold,  he  prays!"  and  then 
they  feel  that  this  is  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire. 
The  sigh  of  penitence  and  the  prayer  of  the  seeking 
are  evidences  of  grace. 

And  when  the  poor  soul  at  last,  driven  by  neces- 
sity, throws  itself  flat  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and 
rests  its  hope  wholly  and  alone  on  Jesus,  then  we 
may  say  of  it,  "  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of 
the  fire  ?  " 

And  when  in  the  midst  of  many  a  conflict  and 
soul-struggle,  the  heart  still  flings  away  its  idols, 
and  hopes  to  love  Christ,  and  vows  in  his  strength 
to  be  devoted  to  his  service,  we  may  say  again 
w^ith  pleasure,  "  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of 
the  fire?" 

I  would  invite  you  to  think  over  the  signs  of 
grace,  and  if  you  see  them  in  yourselves,  may 
you  ask  the  question,  and  be  able  to  answer  it 
with  joy,  "  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of 
the  fire?" 

III.  And  what  a  question  op  defiance  this  is. 


A    FIREBRAND.  367 

Do  you  not  catch  the  idea  of  the  text  ?  There 
etood  Joshua,  there  stood  the  angel  of  the  Lord, 
and  here  stood  the  adversary.  The  adversary  be- 
gan to  accuse  Joshua,  but  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
said  to  him,  '*  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  0  Satan ; 
even  the  Lord  that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem  re- 
buke thee.  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of 
the  fire  ?  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  him  ?  If 
God  has  plucked  him  out  of  the  fire,  thou  canst 
never  put  him  in  again.  Seeing  God  has  plucked 
him  out  of  the  fire,  go  thou  thy  way,  and  mind 
thine  own  business !  Thou  hast  nothing  to  do 
with  this  saved  soul,  this  elect  vessel,  this  one 
whom  God  hath  chosen,  in  whom  the  Spirit's 
power  has  shown  itself  He  has  plucked  him  out 
of  the  fire ;  go  thy  way,  Satan !  and  leave  this  soul 
alone." 

It  is  a  defiance,  full  of  majesty  and  grandeur. 
It  reflects  a  gorgeous  lustre  on  the  past.  "  God 
saved  that  soul,"  says  the  angel  to  Satan.  Why 
did  he  do  it  ?  Why,  because  he  chose  him,  be- 
cause he  ordained  him  to  eternal  life,  because  ever- 
lasting love  had  set  itself  upon  him.  What  hast 
thou  to  do  with  him  ?  If  God  has  chosen  him, 
dost  thou  think  to  undo  the  divine  decree  ?  Canst 
thou  reverse  the  counsels  of  the  Most  High,  or 
dash  in  pieces  the  settled  purposes  of  the  infinite 
mind  ?  Go  thy  way !  God  hath  snatched  him 
from  the  fire,  determined  to  save  him.  Go  thou, 
and  think  not  to  disappoint  or  to  frustrate  that 
design  ! 


368  STORM  SIGNALS. 

Nor  less  did  the  angel  seem  to  dart  a  look  for- 
ward. If  God  has  plucked  him  from  the  fire,  why 
did  he  do  it  ?  To  let  him  go  back  again  ?  Will 
*^God  play  fast  and  loose  ?  Does  he  pluck  brands  out 
of  the  fire  to  thrust  them  into  the  flame  again  ? 
Absurd  !  Preposterous  !  Why  has  he  plucked  it 
out  of  the  fire  ?  Why,  to  keep  it  from  ever  being 
burned.  That  brand  taken  out  of  the  fire  shall  be 
exhibited  in  heaven  as  a  proof  of  what  grace  can 
do;  and  therefore  the  angel  says  to  the  devil,  "  Get 
thee  gone  !  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  this  ?  God 
means  to  save  this  man,  and  canst  thou  destroy 
him?  God  has  done  that  which  is  the  earnest  and 
the  token  of  his  perfect  safety;  dost  thou  think 
that  thou  canst  disappoint  God's  resolutions  and 
resolve  ?  " 

Now,  beloved  in  Christ,  do  realize  in  yourselves 
this  precious  thought,  each  one  of  you.  If  the 
Lord  has  changed  thee,  if,  indeed,  thou  be  a  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fire,  why  shouldest  thou  fear 
the  temptation  which  now  assails  thee  ?  Dread 
not  all  the  temptations  that  may  attack  thee. 
Weak  as  thou  art,  the  God  that  has  done  so  much 
for  thee  cannot  leave  thee  now.  He  will  not 
leave  his  purpose  half  accomplished.  He  will 
not  be  disappointed.  He  will  to  the  end  carry 
on  his  work  till  he  brings  you  up  to  heaven. 
Why,  I  think  some  of  you  who  were  very  great 
offenders  ought  often  to  take  comfort  from  your 
conversion.  You  can  say — *'  What  a  change  there 
is   in    me!     How   far   beyond    anyt^^'""-    T    o- 


A    FIREBRAND.  369 

have  wrought  myself !     It  must  have  been  God's 
work. 

*  And  can  he  have  taught  me 

To  trust  in  his  name, 
And  thus  far  have  brought  me 
To  put  me  to  shame  ?  ' 

It  is  a  good  thing  sometimes  to  go  back  to  the 
time  when  first  we  knew  the  Lord,  and  to  say — 
*  One  thing  I  know,  that,  whereas  I  was  blind, 
now  I  see.'  I  am  not  what  once  I  was;  and 
though  I  am  not  what  I  wish  to  be,  at  the  same 
time  I  am  not  what  naturally  I  should  have  been. 
Well,  then,  if  God  has  done  this,  did  he  bring  me 
out  of  Egypt  to  let  me  die  in  the  wilderness  ?  Did 
-he  begin  to  build  without  intending  to  finish  ?  Did 
he  proclaim  war,  and  did  he  not  intend  to  get  the 
victory  ?  "  That  be  far  from  thee.  Lord  !  Thou 
wilt  complete  the  work  thou  hast  begun,  and  the 
brand  from  the  burning  plucked  shall  be  found  in 
safety  in  the  day  of  Christ's  appearing. 

The  whole  end  to  which  we  drive  is  this — May 
God  enable  us  all  to  see  that  our  salvation  is  in  him. 
Jonah  had  to  go  into  the  whale's  belly  to  learn 
that  grand  axiom  of  theology.  The  most  of  us 
have  been  sorely  beaten  before  we  find  it  out.  "  Sal- 
vation is  of  the  Lord."  If  thou  knowest  this,  look 
to  the  Lord  for  it.  Repose  thyself  on  him  now, 
and  thou  shalt  be  his  for  aye:  thy  place  of  defence 
the  munition  of  rocks. 


*•  And  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  have 
brought  down  the  high  tree,  have  exalted  the  low  tree^  have  dried  up 
the  green  tree,  and  have  made  the  dry  tree  to  fiourish:  I  the  Lord 
have  spoken,  and  have  done  it." —  EZEKIEL  xvii.  24. 

ly  yfETHINKS  I  see  a  great  forest  which  reaches 
^^ ^  for  many  a  league.  The  trees  are  of  divers 
growths,  and  of  various  ages.  Some  of  them  are 
very  lofty.  Here  a  towering  cedar,  and  yonder  the 
storks  have  made  their  nests  among  the  tall 
fir  trees.  Stout  oaks  there  are  that  laugh  at  storms, 
and  elms  that  will  not  be  twisted  with  the  tempest. 
See  how  they  rival  each  other !  And  there  are 
lowlier  trees;  some  bearing  fruit  though  scarcely 
seen,  others,  like  the  vine,  creeping  upon  the 
ground — so  obscure  they  can  hardly  be  observed. 
It  is  a  strange  forest,  in  which  trees  of  every  clime 
are  to  be  found;  some  green,  verdant,  laden  with 
blossoms  and  with  fruit;  others  dead,  dry,  withered, 
with  scarce  here  and  there  a  leaf  It  is  evening, 
the  cool  of  the  day.  The  Lord  God  that  visited 
the  fair  garden  of  Eden  is  come  to  walk  in  this 
forest.  Along  those  deep  glades,  amidst  that  thick 
shade,  the  Almighty  appears.     He  comes.     How 


TO    THE    RESCUE,  371 

see  I  him  ?  Bears  he  in  his  hand  an  awful  axe, 
and  doth  he  pass  his  finger  along  its  edge  to  see 
that  it  be  keen?  Strong  is  the  arm  that  wields  it. 
Howl,  cedars,  if  once  he  lift  that  axe  against  you. 
What  means  that  Woodman  to  do  ?  Wait  and  let 
us  hear  him  speak.  Oh,  ye  trees  of  the  field,  be  si- 
lent before  the  Lord.  Clap  not  your  hands  until  ye 
have  heard  him  speak.  "The  trees  of  the  field 
shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  have  brought  down  the 
high  tree  " — beware,  ye  towering  cedars  ! — "  that  I 
have  exalted  the  low  tree  " — take  courage,  ye  lowly 
vines  ! — "  have  dried  up  the  green  tree  "  ! — wail,  ye 
verdant  elms! — "and  have  made  the  dry  tree  to 
flourish," — hope,  ye  withered  boughs  ! — "  I  the 
Lord  have  spoken,  and  have  done  it."  Let  the 
trees  be  silent  before  the  Lord,  for  he  cometh  to 
judge  them,  and  he  judgeth  them  with  much  jeal- 
ousy. That  forest  I  have  before  my  eyes;  men 
like  trees  appear  to  me  in  the  vision.  While  I 
gaze  on  this  dense  mass  of  people  listening  to  my 
voice,  let  me  interpret  the  Mighty  Woodman's 
words  to  you.  There  are  four  notes  of  which  we 
shall  speak  one  after  the  other.  May  God  sanc- 
tify the  emblems  to  our  profit,  touching  our  ears, 
and  teaching  our  hearts,  that  we  may  rightly 
understand  what  the  Lord  saith  to  the  trees  of  the 
forest. 

I.  "  Tlius  saith  the  Lord,  the  trees  of  the  field  shall 
hnoiv  that  I  the  Lord  have  brought  down  the  high  tree." 

Look  over  history,  and  you  will  see  that  every* 
thing  gigantic  in  stature  and  colossal   in  dimen- 


372  STORM   SIGNALS. 

sioiis;  whatsoever  has  been  great  to  human  appre- 
henision,  grasping  at  earthly  fame,  has  become  an 
object  for  God's  penetrating  arrows,  and  a  subject 
for  his  withering  blight.  A  grand  idea  of  univer- 
sal monarchy  flashed  upon  the  mind  of  man.  He 
would  build  a  tower,  the  top  whereof  should  reach 
to  heaven.  What  did  the  Lord  do  with  this  tine 
scheme  ?  "  I  will  come  down,"  said  he,  "  to  Babel, 
and  see  if  it  be  altogether  as  they  have  said." 
Then  he  touched  their  tongues,  and  confounded 
their  language,  and  scattered  the  imaginations  of 
their  hearts:  so  he  laughed  them  to  scorn,  and  left 
them  to  be  a  laughing-stock  to  all  generations. 
Then  came  the  great  power  of  Egypt.  Pharaoh 
said,  "Am  I  not  lord  of  Thebes,  with  its  hundred 
gates,  and  its  myriads  of  brazen  chariots  ?  Have 
I  not  a  mighty  host  of  cavalry  ?  Who  is  equal  to 
me?  I  speak  and  the  nations  tremble."  When 
the  king  hardened  his  heart,  how  did  Jehovah — 
the  King  of  kings — get  himself  honor  from  Pharaoh 
and  his  hosts  ?  "  Thou  didst  blow  with  thy  wind ;  the 
sea  covered  them ;  they  sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty 
waters.  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  has  triumphed 
gloriously;  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  cast 
into  the  sea ! ''  In  after  years  Babylon  set  herself 
up  as  a  queen.  "  I  shall  be  a  lady  forever,"  said 
the  gay  metropolis  of  the  earth,  the  mighty  city  of 
Euphrates.  "I  sit  alone;  I  shall  see  no  sorrow." 
Behold,  she  decketh  herself  out  in  scarlet,  she 
arrayeth  herself  with  silk;  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth  are  quiet  when  she  ariseth,  nor  is  the  sound 


TO    THE    RESCUE.  373 

of  a  whisper  heard  when  the  voice  of  her  command 
goeth  forth.  But  where  art  thou,  daughter  of  As- 
syria, where  art  thou  now?  0  daughter  of  Chal- 
dea,  where  is  the  crown  which  once  circled  thy 
brow  and  adorned  thy  head?  Go,  mark  a  heap  of 
rubbish,  and  of  desolate  stones;  hear  the  hooting 
of  the  owls  and  the  howling  of  the  dragons,  as 
each  one  calleth  to  his  fellows  in  the  midst 
of  a  desolation  which  cannot  be  repaired  !  How 
art  thou  fallen  i'rom  heaven,  Lucifer,  son  of 
the  morning !  Thus  God  breaketh  in  pieces  with 
his  right  hand  everything  arrogant  and  supercili- 
ous, that  dares  to  assert  greatness  apart  from  his 
endowment,  or  to  presume  on  authority  other  than 
he  delegates.  I  might  prolong  the  strain.  I 
might  tell  you  of  Rome,  and  all  the  boastings  of 
that  imperial  mistress,  point  to  her  faded  charms, 
and  tell  of  her  decay  and  her  decadence.  I  might 
lead  you  back  to  Sennacherib  and  all  his  hosts 
overthrown,  or  recite  the  story  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
driven  out  from  the  abodes  of  men,  and  feeding 
among  the  beasts.  I  might  show  you  lesser  kings, 
kings  of  Israel,  brought  exceeding  low,  until  they 
who  had  sat  on  the  throne  as  princes  pined  in  the 
dungeon  among  slaves.  To  multiply  instances  would 
be  only  to  confirm  the  general  current  of  history, 
and  illustrate  the  fact  that  the  Lord,  even  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  always  cuts  down  the  high  tree,  humili- 
ates the  creature  that  exalts  itself,  and  suffers  \v\ 
flesh  to  glory  in  his  presence.  That  is  the  law  of 
his   government.     The  question  arises,   How  does 


374  STORM   SIGNALS. 

it  concern  us  ?  Doubtless  it  opens  a  sad  prospect 
to  those  that  are  Hfted  up  with  pride,  or  inflated 
with  self-opinion.  Are  there  any  among  you  who 
boast  in  heraldry  a  long  succession  of  illustrious 
names  which  has  ennobled  your  pedigree  ?  Some 
people  seem  to  think  that  the  world  is  hardly  good 
enough  for  them  to  tread  upon,  as  if  they  were 
made  of  china,  while  other  men  are  moulded  but  of 
common  clay;  they  look  down  upon  the  public 
as  an  ignoble  herd,  and  speak  of  the  masses  as 
the  "many-headed"  and  the  "great  unwashed." 
Such  a  man  will  play  the  parasite  to  his  own  dear 
self,  passionately  cherish  his  own  conceits,  and 
petulantly  hold  that  whatever  belongs  to  him  is 
better  than  any  one  else  can  procure  for  love  or 
money,  be  it  his  house,  bis  horse,  the  water  from 
his  well,  or  the  wine  from  his  cellar.  At  his  wit 
let  all  inferiors  laugh;  to  his  creed  let  all  who 
would  receive  his  patronizing  nod  do  obeisance. 
In  stately  isolation  he  will  acknowledge  no  rival. 
Knowest  thou,  man,  that  in  one  respect  thou  hast 
a  veritable  pre-eminence? — thou  mayest  fairly 
challenge  all  thy  fellows  for  one  whose  disposition 
the  Lord  hates  more  than  he  abhors  thine. 
Among  the  seven  abominations  your  order  ranks 
highest.  No  liar  or  murderer  can  claim  a  pre-em- 
inence over  you  in  vice  so  long  as  the  Proverbs 
stand.  Ere  long  the  heel  of  the  Almighty  shall  be 
lifted  higher  than  thy  haughty  head.  He  will  cast 
thee  down  be  thj^  look  never  so  proud;  for  the 
Lord  hath   purposed  it  to   stain  the   pride  of  all 


TO    THE    RESCUE,  375 

glory,  to  bring  into  contempt  all  the  excellency  of 
the  earth.  There  is,  again,  an  arrogance  of  mind, 
of  judgment,  of  opinion,  just  as  ignorant — if  not 
quite  so  grotesque — as  his  who  dreams  that  his 
birth  is  of  higher  caste  and  his  blood  of  richer  hue 
than  other  men.  Humanity  in  the  bulk  is  the  idol 
of  some  people;  and  yonder  1  see  the  man  who 
quotes  himself  as  an  illustrious  specimen.  He  does 
not  believe  in  the  total  depravity  of  human  nature. 
Judging  by  himself,  the  statement  that  the  whole 
head  is  sick,  and  the  heart  faint,  is  a  myth;  or  if  it 
were  true  of  a  recreant  Jew,  it  never  was  a  fair  in- 
dictment against  such  an  orthodox  Christian  as  he 
is.  No,  no;  he  has  kept  the  law;  he  feels  that  in  all 
things  he  is  blameless;  he  has  not  erred,  neither  will 
he  humble  himself  before  the  word  that  God  speaks 
to  us.  In  the  opinion  of  such,  the  gospel  that  we 
preach  is  very  good  for  harlots,  thieves,  and  drunk- 
ards, but  it  is  of  no  use  to  the  righteous,  for  they 
have  put  down  their  own  names  among  those  who 
need  no  repentance.  Admirable  in  their  conduct, 
their  temper  amiable,  and  their  disposition  generous, 
a  salvation  by  free  grace  would  be  wasted  on  thera. 
The  Lord  will  abase  thee,  be  thou  man  or  women, 
whosoever  thou  mayest  be;  he  will  shame  thee;  the 
axe  is  ready  to  be  laid  at  thy  root  even  now.  Thy 
goodness  is  not  God's  goodness,  and  thy  righteous- 
ness is  not  Christ's  righteousness;  therefore  shall 
the  moth  consume  it,  and  it  shall  be  eaten  away. 
Or  it  is  my  friend  yonder,  a  working  man  who  says, 
*'  Well,  I  work  as  hard  as  anybody;  I  bring  up  my 


376  STORM   SIGNALS. 

children  as  well  as  I  can;  I  have  nothing  from  the 
parish ;  and  if  I  see  a  poor  mate  out  of  work  I  al- 
ways subscribe  my  mite,  though  I  have  not  much 
to  give  away ;  can  it  be  right  to  tell  me  that  I  am 
not  in  a  fair  way  of  going  to  heaven  ?  "  Ah  !  the 
Lord  will  deprive  you  of  such  boasting,  for  he  will 
bring  down  all  these  high  trees.  You  that  have 
any  righteousness  of  your  own,  whether  you  be 
rich  or  poor,  the  same  word  will  apply  to  you  all. 
What  mattereth  it  whether  you  are  born  of  princes, 
or  the  offspring  of  beggars,  pride  will  nestle  in  any 
heart,  and  presumption  will  take  advantage  of  any 
circumstances?  Perhaps  I  may  address  some  per- 
son who  says,  "  Well,  I  am  a  member  of  the  orthodox 
and  true  church ;  I  have  been  baptized,  and  I  have 
been  confirmed  after  the  most  proper  manner;  I  re- 
ceive the  Lord's  Supper  on  all  fit  and  proper  oc- 
casions. The  clergyman  from  whom  I  take  the 
sacrament  has  received  apostolic  ordination.  The 
altar  where  I  worship  is  illumined  with  fine  can- 
dles. How  tasteful  the  architecture  !  How  decor- 
ous the  congregation !  How  enchanting  the  music  1 
There  are  none  of  your  rough  wild  notes  that  give 
vent  to  the  feelings.  Our  organ  is  the  perfection 
of  mechanism,  and  it  is  played  with  the  Utmost 
skill.  Our  professional  singers  perform  their  parts 
with  dramatic  taste.  Our  litanies  are  wailed  out 
in  plaintive  tones.  We  do  the  thing  in  the  right 
style;  and  as  I  am  a  member  of  a  national  branch 
of  a  catholic  church,  I  hold  myself  to  be  an  heir  of 
eternal  life."     From  thy  towering  imaginations,  O 


TO    THE    RESCUE.  377 

man,  thou  shalt  speedily  totter.  God  will  cast 
thee  down,  as  sure  as  thou  livest.  No  boasting 
even  of  our  orthodoxy,  or  of  our  attention  to  relig- 
ious formalities,  shall  ever  be  allowed  to  abide  his 
judgment.  The  Lord  hath  set  his  face  against  all 
boastings,  and  all  confidences,  other  than  a  trust 
in  the  cross,  and  a  holy  reliance  on  the  finished 
work  and  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Or  shall  it  fare  better  with  another  class  ?  There 
is  our  friend  who  says,  "  Well,  well,  I  do  not  believe 
in  forms  and  ceremonies;  but,  mark  you,  I  always 
judge  and  weigh  everytliing."  He  estimates  him- 
self as  an  independent  thinker;  he  is  bound  by  no 
precedents,  fettered  by  no  creeds,  and  considers 
that  he  is  amenable  to  no  judgment  but  his  own. 
He  owns  no  lord  but  his  own  conscience,  no  duty 
but  such  as  he  prescribes  himself,  and  as  for  wis- 
dom, he  looks  with  indifference  on  all  things 
whatsoever  that  his  private  judgment  has  not  en- 
dorsed. Moreover,  he  doubts  the  inspiration  of 
the  Bible,  and  has  his  misgivings  as  to  the  authen- 
ticity of  some  parts  of  it.  He  indulges  a  little 
suspicion  as  to  the  deity  of  Christ,  and  as  to  the 
doctrines  of  grace;  he  professes  much  intelligence, 
but  he  exhibits  gross  negligence.  Strong  in  his 
self-assertion,  he  makes  light  of  the  Word  of  God, 
and  the  will  of  God,  while  he  holds  prophets  and 
apostles  in  little  esteem.  Ah,  well,  brother  I  God 
is  against  you,  he  will  make  a  fool  of  you  one  of 
these  days,  if  you  are  so  wise  as  to  exalt  yourself" 
above   his  revelation.     The   world  shall  see  your 


378  STORM  SIGNALS. 

folly.  I  tell  thee,  captious  questioner,  that  the 
Lord  will  bring  thee  down.  "  Tut,  tut,  tut,  I  do 
not  beheve  in  any  of  these  things,"  exclaims  the 
successful  merchant;  "  I  say  the  best  thing  is  to 
push  ahead  on  one's  own  account;  I  mean  to  save 
money,  to  get  rich,  to  rise  in  the  world,  as  others 
have  done  who  have  made  capital  of  their  own 
wits,  and  taken  care  of  their  own  interest."  This 
is  the  religion  of  many  people;  their  creed  being 
that  God  will  help  those  who  help  themselves:  in 
their  account  the  highest  wisdom  is  to  attend  to 
this  world,  and  for  the  world  to  come  the  best 
policy  to  ignore  it.  To  the  statutes  of  the  Lord 
they  give  no  heed.  Evidently  you  see  no  need  to 
depend  on  God.  With  a  stout  pair  of  arms  and  a 
good  clear  brain,  you  are  confident  you  can  make 
your  own  way  in  the  world.  Will  you  prosper,  sir  ? 
1  tell  you  no;  for  God  is  against  you.  The  Lord 
will  bring  you  down.  Whether  it  be  strength  of 
limbs  and  lungs,  force  of  brain  and  intellect,  cun- 
ning works  or  scheming  plans  you  rely  upon,  he 
will  lay  you  level  with  the  dust  ere  long.  You 
shall  know  that  he  who  exalteth  himself  against 
his  Maker  maketh  a  sorry  adventure.  Disaster 
and  everlasting  confusion  are  your  inevitable  fate. 
IL  Furthermore  the  Lord  says,  ^^  I  loill  exalt  the 
loiv  tree.^'  Here  is  a  word  of  comfort  to  some  who 
specially  need  it.  You  remember  Joseph  in  the 
dungeon,  Israel  in  Egypt,  Hannah  in  the  family  of 
Elkanah,  David  when  Samuel  would  have  passed 
him  by,  Hezekiah  when  Sennacherib  rebuked  him. 


TO    THE    RESCUE.  379 

Are  not   all  these   instances  of  God  exalting  the 
low  tree  ?     We  have  no  time  to  expatiate  on  them, 
though  they  are  well  worthy  of  attentive  study. 
But  rather  now  let  us  ask,  where  are  the  low  trees 
here  among  ourselves  ?     Who  are  they  ?     The  low 
trees  are  those  poor  in  spirit  who  think  others  better 
than  they  are  themselves,  who,  instead  of  carving 
their  names  high,  are  willing  to  have  them  written 
low,  because  they  feel  they  have  nothings  where- 
of to   glory,   nought  wherein  to  boast.     The  low 
trees  are  the  penitents,  those  who  take  their  stand 
afar    off   with  the   publican,   and   say,  ''  God,    be 
tnerciful  to  me  a  sinner;"  you  that  feel  your  own 
weakness  to  do  anything  aright;  you  who  are  con- 
scious of  your  own  worthlessness,  and  afraid  that 
God  will   never  hear  your  prayers;  you  that  are 
bowed  down  low  with  a  sense  of  guilt,  and  hardly 
dare  to    look   up   to   the   place   where   his   honor 
dwelleth;  you  are  the  low  trees,  you  are  such  as 
God  exalteth.     You,  too,  who  tremble  at  his  word; 
when  you  see  the  threatening,  fear  lest  it  should 
be  executed  upon  you;  when  you  hear  the  promise, 
hardly  think  it  possible  that  it  can  belong  to  you — 
you  are  the  low  trees— God  shall  exalt  you.     You 
that  feel  your  ignorance,  and  are  willing  to  be  in- 
structed;  you   that   are  modest  as  children,    and 
ready   to  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesus;  you  that  have 
broken  in  pieces  till  you  feel  that  a  crumb  of  mercy 
would  be  more  than  you  deserve,  and  are  willing 
to  take  any  dole  he  is  pleased  to  give — you  are 
the  low  trees.     And  you  that  are  despised,  who 


380  STORM   SIGNALS. 

walk  in  darkness  and  see  no  light;  slandered  for 
Christ's  sake;  reproached  with  crimes  you  never 
committed;  you  of  whom  the  world  is  not  worthy, 
though  the  world  accounts  you  to  be  nnworthy  of 
its  esteem — you  are  the  low  trees,  and  God  shall 
exalt  you.  God  grant  us  grace  to  humble  our- 
selves under  his  mighty  hand.  The  Lord  exalteth 
the  low  trees.  Is  there  a  soul  among  you  that  is 
ready  to  despair — low  tree,  so  low  that  it  can  only 
compare  itself  to  a  bramble-bush.  Well,  God  dwelt 
in  a  bush.  You  may  think  that  if  he  should  have 
mercy  upon  all  other  men,  yet  he  must  make  an 
exception  of  you,  so  aggravated  are  your  offences, 
so  depraved  your  disposition,  and  so  alien  to  any- 
thing good  your  natural  temperament.  Oh  !  bless 
the  Lord!  He  exalteth  the  low  tree.  If  this 
voice  can  reach  now  any  humble,  fearful,  broken- 
hearted soul,  even  though  that  soul  should  say  it 
is  too  good  to  be  true,  yet,  in  God's  name,  let  me 
assure  you  it  is  God's  message  to  you.  Rejoice, 
yea,  siiig  unto  your  God,  for  he  will  lift  up  the 
poor  from  the  dunghill,  while  he  casteth  down  the 
mighty  from  the  seats  of  their  pomp  and  their 
places  of  power. 

III.  The  Lord  has  also  declared  that  ^^  He  ivill 
dry  up  the  green  tree^  Whether  that  green  tree  be 
high  or  low  it  does  not  matter;  if  it  be  green  in  it- 
self, he  will  cut  it  down.  Mark  you,  a  man  may 
be  as  high  as  heaven;  if  it  is  God  that  makes  him 
high,  he  will  stand;  but  if  he  be  high  in  creature- 
strength,  and  creature-merits,  and  creature-glory, 


TO    THE    RESCUE.  381 

he  shall  be  brought  down;  and  a  man  maybe  low 
without  merit,  if  he  is  m-erely  mean  and  meager,  pal- 
try and  pitiable,  not  worth  a  straw.  That  is  not 
the  spirit  of  lowliness  that  God  blesses.  In  like 
manner  a  man  may  be  green  because  he  is  planted 
by  the  rivers  of  God's  living  waters,  that  is 
healthy  enough;  but  those  that  are  like  the  green 
bay  tree  of  the  Psalmist,  trees  growing  in  their 
own  soil,  never  transplanted  by  grace,  green  in  the 
verdure  of  worldly  prosperity,  and  taking  all  their 
delight  in  earthly  things — those  are  the  trees  God 
will  dry  up.  Many  I  know  of  this  kind  !  They 
profess  to  be  God's  people,  and  they  sa}^, 
"  Well,  I  never  have  any  anxiety  about  my 
eternal  state;  I  do  not  see  why  I  should  ever 
have  any  doubts  or  fears.  I  have  no  prickings  of 
conscience."  This  green  tree  boasts  "  that  its 
leaves  never  fade,  that  its  evidences  are  always 
bright."  "They  have  no  charges,  therefore  they 
fear  not  God."  "  They  have  not  been  emptied  from 
vessel  to  vessel."  They  have  no  cares,  they  walk 
confidently,  they  talk  arrogantly,  they  smile  dis- 
dainfully at  some  of  God's  people  who  groan  over 
their  infirmities  and  bemoan  their  sins.  Perhaps 
they  go  the  length  of  protesting  that  they  have 
no  vices,  and  do  no  wrong;  or  they  will  say,  "  Why 
as  for  me,  I  have  overcome  my  bad  habits  and 
made  amends  for  my  youthful  follies  and  indiscre- 
tions; and  if  I  have  any  faults  they  are  only  such 
as  are  natural  to  men,  and  they  do  not  cause  me 
any  trouble."     He  will  even  turn  round  and  rail 


382  STORM  SIGNALS. 

on  this  wise,  "  I  cannot  think  how  some  of  God's 
people  can  do  as  they  do."  No:  he  is  such  a 
blessed,  heavenly-minded  hypocrite,  that  after  he 
lias  condoned  his  own  crimes  he  condemns  other 
people's  customs;  hence  he  holds  up  the  severity  of 
his  judgment  as  a  proof  of  the  integrity  of  his 
character.  He  makes  broad  fringes  to  his  own 
garment,  and  he  cannot  think  how  good  men  can 
wear  such  narrow  fringes  to  theirs;  he  has  a  wide 
phylactery,  and  he  cannot  imagine  how  a  godly 
man  can  wear  a  smaller  one;  he  prays  an  hour- 
and-a-half  at  the  corner  of  the  street,  he  cannot 
think  that  any  man  is  godly  who  prays  for  ten 
minutes  in  his  closet;  he  sounds  a  trumpet  and 
gives  away  three-half-pence  to  the  poor;  he  can- 
not understand  people  when  they  give  away  ten 
pounds  or  a  hundred  pounds  in  the  cause  of  re- 
ligion; he  thinks  they  must  have  mercenary 
motives.  He  might  stand  up  and  say,  "  Look  at 
me  if  you  want  to  see  what  a  man  should  be,  how 
a  Christian  should  live,  and  what  his  manner,  and 
conduct,  and  conversation  should  be."  Behold  the 
man  who  counts  himself  the  paragon  of  perfection. 
Have  you  never  met  with  such  green  trees  ?  I 
have.  These  people  feed  without  fear  and  mock 
without  motive.  They  laugh  at  the  idea  of  Paul's 
apprehension,  when  he  said,  "I  keep  under  my 
body,  lest,  after  having  preached  to  others,  I  my- 
self should  be  a  cast-away."  They  think  such 
fears  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  of  final  per- 
Bfeverance,  though  in  this  they  are  mistaken.     A 


TO    THE    RESCUE.  383 

man  may  kiiow  that  a  true  believer  will  persevere 
and  yet  be  very  much  afraid  that  he  shall  not  him- 
self hold  out,  because  he  may  suspect  himself 
whether  he  is  a  true  believer  at  all.  This  green 
tree  is  never  troubled  about  the  future;  it  is 
all  right  with  him ;  he  has  launched  upon  a  smooth, 
deceitful  sea,  and  he  believes  it  will  be  calm  until 
he  gets  to  the  other  side:  as  for  human  weakness, 
he  knows  nothing  at  all  about  that.  He  hears 
God's  children  crying,  "  Who  shall  deliver  us  from 
the  body  of  his  death  ?  "  and  he  looks  shocked. 

The  professor,  too,  who  boasts  his  deep  expe- 
rience, is  like  this  green  tree.  Young  Christians  he 
frowns  at — he  does  not  like  young  people.  No, 
he  would  not  have  many  yoimg  people  in  the 
church,  because  they  might  adulterate  it,  and  bring 
down  its  spiritual  tone.  As  to  doctrine,  he  is  pro- 
foundly learned;  "  he  can  a  hair  divide,  betwixt  the 
west  and  north-west  side;"  and  he  censures  at  once 
the  man  who  does  not  understand  all  the  points. 
He  understands  more  than  the  Bible  reveals;  he 
has  improved  upon  the  Scriptures:  and  those  who 
cannot  get  up  to  his  standard  he  despises.  As  for 
the  poor,  and  meek,  and  the  sickly  among  the 
people  of  God,  he,  one  of  the  strong  ones,  pushes 
them  on  either  side,  and  will  give  them  no  rest. 
Never  a  man  yet  had  anything  to  boast  of  as  his 
own,  but  God  was  sure  to  dry  him  up.  Let  your 
life  be  green  as  emerald,  it  shall  be  brown  as  March 
dust  before  long.  You  seek  sap  and  nourishment 
from  yourselves.     The  spider's  web — how  soon  it 


384  STORM   SIGNALS. 

is  blown  away !  Well  it  may,  because  it  cometh 
out  of  the  spider's  own  bowels.  Everything  that 
comes  out  of  self,  and  lives  on  self,  and  hangs  on 
self,  and  fattens  on  self,  no  matter  how  green  it 
may  be,  verily,  verily,  it  shall  be  dried  up. 

IV.  Lastly,  the  Lord  makes  ''tlie  dry  tree  to  flour- 
ishy  There  are  some  dry  trees  to  be  pitied  in  their 
present  condition,  yet  to  be  congratulated  on  their 
prospects.  I  would  not  say  a  word  to  encourage 
doubting,  but  1  would  say  a  great  many  words  to 
encourage  doubters.  How  many  of  God's  people 
may  be  fitly  compared  to  a  dry  tree !  They  have 
little  joy;  they  have  not  got  to  full  assurance. 
They  are  afraid  to  say,  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and 
I  am  his."  Every  night  before  they  go  to  bed  they 
feel  such  a  consciousness  of  sin  that  they  can  hard- 
ly sleep.  They  feel  themselves  so  weak  that  where 
others  go  and  think  nothing  of  it,  they  dare  not 
trust  themselves.  They  are  afraid  to  risk  tempta- 
tion ;  sometimes  they  are  so  conscious  of  their  own 
weakness,  that  they  do  not  exert  themselves  as 
they  ought,  and  hence  their  low  spirits,  their  mel- 
ancholy, and  their  mourning.  They  think  they  are 
of  no  use  to  the  church ;  they  are  half  inclined  to 
suspect  it  was  a  mistake  for  them  to  be  baptized, 
and  that  they  were  to  blame  for  uniting  themselves 
with  the  people  of  God.  "  Oh,"  say  they,  "  If  I  be 
a  lamb,  I  am  the  sickliest  of  the  whole  flock." 
Were  I  an  heir  of  promise,  should  I  feel  the  assaults 
of  sin  as  I  do?  or  should  I  be,  so  much  the  prey  of 
indwelling  corruption,  acd  become  so  dry  and  with.*- 


TO    THE    RESCUE.  385 

ered  ?  Do  they  retire  to  the  closet  to  pray,  hardly 
a  word  can  they  utter.  They  come  to  the  assem- 
bly of  believers,  and  though  they  do  sing  with 
their  lips,  the  heart  cannot  sing  as  it  would. 
There  are  times,  too,  when  walking  home  they  say 
"  I  go  where  others  go,  but  I  get  no  comfort;  if  I 
were  really  the  Lord's,  should  I  be  thus;  if  I  did 
trust  Christ,  should  I  ever  be  so  languid  ?  "  Breth- 
ren, if  it  is  of  your  own  bringing  about  that  you 
are  thus  dry,  I  do  not  offer  you  any  comfort;  but 
if  the  Holy  Spirit  has  led  you  to  see  your  weak- 
ness, your  nothingness,  your  deadness,  then  Lam 
glad  you  have  been  brought  to  this  pass,  for  God 
will  cause  the  dry  tree  to  flourish.  When  we  are 
weak,  then  are  we  strong.  The  death  warrant  is 
gone  out  from  God  against  everything  that  is  of 
the  creature.  All  that  is  of  nature's  spinning 
must  be  unravelled;  not  your  bad  nature  only, 
but  your  good  nature:  not  your  vices  only,  but 
your  virtues;  not  your  sins  alone,  but  your  graces; 
all  these  must  be  contemned  and  despised  so 
far  as  you  venture  to  put  them  in  the  place  of 
Christ.  You  must  cry,  "Away  with  them;  away 
with  them,"  as  if  they  were  so  much  dung  and 
dross.  Christ's  blood  only  for  our  hope,  the 
Spirit's  work  only  for  our  life.  Here  let  us  stand, 
and  we  shall  be  safe.  The  dry  tree  by  divioe 
grace  shall  flourish;  the  green  tree,  deserted  by 
the  dew  of  heaven,  shall  dry  up.  The  low  tree, 
fostered  by  the  husbandman,  shall  mount  even 
to  the  stars;  the  high  tree,  cut  down  by  the  ax6 


3   6  STORM  SIGNALS. 

of  judgment,  shall  lay  outstretched  along  the  plains 
of  ruin  forever. 

I  think  I  see  the  last  great  day.  There  is  a 
greater  forest  than  this;  this  is  but  one  corner  of 
it.  I  see  that  forest  stretched  over  sea  and  land, 
over  mountain  and  valley.  It  is  a  forest  of  men. 
There  stand  the  Pharisees,  the  self-righteous,  the 
tyrants,  the  autocrats  of  haughty  mein,  the  men  of 
profound  intellect  with  lofty  brows;  the  men  that 
questioned  God's  government,  the  infidels  who 
said  "  Atheos,"  and  denied  his  being.  I  see  the 
high  trees,  that  towered  to  such  an  elevation,  and 
attracted  so  much  admiration;  and  there,  too,  are 
the  low  trees  contented  to  be  low,  for  Christ  of 
Nazareth  was  lowly.  He,  whose  disciples  they  are, 
came  riding  on  an  ass  even  in  the  day  of  his  high- 
est earthly  triumph.  And  now  I  hear  the  trumpet 
ring  exceedingly  loud  and  long.  Through  the 
glades  of  that  vast  human  forest  the  sound  comes 
ringing  broad  and  clear:  "Smite!  smite!  smite! 
and  let  all  the  high  trees  fall !  "  0  God,  what  a 
crash  ! 

He  smote  great  kings  and  slew  famous  kings; 
for  his  mercy  endureth  forever.  He  smites.  What ! 
another  crash  ?  the  orthodox  who  rested  in  their 
orthodoxy,  and  the  self-righteous  men  and  womeu 
fall  there;  yonder  the  philosophic  atheist,  and  here 
the  scoffing  skeptic;  there  the  haughty  persecutor, 
and  there  again  the  pompous  priest  and  pretentious 
ceremonialist.  Gather  them  in ;  Tophet  ordained  of 
old,  pile  them  together,  cfedar  upon  oak,  and  elm 


TO    THE    RESCUE.  387 

upon  fir,  gather  them  together;  pile  them  on,  pile 
them  up ;  let  the  breath  of  the  Lord,  like  a  stream 
of  brimstone,  come  upon  the  mighty  pile.  It  is  of 
the  funeral  pyre  of  the  giants.  There  lies  the  dead 
body  of  sin,  and  here  comes  the  living  spouse 
of  sin  to  be  immolated  upon  that  same  pile. 
Her  name  is  Pride.  She  comes;  they  clasp.  The 
great  transgression  and  the  evil  imagination,  to- 
gether they  lie  down,  and  the  flames  arise.  Now 
the  cedars  full  of  resin  give  forth  their  flame,  the 
sparks  go  up  to  heaven,  and  the  flames  even  unto 
the  throne  of  God,  whilst  I  hear  the  voices  of  mul- 
titudes singing,  "  Hallelujah  !  Hallelujah  !  Hallelu- 
jah !  for  thou  hast  judged  the  great  whore,  even 
Pride,  and  thou  hast  given  her  up  to  be  burned 
with  fire  ! "  But  what  of  you,  what  of  you,  that 
will  be  faggots  to  that  great  burning  ?  What  of 
you,  proud  sons  of  men,  that  will  be  fuel  to  that 
flame  ?  Turn  ye.  Turn  ye  !  Fly  ye  to  Christ,  and 
then  you  shall  stand  in  the  judgment,  and  join  in 
the  anthem,  "  Hallelujah  !  Hallelujah !  Hallelujah  ! " 
*'  Be  wise  now  therefore,  0  ye  kings:  be  instructed, 
ye  judges  of  the  earth.  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear, 
and  rejoice  with  trembling.  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he 
be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way  when  his 
wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little.  Blessed  are  all  they 
that  put  their  trust  in  him."  Oh,  that  we  all  may 
be  found  among  the  humble — not  the  haughty — 
in  our  present  life,  and  that  we  may  be  gathered 
among  the  blessed,  not  destroyed  among  those 
whom  the  Lord  abhorreth,  in  our  future  destiny! 


Clje  ILtons*  ©en. 

*•  O  Danisl,  servant  of  the  living  God,  is  thy  God,  whom  thou 
servest  continually,  able  to  deliver  thee  from  the  lions  ?  " — Daniel 
vi,  20. 

'T^HE  empire  of  Babylonia  and  Chaldea  passed 
-*-  into  the  hands  of  a  new  dynasty,  and  king 
Belshazzar  was  slain  in  a  night-assault  upon  his 
capital.  On  that  very  night  he  had  clothed  Daniel 
in  scarlet,  and  made  him  a  prince  of  the  realm. 
This  was  providential ;  for  had  Daniel  been  in  ob- 
scurity, he  would  have  been  little  likely  to  attract 
the  notice  of  Darius:  but  observing  him  in  the  pal- 
ace, clothed  in  scarlet,  Darius  would  naturally  ask 
who  he  was,  and  inquire  into  his  antecedents. 
The  fame  of  his  wisdom  would  be  quickly  told,  and 
the  fact  of  his  having  twice  interpreted  the  dreams 
ot  Nebuchadnezzar  informer  times,  and  of  his  hav- 
ing just  then,  with  startling  precision,  foretold  the 
downfall  of  Belshazzar,  and  the  capture  of  the  city 
by  the  Meades  and  Persians,  would  be  eagerly  re- 
lated. Hence  it  is  not  at  all  surprising  that  Darius 
took  great  notice  of  Daniel,  weighed  his  character, 
observed  his  conduct,  and  after  a  while  exalted 
him  to  be  prime  minister  of  his  realm.     You  see 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  389 

Daniel  thus  raised  to  the  highest  point  of  distinction 
and  dignity  and  dominion ;  and  forthwith  his  pros- 
perity and  his  honors  excite  the  envy  of  the  cour- 
tiers. Full  of  sullen  spite,  brimming  over  with 
jealousy,  they  gnashed  their  teeth  at  him.  Presi- 
dents and  princes  conspired  together  to  cast  him 
down  with  calumnious  accusations.  We  are  wont 
to  say  that  any  stick  will  do  to  beat  a  dog  with ; 
and  so  they  looked  about  for  any  charge  with 
which  they  might  assail  him.  I  have  no  doubt 
they  watched  him  constantly,  waited  eagerly  for 
his  halting,  all  the  while  basely  flattering  the  man 
they  wanted  to  trip  up.  Can  they  discover  a  flaw 
in  his  accounts?  Can  they  question  the  impar- 
tiality of  his  judgment  ?  Can  they  detect  a  lack  of 
loyalty  in  the  administration  of  his  government? 
Can  they  find  fault  with  his  private  life?  Nay; 
but  is  there  nothing  against  him  ?  Is  Daniel  such 
a  four-square  man  that  he  is  more  than  a  match  for 
them?  I  can  well  believe  that  they  hunted  him 
here  and  there  till  their  haughty  faces  grew  hag- 
gard in  the  vain  effort  to  find  a  cause  of  complaint, 
and  that  they  set  spies  to  skulk  about  his  house 
and  mark  his  movements;  and,  in  fact,  they  stooped 
to  the  meanest  stratagems,  little  heeding  how 
much  they  compromised  themselves,  if  they  might 
but  compass  his  downfall.  But  his  integrity  was 
proof  against  their  devices.  ,  The  more  closely  they 
observed  him,  the  more  clearly  they  discerned  that 
he  was  always  diligent,  discreet,  and  devout.  So 
conscientious    and    so    uniformly    consistent   was 


390  STORM  SIGNALS. 

Daniel  both  in  his  character  and  his  conduct, 
that  every  effort  to  entangle  him  in  the  meshes  of 
their  conspiracy  proved  to  be  vain. 

At  length  the  devil,  who  does  not  often  run  short 
of  devices,  puts  them  up  to  a  fresh  plot.     0  Satan, » 
thou  art  full  of  all  subtlety  !     "  Let  us  contrive  a 
new  law,"  say  they,  "  that  shall  bring  his  piety  and 
his  patriotism  into  conflict.     He  is  a   Hebrew  by 
birth,  and  in  one  only  God  he  believes  with  all  his 
heart.     Our  divinities   he   despises;   towards   our 
temples  he  shows  a  silent  scorn ;  he  sets  no  value 
on  the  magnificent  statues  that  we  venerate;  three 
times  a  day  he  has  been  accustomed  to  offer  prayer 
to  an  invisible  Protector  whom  he  calls  '  the  living 
God,  »Jehovah  '  ;  surely  these  peculiarities  will  isup- 
ply  us  with  a  pretext,  and  we  will  pledge  ourselves 
to  entrap  him."     So  they  hie  ofl'to  their  homes  and, 
Full   of  hope,  they   reflect    on    their  new    scheme. 
Soon  they  meet  again,  lay  their  evil  heads  together 
and  devise  as  cunning  a  snare  as  they  could  possibly 
invent ;  and  yet,  clever  as  they  were,  they  perished 
in  the  trap  they  had  prepared.     They  managed  to 
involve  the  king  himself  in  their  iniquitous  device, 
and  to  entangle  him  in   such  a  dilemma  that  he 
must  either  sacrifice  his  favorite  courtier,  or  com- 
promise his  own  truthfulness,  and  violate  the  sacred 
traditions   of  the   empire.     A    royal    statute   was 
framed,  and  a  decree  published,  forbidding  any  peti- 
tion to  be  asked  of  God  or  man  for  thirty  days. 
How  preposterous ! 

But  when  was  there  ever  a  despot  who  was  not 


THE   LIONS'    DEN.  391 

sooner  or  later  deserted  of  his  wits  ?  The  passion 
for  power,  when  indulged  without  restraint,  will 
lead  a  man  to  the  utmost  foolishness,  and  urge  him 
to  a  madness  of  vanity.  In  such  a  false  position 
did  the  monarch  stand  who  was  easily  persuaded 
to  utter  the  infamous  edict  that  his  subjects  should 
not  ask  any  favor  of  either  God  or  man,  save  of  his 
supreme  self,  for  the  space  of  a  whole  month.  In 
this  strait  how  does  Daniel  acquit  himself? 
Will  he  abscond  ?  Will  he  count  it  prudent  to  de- 
sert his  post,  and  get  out  of  the  way  ?  Nay,  but 
Daniel  had  a  soul  above  such  policy.  And  yet  you 
might  imagine  that  if  he  must  pray,  he  would  go 
down  into  the  cellar,  or  offer  his  supplications  to  God 
in  some  retired  place  where  he  need  not  challenge 
notice.  His  petitions  will  be  heard  in  heaven  with- 
out respect  to  the  place  from  which  they  are  pre- 
sented. Or  it  might  have  been  expedient  to  sus- 
pend the  vocal  utterance  of  prayer,  and  breathe  out 
his  supplications  with  a  silent  tongue.  Daniel 
however,  was  a  servant  of  the  living  God,  and 
therefore  he  scorned  thus  to  temporize  and  play  the 
coward.  Well  does  one  of  the  old  writers  call  him 
"  Coeur  de  Lion."  He  had  the  heart  of  a  lion.  Into 
that  cage  of  lions  he  went,  a  lion-like  man — not 
cruel,  like  the  beasts  of  the  forest,  but  more  cour- 
ageous than  they  all.  His  conscience  toward  God 
was  clean,  and  the  cause  he  pursued  before  his  fel- 
low-creatures was  clear.  His  sense  of  truth  would 
not  suffer  him  to  be  a  trimmer.  He  does  not  change 
his  habit,  but  goes  upstairs,  though  he  might  have 


392  STORM   SIGNALS. 

knowQ  that  it  was  like  climbing  the  gallows;  he 
drops  upon  his  knees,  puts  his  hands  together,  with 
the  window  open,  in  the  presence  of  all  his  adver- 
saries, and  there  he  prays  three  times  a  day  to- 
wards Jerusalem,  as  he  had  done  aforetime.  Brave 
old  man  !  Kemember,  this  was  not  the  sudden  im- 
pulse of  one  who  felt  the  flush  of  youth;  but  it  was 
the  calm  decision  of  one  who  was  venerable  with 
age,  having  already  fulfilled  threescore  years  and 
ten  of  life's  pilgrimage,  and  performed  deeds  of 
public  service  that  might  have  well  entitled  him  to 
do  garrison  duty  for  the  rest  of  his  days.  So  much 
the  more  do  we  value  the  example  of  Daniel, 
because  with  grave  decision  he  taught  the  captives 
of  Judah,  both  old  and  young,  to  prove  their  fidel- 
ity to  the  Lord  God  of  hosts.  He  prays  openly, 
not  ostentatiously:  in  the  spirit  of  a  Protestant 
rather  than  in  the  fashion  of  a  Pharisee:  he  sought 
no  honor,  but  he  shunned  no  danger.  To  encounter 
shame,  or  to  endure  reproach,  if  needful,  for  the 
cause  of  righteousness,  had  long  been  his  fixed  habit, 
and  now  that  it  threatens  to  bring  on  swift  death, 
he  swerves  not.  Hear  those  quick  feet  as  they 
patter  along  the  streets  of  Shusan.  How  all  the 
counselors  and  captains  are  coming  together ! 
What  is  doing  ?  There  is  mischief  brewing  full 
often  when  nobles  and  statesmen  meet  in  council 
with  closed  doors ;  especially  was  it  so  in  the  olden 
times.  They  are  going  to  seek  an  interview  with 
the  king.  What  calls  them  thither  ?  Noble  pat- 
riots !     They  are  anxious  to  inform  his  majesty  that 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  393 

they  had  caught  Daniel  committing  the  horrible 
crime  of  prayer.  Was  not  this  a  new  offence? 
Oh,  no  !  dear  friends,  the  first  man  that  ever  died 
fell  a  victim  to  his  religion;  and  so,  I  suppose,  for 
many  and  many  a  century  this  was  one  of  the  foul- 
est offences  a  man  could  commit  against  society. 
Those  who  served  the  living  and  the  true  God  are 
sure  to  challenge  the  sneers  of  the  time-servers  in 
any  age.  There  be  many  now  who  hate  nothing  so 
much  as  a  religious  man.  All  the  epithets  in  the 
catalogue  of  scandal  are  too  good  for  the  man  who 
offers  homage  to  God  in  everything  that  betides 
him.  An  infidel!  well,  he  may  be  reputed  honest, 
intelligent,  and  worthy  of  respect;  but  a  genuine 
Christian  is  denounced  as  a  hypocrite  at  once. 
Awav  with  such  a  fellow;  his  conscience  is  as  often- 
sive  as  his  creed!  Toleration  for  everything  and 
everybody  who  conforms  to  the  fashion  of  the  day; 
but  no  toleration  for  any  one  who  believes  that  the 
laws  of  heaven  should  regulate  his  life  on  earth. 

So  they  told  the  king  that  the  laws  of  his  em- 
pire must  be  kept  inviolate ;  good,  loyal  souls  as 
they  were,  they  would  not  have  a  statute  broken 
for  the  world  !  There  is  an  end  to  your  monarchy 
if  your  royal  proclamations  are  not  to  be  respected ! 
They  are  so  jealous  for  the  common  weal,  and  so 
earnest  for  the  king's  honor,  that  they  must,  at  all 
hazards,  even  if  it  be  at  the  risk  of  seeing  their 
dear  friend  Daniel  put  into  the  lion's  den,  maintain 
the  dignity  of  the  king,  and  assert  the  majesty  of 
his  imperial  edict.     The  king  perceives  that  he  is 


394  STORM  SIGNALS. 

caught,  calls  some  of  his  counselors  together, 
thinks  the  matter  over,  and,  finding  no  alternative, 
gives  Daniel  up  to  the  conspirators.  Alas  !  I  see 
the  godly  man  flung  in  among  the  lions;  but  what 
do  I  hear  ?  Do  I  hear  his  bones  cracking  ?  Can  I 
hear  a  shriek  of  the  prophet  ?  Is  there  a  noise  of 
the  howling  of  those  savage  beasts  of  prey  ?  Oh, 
no !  There  is  an  awful  hush  while  the  king  puts 
his  seal  upon  the  stone,  and  all  the  lords  come  and 
attach  their  signets  likewise.  Shall  we  step  down 
and  peer  into  the  den,  to  see  what  is  going  on  ? 
No  sooner  had  Daniel  arrived  at  his  destination 
than  an  angel  of  God  encamped  in  that  dungeon. 
Stretching  his  broad  wings,  he  seems  to  have  fixed 
his  station  in  full  front  of  those  grim  old  Neros. 
The  safety  of  Daniel  was  secured.  The  mouths  of 
the  lions  were  shut.  They  lay  down  like  lambs. 
Perhaps  Daniel  found  a  comfortable  pillow  for  his 
night's  rest  upon  the  shaggy  body  of  one  of  those 
monsters  that  would  have  devoured  him  had  not 
the  heavenly  visitant  hushed  them  into  silence  by  his 
presence;  or  perhaps  the  appearance  of  the  angel 
was  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  wrought  an  illusion  be- 
fore the  lions'  eyes,  so  that  Daniel  seemed  to  them 
to  be  surrounded  with  flame,  or  robed  with  fire. 
At  any  rate,  that  night  the  prophecy  of  the  latter 
days  was  fulfilled  to  the  letter,  that  the  lamb  shall 
lie  down  with  the  lion.  God  in  his  providence 
and  grace  preserves  his  servant  all  that  night.  We 
can  easily  imagine  that,  like  Paul  and  Silas,  when 
he  did  not  sleep,  he  made  the  lions'  den  vocal  with 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  395 

his  songs,  and  the  lions  growled  the  bass  while 
God's  angel  stood  there  listening  to  such  music  as 
he  had  never  heard  before,  till  the  morning  dawned, 
and  then  he  sped  his  way  up  to  heaven  as  the 
king  came  to  fetch  Daniel  out  of  his  prison-house. 
So  Daniel  was  delivered,  and  his  foes  were  con- 
founded. There  is  the  story;  now,  what  lessons 
are  we  to  learn  from  it  ? 

Well  now,  first  I  want  to  set  before  you  Daniel's 
early  and  entire  consecration  to  the  service  of  God. 
The  King  said,  "  Thy  God,  whom  thou  servest 
continually."  This  is  no  empty  compliment.  His 
scrupulous  uprightness  had  become  so  habitual 
that  it  was  like  an  instinct  of  his  nature.  Daniel 
began  to  serve  God  in  his  youth.  The  fear  of  the 
Lord  was  implanted  in  his  heart  from  the  very 
daybreak  of  his  existence.  There  are  no  saints  to 
be  compared  with  those  who  were  set  apart  from 
the  nursery,  whose  childish  minds  were  imbued 
with  heavenly  truths  as  soon  as  their  infant  lips 
began  to  lisp  them:  just  as  there  are  no  sinners  so 
inured  to  wickedness  as  those  who  are  bred  and 
trained  in  haunts  of  vice,  tutored  from  their  cradle 
to  utter  profane  words,  and  prone  to  act,  as  they 
think  bravely,  in  defiance  of  every  precept  of  the 
Decalogue,  till  they  become  proficients  in  every 
kind  of  profligacy.  They  who  give  their  morning 
to  God,  shall  find  that  in  beginning  early  they  can 
keep  pace  with  their  work  all  the  day.  Happy 
Daniel,  thus  continually  to  serve  his  God  from  his 
youth  up  !     Yet  it  was  not  the  good  fortune  of  his 


396  STORM   SIGNALS. 

birth  that  gilded  his  name  with  glory.  Far  from 
that;  it  was  his  sad  hap  to  be  carried  away  captive 
from  his  native  land  while  but  a  stripling.  Alien- 
ated from  the  home  of  his  ancestors,  he  was  taken 
to  the  palace  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  there,  with 
three  other  youths,  he  was  entered  as  a  bursar  in 
a  heathen  school,  to  be  instructed  in  the  strange 
literature  of  a  strange  nation,  and  so  to  become  one 
of  the  king's  learned  men — a  magician.  His  fealty 
to  the  faith  of  his  forefathers  was  at  once  put  to 
tlie  proof.  Certain  food  that  was  repugnant  to 
his  conscience  was  served  up  to  table  every  day. 
Probably  it  had  been  offered  in  sacrifice  to  a  false 
god.  Daniel  feels  he  would  be  polluted  by  partak- 
ing of  it.  He,  therefore,  with  his  companions,  re- 
fuses either  to  eat  the  king's  meat  or  to  drink  the 
king's  wine.  As  a  total  abstainer,  he  drank  noth- 
ing but  water;  and  as  a  vegetarian,  he  ate  nothing 
but  simple  pulse.  With  no  desire  to  please  his 
palate,  it  was  his  delight  to  serve  his  God  continu- 
ally. Another  man  might  have  thought  it  mattered 
little  what  he  ate  and  drank;  for  Daniel  the  jots 
and  tittles  of  divine  revelation  had  a  meaning. 
He  could  not,  ay,  he  dared  not,  go  contrary  to  the 
law  of  his  God,  even  with  regard  to  meats  and 
drinks.  Though  far  from  the  land  that  Jehovah 
cared  for,  he  longed  to  live  in  the  light  of  God's 
countenance.  Strict  obedience  to  God  has  a  swift 
reward.  His  face  soon  became  fairer  than  the  faces 
of  those  who  fed  on  the  royal  diet.  But  know  this, 
brethren,  it  needs  courage  to  serve  God  continually. 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  397 

At  length  the  time  arrives  when  Daniel  is  to  be 
brought  from  private  tuition  into  public  notice. 
Nebuchadnezzar  has  been  distressed  by  a  dream, 
which  his  astrologers  cannot  apprehend,  and  his 
soothsayers  try  in  vain  to  search  out.  To  Daniel 
alone,  who  served  his  God  continually,  the  secret 
is  revealed.  Of  that  vision  1  do  not  now  attempt 
to  speak.  But  with  what  nobility  of  heart  does 
Daniel  stand  before  the  king !  He  does  not 
tremble  before  the  earthly  potentate;  nor  does  he 
conceal  the  name  of  the  God  in  heaven  who  in- 
spires him  with  wisdom.  He  recalls  the  forgotten 
dream,  and  forthwith  he  is  exalted;  made  a  great 
man  in  the  realm;  and  set  in  the  king's  gate.  He 
becomes,  so  to  speak,  the  king's  privy-chaplain. 
Still  he  goes  on  to  serve  his  God  continually.  Ob- 
scurity could  not  hinder  him,  publicity  cannot  mis- 
lead him.  Again  the  king  dreams;  again  Daniel 
boldly  explains,  though  that  explanation  is  to  the 
effect  that  the  haughty  monarch  shall  be  driven  as 
a  lunatic  from  the  abodes  of  men. 

"  Fearless,  himself  a  dying  man, 
Of  dying  men's  esteem," 

he  serves  his  God  continually. 

For  a  while  Daniel  retires  into  the  shade.  You 
hear  nothing  of  him  till  Belshazzar  ascends  the 
throne,  but  he  is  still  serving  his  God;  I  doubt  not 
sometimes  ministering  to  his  poorer  brethren,  and 
visiting  the  sick,  but  constantly  in  his  chamber,  by 
prayer  and  by  study  of  the  Scriptures,  seeking  and 


398  STORM   SIGNALS. 

finding  communion  with  the  Most  High.  On  a 
sudden  Belshazzar  summons  him  to  his  presence. 
There  is  a  mysterious  writing  on  the  wall,  which 
can  be  read  by  no  eye,  and  interpreted  by  no  lip 
but  his.  He  is  not  disconcerted,  but  ready  at  the 
call  of  royalty.  To  court  he  comes.  Oh,  with 
what  simple  dignity,  with  what  sublime  compo- 
sure, with  what  heroic  courage,  does  the  man  of 
God,  bending  now  beneath  the  weight  of  years, 
tell  the  proud  monarch,  who  might  cut  him  in 
pieces  if  he  willed,  of  his  immediate  doom :  "  Thou 
art  weighed  in  the  balances  and  art  found  want- 
ing"! If  you  want  to  find  a  counterpart  of  John 
Knox  in  the  Bible,  I  do  not  know,  leaving  out 
Elijah,  where  you  will  find  a  rival  to  Daniel.  How 
confidently  he  speaks:  "This  is  the  writing"! 
And  again:  ''  This  is  the  interpretation."  His  word 
commends  itself  to  the  conscience.  No  man  dare 
gainsay  it.  He  is  promoted  to  the  highest  honor  in 
the  realm.  And  now  what  will  he  do  ?  There  has 
been  a  change  of  monarchs,  but  there  is  no  change 
in  Daniel.  No  time-server,  he  stands  to  his  princi- 
ples at  all  times.  "  Servant  of  the  living  God  "  is 
bis  title.  He  had  taken  for  his  motto,  when  he  be- 
gan life,  "I  serve";  and  he  retains  the  motto  to 
bis  life's  close.  The  glory  of  his  God  was  his  one 
Dbject  throughout  all  his  days.  He  never  swerved. 
He  is  now  lifted  to  a  higher  post  of  dignity  than 
he  had  ever  been  raised  to  before.  He  is  prime- 
minister  of  the  greatest  monarch  of  the  age;  yet  he 
refuses  the  idolatry  of  the  heathen,  and  maintains 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  399 

his  allegiance  to  him  who  ruleth  in  the  heavens. 
They  can  find  no  flaw  in  him,  though  the  eyes  of 
envy  watch  him  from  early  morn  to  dewy  eve. 
Oh,  my  brethren,  it  is  a  hard  thing  to  serve  God  in 
high  places  !  Many  a  man  did  seem  to  adorn  the 
doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  when  humbly  earning 
his  livelihood  by  the  toil  of  his  hands,  and  eating 
his  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  face;  but  afterwards 
when  advanced  to  ease  and  ooulence,  he  turned 
his  back  upon  his  friends,  and  forsook  his  Lord. 
Be  very  jealous  of  yourselves  if  you  are  rising  in 
the  world.  Riches  are  deceitful.  It  is  not  easy  to 
walk  on  a  high  rope.  What  lamentable  accidents 
have  befallen  those  who  have  thus  risked  their 
lives !  Let  us  be  the  more  circumspect  when  we 
are  called  to  walk  in  high  places.  Popular- 
ity and  fame,  riches  and  honor,  are  among  the 
sharpest  trials  of  integrity  that  mortal  man  can  pass 
through.  Daniel  could  endure  them  all  without 
his  head  growing  giddy,  for  he  served  his  God 
continually. 

Now  note  the  effect  of  what  Daniel  did.  It  is 
comparatively  easy  to  follow  the  Lord  in  bright 
days;  but  the  sun  of  prosperity  suddenly  darkens, 
and  the  man  of  God  is  encompassed  with  perils. 
If  he  continues  in  his  holy  cause,  he  will  forfeit  the 
king's  favor  and  lose  his  life  in  the  most  dreadful 
manner.  What  will  Daniel's  determination  be  ? 
Oh,  the  true  grit  is  in  him  !  He  is  a  blade  of  the 
true  Jerusalem  manufacture,  and  is  not  to  be 
broken.     He  will   do  just   as  he  did  before.     He 


400  STORM  SIGNALS. 

opens  his  window,  and  in  the  same  posture,  down 
on  his  knees,  he  prays,  as  he  did  aforetime.  Glory- 
be  unto  the  God  of  Daniel,  who  made  and  who 
kept  such  a  man  with  his  head  clear  in  the  crisis, 
with  his  heart  pure  in  the  midst  of  persecution, 
and  his  feet  steadfast  to  the  end.  Ah  !  dear  friends 
some  of  us  little  know  what  these  pinches  mean. 
There  are  a  few  of  you  that  do.  You  have  endured 
torture  without  accepting  deliverance.  I  have  felt 
a  holy  pride  in  some  of  you  when  I  have  seen  how 
you  have  borne  trial.  Witness  the  man  who  has 
a  shop,  which  brings  him  in  more  profit  on  a  Sun- 
day than  it  does  all  the  rest  of  the  days  of  the  week, 
and  he  says,  "  Come,  it  must  be  one  thing  or  an- 
other; I  cannot  go  to  the  Tabernacle  and  keep  my 
shop  open  too;  which  shall  it  be?"  His  faith 
proves  stronger  than  his  fear.  The  shutters  are 
closed  on  the  first  day  of  the  week.  His  business 
goes;  he  loses  everything;  and  yet  he  does  not  re- 
gret it,  he  parts  with  ill-gotten  gain  without  a 
grudge,  and  goes  back  to  hard  manual  labor  again 
with  a  moral  satisfaction  and  a  manifest  ease  of  con- 
science that  that  he  never  knew  before.  Dear  souls, 
your  Pastor  is  proud  of  you.  I  feel  that  I  can 
thank  God  and  take  courage,  since  the  gospel  of 
Christ  educates  and  brings  up  such  men — such 
simple,  honest  servants  of  the  living  God;  and 
when  I  have  seen  young  men  serving  in  a  shop 
who,  when  asked  to  do  something  positively  dis- 
honest, have  at  first  mildly  answered  that  they 
could  not,  and  when  told  that  they   must  either 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  401 

comply  or  retire,  they  have  boldly  said,  "  Then  I 
will  leave,"  I  have  felt  how  highly  honored  I 
am  of  God  to  have  such  men  in  our  ranks.  My 
eminent  predecessor,  Dr.  Gill,  was  told  by  a  certain 
member  of  his  congregation,  who  ought  to  have 
known  better,  that  if  he  published  his  book,  "The 
Cause  of  God  and  Truth,"  he  would  lose  some 
of  his  best  friends,  and  that  his  income  would 
fall  off;  and  the  Doctor  said,  "  I  can  afford  to 
be  poor,  but  I  cannot  afford  to  injure  my  con- 
science." The  devil  and  the  deceit  of  your  own 
heart  will  readily  suggest  that  you  must  look 
after  your  family.  And  some  good  Christian 
people  mistake  prudence  for  piety.  I  dare  say, 
had  Daniel  gone  to  consult  Mr.  Prudent-Thrifty, 
and  ask  his  advice,  he  would  have  said,  "  Well, 
you  see,  it  is  a  very  important  thing  for  us  to 
have  you  at  the  head  of  affairs;  I  do  not  think 
you  ought  to  throw  away  such  an  opportunity  as 
you  have  of  doing  good.  It  is  not  absolutely  ne- 
cessary for  you  to  pray  for  thirty  days  !  We)e 
it  not  better  for  you  to  trim  a  little,  and  yield  a 
point  or  two?  You  do  distinguished  service  to 
our  cause,  and  by  keeping  your  position  you  will  be 
putting  your  foes  to  a  non-plus.  By  compromise 
you  will  obtain  concessions.  Worldly  wisdom  is 
worth  your  study."  This  the  way  that  fools  are 
beguiled,  and  in  this  way  many  Christians,  alas! 
drift  from  their  moorings.  To  plead  the  present 
distress  is,  for  the  most  part,  a  mere  pretence. 
"  Let  us  do  evil  that  good   may  come,"  never  was 


4:02  STORM   SIGNALS. 

in  the  code  of  Old  Testament  or  New  Testament 
truth.  I  remember  a  notable  instance  some  years 
ago  of  this  fallacious  reasoning.  A  reflection  was 
cast  on  the  career  of  a  distinguished  clergyman, 
who  resigned  his  connection  with  the  Established 
Church,  and,  after  much  consideration,  allied  him- 
self with  the  Baptists.  "  Did  he  gain  credit,"  it 
was  asked,  "  or  increase  his  congregation  by  the 
change?*'  What  of  that?  The  answer  is  easy. 
Let  conscience  assert  its  supremacy;  for  circum- 
stances do  not  weigh  a  feather  in  the  scale.  Long 
departed  frora  among  us,  we  may  still  speak  of  him 
as  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  Baptist  Noel;  and  he  was  right 
and  righteous  in  his  decision,  as  one  who  feared 
the  Lord  in  the  face  of  any  loss.  If  by  stopping 
where  he  thought  he  ought  not  to  stop,  or  by  con- 
forming to  what  he  believed  to  be  a  corrupt  corpo- 
ration, he  could  have  saved  multitudes  of  souls,  the 
good  done  to  others  would  not  have  extenuated 
the  guilt  incurred  by  himself  You  and  I  have 
nothing  at  all  to  do  with  consequences.  Be  it 
ours  to  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and 
obey  his  high  behests.  When  God  prompts  our 
conscience  to  a^  course  of  action,  the  slightest 
demur  will  recoil  with  a  sense  of  guilt  intolerable. 
Fiat  justitia^  mat  ccelum  is  an  old  adage.  Tliough 
the  heavens  should  fall  by  our  doing  right,  we 
are  not  tu  sin  in  order  to  keep  them  up.  At  the 
call  of  duty  never  parley  with  danger.  Should 
everything  seem  to  go  amiss  with  us  after  we 
have  done  the  right  thing,  there  is  no  cause  for 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  403 

regret.     Remember  that  our  conduct  is  the  maker 
of  our  character. 

*•  Though  dark  be  the  way, 
Since  he  is  my  guide, 
'Tis  mine  to  obey, 
'Tis  his  to  provide." 

**  Though  cisterns  be  broken. 
And  creatures  all  fail, 
The  word  he  has  spoken 
ShaU  surely  prevaiL" 

Ye  men  of  faith,  hoist  your  colors !  Leave  to 
your  God  the  providing:  stick  ye  to  the  obeying. 
Learn  your  duty,  and  do  it  bravely.  Through 
floods  and  through  flames,  if  Jesus  leads,  follow 
on,  never  dubious  that  your  welfare  is  assured. 
That  all-absorbing  zeal  which  is  deaf  to  remons- 
trance, and  urges  ever  its  onward  march,  crying, 
"Hinder  me  not,"  makes  light  of  the  cross  a  man 
has  to  carry  in  prospect  of  the  crown  of  glory 
awaiting  him  at  the  end  of  his  brief  life's  campaign. 
Here,  dear  friends,  I  would  remark  that  the  only 
service  to  God  which  is  real,  genuine,  remunerative, 
is  this  continual  service  that  sticks  at  nothing.  Any 
hungry  dog  will  follow  you  in  the  streets  if  you 
do  but  entice  him  with  a  piece  of  meat,  or  a  bit  of 
biscuit.  How  closely  he  keeps  to  your  heels  !  but 
after  a  while  the  bait  is  gone,  and  the  dog  retreats. 
That  is  like  many  a  professor.  There  is  some  little 
pleasure  in  religion,  or  some  advantage,  and  so  he 
follows  Christ;  but  after  a  while  there  is  an  at- 
traction   elsewhere,    and    the    brute,    impelled    by 


404  STORM  SIGNALS. 

greed  rather  than  gratitude,  pursues  it.  Of  such 
a  cur  I  would  never  make  a  pet.  Thus  do  false 
professors  forsake  Christ,  whom  they  never  did 
really  follow.  But  I  have  seen  a  man  sometimes 
on  horseback,  splashing  the  mud  about;  and  I  have 
seen  his  dog  keeping  close  at  the  horse's  heels — 
up  hill  and  down  dale — whether  the  road  were 
Btnooth  or  rough,  what  matters  it  to  the  faithful 
hound  ?  His  master  was  before  him,  so  on  he  went. 
That  is  the  only  kind  of  dog  I  would  care  to  own ; 
and  I  believe  this  is  the  only  sort  of  follower  that 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  willing  to  acknowledge. 
Oh,  those  time-servers,  who  look  one  way  and  pull 
the  other,  like  the  wherry-men  upon  the  stream  ! 
As  for  the  Lord  Fair-Speech,  Lord  Time-Server, 
Mr.  Smooth-Man,  Mr.  Anything,  Mr.  Facing-both- 
Ways,  Mr.  Two-Tongues,  and  all  the  members 
of  their  club,  Mr.  By-Ends  included,  the  entire 
company  of  them  will  be  swept  away  when 
the  Judge  comes  with  the  besom  of  destruction. 
I  know  you  feel  the  force  of  this.  How  you 
loathe  a  friend  who  will  not  stick  to  you  in 
dark  times !  Do  you  remember  that  companion 
of  yours  who  used  to  call  in  of  an  evening  and  sit 
and  chat  with  you?  What  a  dear  fellow  he 
seemed  !  You  always  thought  he  was  a  sincere 
friend;  you  liked  him  much,  and  you  confided  in 
his  judgment  as  you  often  took  counsel  together. 
And  all  went  well  till  one  day,  when  the  dark 
clouds  began  to  gather  over  your  head.  It  made 
a  serious  change  in  your  circumstances.     What 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  405 

was  it?     A  severe  loss  in  business,  or  perhaps  a 
bankruptcy.     Now  you  cannot  keep  such  a  well- 
spread  table,  or  wear  so  good  a  hat  as  you  used  to 
do;  there  is  not  so  much  nap  on  your  Sunday  coat; 
you    look    rather  less  thriving    than    in    days  of 
yore.    Pray  tell  me  what  has  become  of  your  friend  ? 
Ah  !  never  mind,  let  him  stop  where  he  is,  for  you 
have  not  suffer^ed  much  loss  by  getting  rid  of  him. 
He  was  never  worth  knowing  before,  but  you  have 
found  out  his  worthlessness  now;  and  I  advise  you 
to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  him.     Do  you  not 
despise  the  character  of  such  a  man  ?     Do  you  not 
feel  in  your  heart,  "  Well,  I  can  forgive  him,  but  I 
will  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  such  a  selfish 
fellow  "  ?     This  is  but  a  picture  of  yourselves  if 
you  try  to  follow  Jesus  Christ  only  when  you  are 
in  the  society  of  his  people,    and   as  easily  lend 
yourselves  to  sing  a  frivolous  or  lewd  song  when 
you  are  with  the  ungodly.     What   is  that  man's 
profession  worth  who  lets  his  tongue  run  loose  with 
flippant  speech   and  vain   conversation  when  he 
gets  into  the  company  of  such  friends  as  are  known 
to  be  sons  of  Behal  ?     Oh,  to  have  a  few  Daniels 
who  will  serve  the  Lord  continually  I     The   only 
way  to  build  up  a  character  which  will  be  proof 
against  the  temptations  of  the  age  and  of  your  own 
immediate  surroundings  is  to  commit  your  cause 
to   God,    as    Daniel    did.     Be    much    in    prayer. 
Prayer  keeps  the   Christian  steadfast.     You  may 
make  a  loud  profession,  but  it  will  not  last  without 
prayer.     Amidst   work  and  worry,   heavy  respoa- 


406  STORM   SIGNALS. 

sibilities  and  incessant  anxiety,  you  had  need  often 
renew  the  confession  of  sin  and  weakness  on  your 
bended  knees.  Then,  again,  you  must  have  a 
lively  faith  in  the  living  and  true  God,  as  the  pro- 
phet had;  for  this  only  can  sustain  you  in  such  a 
warfare.  Is  yourfaith  genuine,  of  the  right  metal  ? 
Spurious  faith  soon  loses  its  edge.  The  Christian 
is  in  hard  straits  if  he  finds  that,  when  most  he 
needs  courage  and  comfort,  all  his  strength  and 
joy  have  departed.  Prove  your  faith  in  the  petty 
skirmishes  of  the  passing  hour,  if  you  would  have 
it  endure  the  perilous  conflicts  of  an  evil  day. 
Have  you  got  a  religion  that  did  not  begin  with 
rigorous  self-denial  ?  Get  rid  of  it.  If  you  have 
religion  that  suits  your  constitutional  fondness  for 
ceremonies,  your  aesthetic  taste  for  culture,  your 
habitual  passion  for  music,  or  the  like,  beware  of 
it,  eschew  it.  The  root  of  all  real  religion  is  sim- 
ple faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  Away  with  every 
counterfeit.  That  faith  which  lives  on  Jesus  only, 
rests  on  Jesus  solely,  builds  on  eJesus  wholly,  and 
shows  itself  in  earnest  prayer,  will  give  you  a  con- 
sistency and  decision  of  character  that  will  make 
you  like  Daniel  all  your  days. 

There  I  leave  this  first  point.  The  next  turns  up 
in  due  course. 

Who  was  this  God  that  Datiiel  served  ?  Daniel's 
God — is  he  worthy  of  our  worship  ?  Poor  Daniel, 
facing  the  forfeit  of  his  life — -thrown  into  a  lions* 
den  for  his  fidelity  to  the  faith  of  his  fathers.  Is 
the  game  worth  the  candle  ?     I  ask  the  question 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  407 

in   all  earnestness,  because  I  feel  positively  sure 
that   multitudes   of  men   have  a  religion  that  in 
their   own  judgment    is   hardly   worth    debating  ' 
about,  far  less  dying  for.     To  my  apprehension,  it 
must  have  been  a  sorry  spectacle  to  watch  a  Papist 
going  to  the  stake  or  the  scaffold — as  many  have 
gone — for  the  maintenance  of  a  fiction  or  a  false- 
hood.    And    I    should    be    surprised    to   see   an 
Agnostic  lay  down  his  life  for  the  defence  of  noth- 
ing; though  of  this  I  can  remember  no  instance.     I 
suppose  that  in  the  natural  order  of  things  Noncon- 
formity  must    sometimes   take   a   negative   form. 
Still,  the  heroes  of  chivalry  and  the  martyrs  of  the 
church  were  never  recruited  from  any  society  of 
cosmopolitans,  who  own  no  country  as  their  own, 
nor  from  any  clique  of  freethinkers  who  acknow- 
ledge no  doctrine  or  dogma  as  the  peculiar  heri- 
tage of  Christians.     But  what  shall  we  say  of  the 
living  and    true    God,  whom  Daniel  delighted  to 
honor?     Is  he  worth,  living  for,   worth   serving, 
worth  dying  for  ?     Doubtless,  the  prophet's  devo- 
tion grew  stronger  with  the  proof  he  made  of  the  i 
Lord's    goodness  and    greatness.     With  childlike 
faith  he  clung  at  first  to  simple  precepts  that  he 
would  not  transgress.     The   revelations  he  after- 
wards received  seem  like  rewards  for  his  unfalter- 
ing  integrity.     In    his    direst    emergencies    God 
manifestly  delivered  him.     He  had  no  other  long- 
ing for  life  than  communion  with  the  Lord  of  all 
the  earth.     From  the  Christian  point  of  view,   he 
was    "a   man   greatly   beloved";   to   the  outside 


408  STORM   SIGNALS. 

heathen  aspect,  he  was  "  a  servant  of  the  living 
God."  But  let  us  repeat  the  question,  that  we 
may  have  thepleasure  of  answering  it  for  ourselves. 
Is  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
worthy  of  our  love  and  our  life  ?  Words  are  want- 
ing to  tell  the  gratitude  and  joy  that  we  cherish 
towards  God,  who  is  rich  in  n>ercy,  for  his  great 
love  wherewith  he  loved  us  even  when  we  were 
dead  in  sins.  By  faith  I  understand  that  the 
blessed  Son  of  God  redeemed  my  soul  with  his  own 
heart's  blood ;  and  by  sweet  experience  I  know  that 
he  raised  me  up  from  the  pit  of  dark  despair,  and 
set  my  feet  on  the  rock.  He  died  for  me.  Ah, 
this  is  the  root  of  every  satisfaction  I  have  !  He 
put  all  my  transgressions  away.  He  cleansed  nie 
with  his  precious  blood;  he  covered  me  with  his 
perfect  righteousness;  he  wrapped  me  up  in  his 
own  virtues.  He  has  promised  to  keep  me,  while 
I  abide  in  this  world,  from  its  temptations  and 
snares;  and  when  I  depart  from  this  world,  he  has 
already  prepared  for  me  a  mansion  in  the  heaven 
of  unfading  bliss,  and  a  crown  of  everlasting  joy 
that  shall  never,  never  fade  away.  To  me,  then, 
the  days  or  years  of  my  mortal  sojourn  on  this 
earth  are  of  little  moment.  Nor  is  the  manner 
of  my  decease  of  much  consequence.  Should  foe- 
men  sentence  me  to  martyrdom,  or  physicians  de- 
clare that  I  must  soon  depart  this  life,  it  is  all 
alike : 

♦ '  A.  few  more  rolling  suns  at  most. 
Shall  land  me  on  fair  Canaan's  coast" 


THE   LIONS'    DEN.  409 

What  more  can  I  wish  than  that  while  my  brief 
term  on  earth  shall  last  I  should  be  the  servant  of 
him  who  became  the  servant  of  servants  for  me  ? 
You,  dear  friends,  must  be  the  best  judges  of  your 
own  religion,  whether  or  not  it  be  worth  suffering 
for.  If  it  is  not  full  of  immortality,  I  would  not 
advise  you  to  risk  your  reputation  on  retaining  it. 
If  it  is  only  a  fair  profession,  you  may  well  blush 
for  it  as  a  foul  delusion.  The  fleeting  fashion  of 
the  time  has  its  market  value ;  but  sterling  truth  is 
a  commodity  that  never  fluctuates.  Have  you 
found  him  of  whom  Moses  in  the  law  and  the  pro- 
phets did  write,  Jesus  of  Nazareth?  Your  relig- 
ion is  genuine  if  Christ  himself  be  the  all  in  all  of 
it.  Is  he  your  own  dear  Saviour?  Then  you  have 
pardon  and  peace,  happiness  in  this  present  time, 
and  heaven  in  prospect.  Happier  lot  no  heart  can 
wish  for. 

The  apostle  Paul  tells  us  of  three  full  assurances 
— the  full  assurance  of  understanding,  the  full  as- 
surance of  faith,  and  the  full  assurance  of  hope. 
Add  them  together,  and  then,  by  your  leave,  I 
would  ask  you  to  tell  me  what  views  of  immortal- 
ity break  on  your  vision  as  you  realize  this  triple 
assurance.  With  me  it  comes  to  this:  if  need  be, 
let  me  live  like  a  pauper  and  die  like  a  felon.  Our 
God  is  able  to  deliver  us  from  every  ill  we  dread, 
and  he  will  deliver  us;  and  if  not,  if  not — what 
then  ?  We  are  counted  worthy  to  sufi'er  for  his 
sake.  Forthwith  we  are  canonized.  Into  a  goodly 
fellowship  we  enter      With  the  noble  army  of  mar- 


410  Sro/CAI   SIGNALS. 

tyrs  we  are  numbered.  Seeing  we  have  such  a 
God  and  Father,  such  a  blessed  Mediator  who  has 
ascended  in  our  nature  into  heaven,  and  such  a 
Spirit  of  consolation  in  the  chamber  of  our  own 
hearts,  with  an  eternal  reward  in  reversion — to 
serve  the  Lord,  and  to  serve  him  continually,  must 
obviously  be  our  supreme  interest. 

Then  there  comes  a  great  question.  Daniel's  de- 
liverance may  excite  in  our  minds  the  inquiry — 
Is  our  God  able  to  deliver  us  from  the  lions  ? 

My  dear  friends,  you  that  are  suffering  just  now 
for  the  cross  of  Christ,  you  that  know  what  it  is  to 
be  losers  for  Jesus,  to  stand  out  and  to  endure  pains 
and  penalties  as  Daniel  did — you  are  well  aware 
that  the  lions  are  fierce  and  furious  creatures. 
They  are  not  stuffed  animals,  having  the  name 
without  the  nature  of  those  beasts  of  prey.  So  the 
sufferings  of  a  Christian  are  severe  in  deed  and 
truth;  not  merely  sentimental.  Those  lions  had 
not  their  teeth  knocked  out;  they  were  not  trans- 
formed into  lambs;  they  could  have  devoured  Dan- 
iel if  they  had  been  permitted  to  do  so.  It  were 
mere  folly  to  talk  of  your  troubles  as  trifles.  They 
might  have  been  enough  to  drive  you  back  into 
the  world,  and  reduce  you  to  sheer  despair.  Full 
often  your  steps  have  well  nigh  slipped.  The  lions 
have  jaw-teeth,  and  they  would  devour  you,  only 
divine  grace  has  found  a  means  of  delivering  you 
out  of  their  mouths.  As  I  have  stood  some- 
times by  the  sea-shore,  and  watched  the  mighty 
waves  that  rolled  in,   I  observed  how  the  break- 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  411 

waters  diminished  their  force.  Then  a  thought  has 
crossed  my  mind;  Is  it  not  thus  that  sympathy  offers 
us  an  effectual  solace  when  the  tide  of  sorrow  rises 
high  ?  All  along  the  strand  of  life  God  has  provid- 
ed these  break-waters,  as  kindly  helps  to  shield  us 
from  those  encroachments  of  the  proud  waters  that 
threatened  to  drown  our  dwellings.  Such  comfort 
lightens  calamity.  I  ask  the  man  who  has  given  up 
a  profitable  appointment  because  he  would  not  play 
foul  with  his  convictions,  whether,  on  shorter  com- 
mons, he  has  not  found  the  sweeter  luxury  of  con- 
tentment ?  I  ask  him  whether  he  has  not  enjoyed, 
on  a  harder  pillow,  more  refreshing  sleep  ?  I  ap- 
peal to  you,  one  and  all,  if  a  sense  of  rectitude  has 
not  invariably  a  soothing  efiect  and  a  gentle  stim- 
ulous?  I  know,  brethren,  that  those  of  you  who 
have  passed  through  such  trials  will  bear  me  wit- 
ness that  there  is  a  soft,  sustaining  influence  vouch- 
safed to  you  while  you  are  cast,  as  it  were,  into  the 
lions'  den.  I  will  ask  you  who  have  grown  old, 
whether  God  did  not  bring  you  forth  in  safety  ? 
Some  of  you  are  suffering  the  ordeal  now;  but  I 
will  ask  others  who  have  got  farther  on,  whether 
they  have  not  been  rescued  after  much  peril  with- 
out any  harm  ?  In  most  cases  that  have  come  un- 
der my  notice,  when  any  one  has  ventured  loss  for 
Christ,  he  has  presently  reaped  some  substantial 
advantage,  and  his  loss  has,  in  the  issue,  proved  to 
be  his  gain.  ^  Many  a  man  in  this  manner  has 
proved  God's  providence.  For  an  honest  scrapie 
he  has  been  put  out  of  a  position  that  supplied  him 


412  SrORM   SIGNALS. 

with  a  scant  livelihood.  Contentment,  with  a  bare 
pittance,  was  his  only  outlook.  Loosed  from  his 
moorings,  he  feared  lest  he  should  be  lost. 
Yet  he  afterwards  traced  back  his  enlarged  pros- 
perity to  this  very  date.  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy 
has  soon  found  for  that  man  a  far  better  position 
than  he  could  have  held  had  it  not  been  for  his  for- 
feiting the  other.  And  even  if  thy  deliverance  be 
not  thus  speedy  and  sudden,  if,  like  David,  thou 
shouldest  say,  "My  soul  is  among  lions;  1  lie  among 
them  that  are  set  on  fire,  even  the  sons  of  men, 
whose  teeth  are  spears,  and  their  tongue  a  sharp 
sword" :  yet  shalt  thou  sing  like  David :  "  My  heart  is 
iixed,  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed :  I  will  sing  and  give 
praise."  But  oh,  should  we  dwell  among  lions  till 
we  die,  what  joy  shall  it  be  to  leave  the  lions  and 
be  linked  with  saints  and  holy  angels  in  the  beati- 
fic hereafter  !  And  be  it  so,  that  the  highest  re- 
ward is  bestowed  on  the  higher  service,  and  that 
brighter  crowns  encircle  their  brows  who  have  suf- 
fered most  bitterly  and  most  bravely;  what  fellow- 
ship shall  they  enjoy  with  Christ  in  ,his  glory ! 
Why,  you  and  I  have  but  few  and  slender  oppor- 
tunities in  this  soft  and  silken  age  of  showing  our 
love  to  our  Lord  by  the  surrender  of  liberty  and 
life  for  his  sake.  There  are  no  stocks  or  racks,  no 
stakes  or  gibbets,  for  martyrs  now.  These  are 
smooth  and  slippery  times.  Yet  we  can  work  with 
a  will,  if  we  be  so  inclined,  with  the  self-denial  and 
self-sacrifice  of  missionaries.  Yes,  for  the  love  of 
Jesus  we  can   dare  to   die  under  a  cloud  with  no 


THE   LIONS'    DEN.  413 

hope  of  being  canonized.  Faith  and  patience  are 
martial  virtues,  which  it  may  be  quite  within  our 
province  to  illustrate  in  humble  rather  than  heroic 
fashion.  You  may  wonder  why  we  keep  on  in  this 
strain.  I  am  aiming  at  instances  much  more  com- 
mon than  some  -of  you  may  imagine.  There  are 
many  worshippers  gathered  within  these  walls, 
whose  constant  attendance  at  what  is  sneeringly 
called  a  Conventicle  exposes  them  to  no  reproach, 
and  in  some  instances  would  rather  win  them  a 
measure  of  esteem.  Others  to  my  knowledge  there 
are  who  can  never  enjoy  the  privileges  of  the  Lord's 
people  without  encountering  grievous  provocation 
and  bitter  malice.  In  a  congregation  of  this  mag- 
nitude the  confidential  words  spoken  to  the  Pastor 
by  the  solitary  ones  would  startle  full  often  those 
who  sit  in  their  family  pews.  The  confession  of 
Christ  causes  division  in  a  household.  Husband 
and  wife  are  for  his  sake  in  hostility.  Mother  and 
daughter  cannot  manage  to  agree.  Taunt  and  jibe 
are  ill  to  bear  with  equanimity.  Mayhap  it  touches 
men  in  their  trade.  Goes  it  not  hard  with  the 
bread-winner  when  faithfulness  takes  away  his 
bread  and  cheese?  My  sympathy,  however  sin- 
cere, is  of  small  account;  would  to  God  I  could  in- 
spire you  with  more  fortitude  !  Let  me  challenge 
you  to  quit  yourselves  like  men.  Let  me  exhort  you 
to  play  the  Daniel.  Say  now,  Is  thy  God,  the  living 
God,  able  to  deliver  thee  out  of  the  den  of  lions  ? 
I  hope  you  will  be  able  cheerfully  to  respond,  "  I 
believe  he  can,  I  believe  he  will ;  and  if  not,  though 


414  STORM   SIGNALS. 

I  abide  in  the  den  till  I  die,  I  will  rest  quietly  there 
with  the  angel  of  his  presence  as  my  guard ;  for  I 
know  he  will  bring  me,  when  I  have  suffered  a 
while,  to  glory  everlasting." 

*'  Is  thy  God,  whom  thou  servest  continually,  » 
able  to  deliver  thee  from  the  lions?"  Let  me  put 
this  question  in  one  or  two  lights,  and  thus  draw 
our  reflections  to  a  close.  Leaning  over  like  that 
Persian  king,  I  look  down  into  a  greater  den  of 
lions  than  he  ever  descried.  It  is  dark.  The 
stench  is  foul,  and  'midst  the  dim  shadows  I  discern 
struggling  forms  and  figures;  tormentors  whose 
faces  are  hidden,  stretching  women  upon  racks,  and 
torturing  men  with  switch  and  knout,  and  yonder 
a  spot  where,  on  hundreds  of  stakes,  martyrs  have 
burned  quick  to  the  death.  In  the  far  distance  a 
wild  horse,  and  a  human  victim  tied  to  his  heels 
to  be  dragged  to  death.  Strange  and  horrible  spec- 
tacle that  out  yonder ! — a  long  procession  of  men 
who  were  scourged,  who  were  stoned,  who  were  be- 
headed, who  were  sawn  asunder ;  saintly  men  were 
they,  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy.  Leaning 
over  the  mouth  of  this  great  lions'  den,  I  ask  the 
persecuted  saints  of  all  ages.  Has  your  God  been 
able  to  deliver  you  ?  And  with  a  cheerful  shout, 
loud  as  the  voice  of  Jubilee,  they  cry,  "  In  all 
these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors  through 
him  that  loved  us." 

To  change  the  picture :  I  look  down  upon  another 
lions'  den.  It  still  is  dark,  but  not  so  dreary. 
Night  reigns  in  sacred  shade  and  solitude.     The 


•       THE   LIONS'    DEN.  415 

stars  are  hid;  but  tapers  burn  in  chambers  dimly- 
lit  with  rayless  gloom.  There  sons  and  daughters 
of  sorrow  are  tossed  and  tumbled  on  beds  of  sick- 
ness. Thus  they  have  lain  for  months,  perhaps 
for  years,  all  hope  of  health  extinguished,  all  pros- 
pect of  pleasure  passed ;  their  limbs  paralyzed,  their 
sight  failing,  their  hearing  dull ;  calamities  of  every 
kind  have  befallen  them.  God  has  permitted  the 
great  lions  of  affliction  to  come  howling  round,  and 
to  tear  away  all  their  comforts  and  their  joys,  till 
they  are  left  without  any  of  that  cheerful  fellowship 
with  nature  which  seasons  mortal  life  with  sweet- 
est relish.  Some  of  you  are  robust  in  health.  Your 
head  never  throbs ;  your  heart  never  aches ;  you  are 
hardly  conscious  that  you  have  any  nerves.  Small 
account  ye  take  of  the  secret,  silent,  saintly  hero- 
ism of  sufferers,  whose  pilgrimage  on  earth  is 
blighted  with  pain.  Oft  have  I  been  their  com- 
panion in  tribulation.  I  appeal  to  those  tried  and 
afflicted  children  of  God.  Tell  me,  ye  Daniels,  has 
your  God  been  able  to  deliver  you  out  of  the 
mouths  of  the  lions  ?  And  I  hear  each  one  say, 
"  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul ! "  and  all  in  chorus 
join,  saying,  "  Not  one  good  thing  hath  failed  of 
all  that  the  Lord  God  hath  promised;  our  shoes 
have  been  iron  and  brass,  and  as  our  days  so  has 
our  strength  been."     Thus  we  find  ever — 

*'Beligion's  force  divine  is  but  displayed 
In  deep  desertion  of  all  human  aid; 
To  succor  in  extremes  is  her  delight, 
And  cheer  the  heart  when  terror  strikes  the  sight. 


416  STORM   SIGNALS. 

We,  disbelieving  our  own  senses,  gaze, 
And  wonder  what  a  mortal's  heart  can  raise 
To  triumph  in  misfortune,  smile  at  grief. 
And  comfort  those  who  came  to  give  relief. 
We  gaze,  and  as  we  gaze,  wealth,  fame,  decay, 
And  all  the  world's  vain  glories  die  away." 

Shall  I  strain  my  parable  too  fa-r  if  I  turn  my  eye 
upon  another  lions'  den  ?  It  lies  in  a  deep  valley. 
The  night  hangs  heavy.  The  beasts  of  prey  are 
diseases  that  skill  and  shrewdness,  time  and  talent, 
have  striven  in  vain  to  tame.  Like  lions,  strangely 
dissimilar  in  outward  fashion,  but  strongly  resem- 
bling one  another  in  instinct,  they  pounce  on  their 
victims  and  seal  their  doom.  We  call  this  place 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  Methinks  I 
am  gazing  now  on  the  forms  of  shivering  men  and 
women  as  they  are  dragged  down  by  the  lions. 
One  after  another  my  familiar  friends  descend  into 
the  grave,  which  is  the  great  devourer  I  ask  them 
in  the  hour  of  their  departure,  "  Is  thy  God  whom 
thou  servest  continually,  able  to  deliver  thee  from 
the  lions  ?  "  Calm  is  their  countenance,  and  clear 
their  voice,  as  each  one  chants  his  solo,  "  0  death, 
where  is  thy  sting  ?  0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ? 
Thanks  be  unto  God  which  giveth  us  the  victory 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ! "  So,  at  length, 
this  lions'  den  loses  all  its  terror. 

Then  I  look  into  another  den ;  it  is  almost  empty. 
There  is  a  lion  in  it — a  grim  old  lion,  but  I  do  not 
see  so  much  as  a  bone  to  tell  the  tale  of  its  victims. 
No  trace  of  its  ravages  is  left  behind.  On  this  soil 
there  once  were  countless  thousands  of  the  slain; 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  417 

it  is  empty  now.  Of  a  sudden  I  look  upwards,  and 
Jo  !  myriads  of  immortal  souls,  and  they  all  tell  me, 
"  Our  God  delivered  us  from  the  grave  and  rifled 
the  tomb  of  its  prey.  By  a  glorious  resurrection 
he  has  brought  all  his  ransomed  people  forth  to 
meet  their  Lord  at  the  great  day  of  his  appearing. 
There  shall  they  stand  before  the  throne  of  God, 
for  he  hath  broken  the  teeth  of  the  lion,  and  res- 
cued all  his  children  from  the  power  of  the^  adver- 
sary." Thus,  the  God  whom  we  serve  is  able,  in 
the  day  of  judgment,  and  at  the  hour  of  resurrec- 
tion, to  deliver  all  his  children  out  of  the  lions'  den. 

But,  dear  friends,  there  are  some  here  who  have 
never  suffered  anything  for  Christ's  sake:  in  fact, 
they  have  made  up  their  minds  that  they  never 
will.  We  are  not  such  fools,  say  they.  Ah,  ye  lit- 
tle wot  what  fools  ye  are  who  count  it  a  pleasure 
to  sin,  and  a  gain  to  rebel  against  the  God  of  hea- 
ven and  earth.  There  is  a  surprise. in  store  for  you. 
Into  the  lions'  den  you  will  be  cast.  And  alas  ! 
alas !  you  have  no  God  to  call  upon,  no  God  to  de- 
liver you.  Beware,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  he  tear 
you  in  pieces  1 

The  tale  is  not  fully  told  until  the  den  of  lions  is 
portrayed  under  a  fresh  aspect.  Kead,  I  pray  you, 
the  twenty-fourth  verse  of  this  chapter  for  your- 
selves: "And  the  king  commanded,  and  they 
brought  those  men  which  had  accused  Daniel,  and 
they  cast  them  into  the  den  of  lions,  them,  their 
children,  and  their  wives;  and  the  lions  had  the 
mastery  of  them,  and  brake  all  their  bones  in  pieces 


418  STORM   SIGNALS. 

or  ever  they  came  at  the  bottom  of  the  den." 
Hearken  to  this,  ye  time  servers,  and  tremble. 
The  lions  had  the  mastery;  that  is  awful.  Over 
whom  had  they  the  mastery  ?  Over  whole  famiHes : 
"  the  men,  their  children,  and  their  wives  "  ;  that 
is  more  awful  still.  When  did  this  happen  ?  Ah ! 
here  is  a  fresh  feature  of  the  agony.  It  was  "  or 
ever  "  (that  means  he/ore)  "  they  came  at  the  bot- 
tom of  the  den."  And  why  such  terrible  slaughter, 
from  which  none  escaped  ?  Do  not  tell  me  it  was 
because  the  lions  were  ferocious;  for  they  always 
are.  But  let  me  tell  you,  it  was  because  they  had 
no  God  to  deliver  them ;  no  angel  of  God  commis- 
sioned to  shut  the  lions'  mouths,  that  they  should 
not  hurt.  I  recount  a  fact,  a  veritable  fact  of  his- 
tory. Does  the  skeptic  meet  you  with  a  sneer,  and 
tell  you  this  is  merely  a  fable?  Then  I  would 
hold  up  the  fable  before  his  eyes,  and  show  him 
that  it  contains  ten  thousand  facts  in  one.  The 
lions — what  are  they?  Animal  passions,  sensual 
appetites,  wanton  lusts !  Ay,  yes ;  and  they  prey 
on  their  victims  in  pitiless  fury.  I  am  looking 
down  just  now  into  the  den  with  ghastly  terror. 
Whole  households  are  there — fathers,  mothers,  sons 
and  daughters.  The  withered  frame,  the  ruined 
mind,  the  hopeless  sigh,  these  all  convince  me  that 
their  bones  are  broken  or  ever  they  reach  the  bot- 
tom of  tbe  den.  The  lions  have  the  mastery  of 
them.  Oh,  dear  friends,  how  perilous  the  outlook 
of  those  who  have  no  principle  1  For  such,  the 
chivalry  of  faith  has  no  charm.     Absorbed  in  the 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  419 

luxury  of  self-indulgence,  the  nobler  powers  and 
faculties  of  the  human  soul  are  not,  and  cannot,  be 
brought  into  play.  The  love  of  God  has  never 
roused  them  to  a  holy  enthusiasm.  The  law  of 
God  has  never  regulated  their  lives.  Those  thrill- 
ing tales  of  sacred  history,  handed  down  from  sire 
to  son,  generation  after  generation,  have  failed 
to  fire  their  blood.  In  vain  for  them  seers  of  yore 
bequeathed  treasuries  of  psalms  and  songs  which 
have  awakened,  as  it  were,  fresh  inspirations  from 
age  to  age,  supplying  us  with  glees  of  gladness, 
and  solacing  us  with  plaintive  symphonies  for  all 
the  checkered  scenes  and  sensations  of  mortal  life. 
Let  me  see:  I  wonder  if  I  am  talking  straight  to 
you  and  touching  your  conscience.  Which  are 
the  marked  passages  in  your  Bible  that  tell  of  pre- 
cepts that  restrained  you  in  the  day  of  temptation, 
of  promises  that  cheered  you  when  black  clouds 
lowered  over-head,  or  of  visions  of  God  that  encour- 
aged you  when  your  soul  was  faint  ?  Be  sure  of 
this.  The  harp  of  Judah,  and  the  timbrels  of  her 
minstrels,  will  wake  no  echoes  in  your  hearts, 
while  the  sackbuts  and  dulcimers  of  this  doomed 
Babylon  in  which  you  dwell  enchant  your  ears 
with  some  lively  ditty,  or,  mayhap  with  some 
lascivious  ballad.  Shame  on  those  of  you  who 
heed  not,  though  ye  have  so  often  heard  with 
your  ears,  and  your  fathers  have  told  you  what 
work  God  did  in  their  days  in  the  times  of 
old  !  Sorrow  awaits  you — such  sorrow  as  baffles 
my  force  of  language  to  describe — who  are  fas- 


420  STORM  SIGNALS. 

ciliated  by  fleeting  vanities,  and  reck  nothing 
of  those  eternal  verities  which  patriarchs  and 
prophets  inherited,  and  bequeathed  as  an  entail 
to  their  posterity. 

The  oracles  of  God  !  How  true  they  seem  to 
me  !  how  trifling  they  appear  to  some  of  you  ! 
We  like  to  troop  our  colors.  There  is  some 
fight  in  us,  as  there  was  in  our  forefathers. 
"  Dare  to  he  a  Daniel^''  means,  to  our  appre- 
hension— resolve  to  eat  pulse  and  drink  water 
from  the  mountain  spring  in  your  young  days, 
rather  than  defile  yourself  with  the  king's  meat 
or  his  wine.  Then,  by  degrees,  in  your  riper 
years,  you  will  get  courage  enough  to  go  down 
into  the  lions'  den,  rather  than  defy  conscience. 
Such  a  character  as  Daniel's  had  much  need  of 
time  to  mature  it.  Like  a  well  grown  oak  tree, 
its  roots  spread  far  beneath  the  soil,  while  its 
branches  tower  up  towards  the  skies.  It  is  not  as 
the  gourd,  which  comes  up  in  a  night  and  perishes 
in  a  night.  To  some  of  you,  I  doubt  not,  martyr- 
dom would  seem  a  species  of  madness;  though  in 
very  truth  it  is  the  noblest  type  of  manhood,  and 
Daniel  could  face  its  terrors  without  fear.  The 
fact  is,  thoroughness  of  mind  and  steadfastness  of 
purpose  distinguished  him  all  his  days.  His 
heroism  never  surprises  us,  as  ifit  were  the  acci- 
dent of  an  hour;  we  rather  look  upon  it  as  the  con- 
sistency of  a  life.  Daniel's  faith  was  the  main 
feature  of  his  entire  career.  We  must  give  Darius 
credit  for  no  little  shrewd  discernment  in  this  mat- 


THE    LIONS'    DEN.  421 

ter.  Whatever  esteem  he  had  for  his  prime-minis- 
ter, he  lavished  no  compHments  on  him.  To  Dan- 
iel's God  he  offered  the  tribute  of  his  esteem.  What 
a  lively  sense  of  the  living  God,  to  whom  Daniel's 
life  was  one  devoted  service,  did  that  heathen 
monarch  entertain  !  It  is  "  thy  God,  Daniel," — 
"  thy  God  whom  thou  servest  continually."  And 
he  repeats  the  same  words  on  different  occasions: 
full  proof  of  the  impression  that  had  been  produced 
on  his  mind.  Then  the  decree  which  he  sent  out 
through  all  provinces  of  his  dominion,  "  that  men 
tremble  and  fear  before  the  God  of  Daniel,"  reads 
to  us  like  a  prophecy  of  the  age  to  come.  How  the 
subjects  of  Darius  treated  his  decree  I  cannot  tell 
you.  Let  that  pass.  With  yourselves  I  am  con- 
cerned just  now.  The  proclamation  of  the  living 
God,  of  the  loving  Redeemer,  is  sounded  in  your 
ears,  and  set  before  your  eyes,  with  clearer  light, 
with  stronger  evidence,  with  sweeter  persuasive- 
ness than  those  residents  in  remote  provinces  ever 
knew.  With  what  result  ?  Will  not  the  terrors 
of  the  Lord  alarm  you  ?  Will  not  his  longsufifer- 
ing  amaze  you  ?  Will  not  his  lovingkindness  alluEft 
you  ?  Will  not  the  grace  of  God  which  bringeth 
salvation  attract  you  ?  What  more  can  I  say  in 
full  view  of  that  Lions'  den  into  which  every  child 
of  woman  born  is  cast,  with  or  without  a  deliverer? 

"Keligion  is  the  true  philosophy  ! 
Faith  is  the  last  great  link  'twixt  God  and  man; 
There  is  more  wisdom  in  a  whispered  prayer 
Than  in  the  ancient  lore  of  all  the  schoolB: 


422  STORM  SIGNALS. 

The  soul  upon  its  knees  holds  God  by  the  hand; 
Worship  is  wisdom,  as  it  is  in  heaven; 
I  do  believe  !    Help  thou  my  unbelief, 
Is  the  last  great  utterance  of  the  soul," 

To  that  great  utterance  of  simple  faith  the  Lord 
enable  you  now  to  give  sincere  expression.  So 
shall  you  be  partakers  of  his  great  salvation,  and 
to  God  shall  be  all  the  glory.     Amen. 


Pr'nceton  Theological  Seminary  Libraries 


1    1012  01231    4862 


'ft 


