School of Theology at Claremont 


100 


WANTON 


1 1383412 


“4 


SY 3 
BRS NHS. YS 














é oh ey Ba aS 


Nims lee maces 


The Library 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
_AT CLAREMONT 









WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


\ ete Zi 
7K a) ; 
eas Rt: BA 
K Rp aN SHEA tes K 
Bais, ake oe 2 ane wind 
oy uae AVN, abe 
= 


SASS we i oes aS) 


gy Say 
1S 








CF . A Cr rr AA Ftd 
| ANOF sro 


835 
IGS 


G2 


STUDIES 


IN 


ZECHARIAH. 


BY 


A. GC. GAEBELEIN. 


PUBLISHED BY FRANCIS E. FITCH 
47 BROAD STREET, 
NEW YORK CITY, N. Y. 


i | | 
| heoloau |_ibeaiey 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


INTRODUCTION. 


Zechariah, the name of the prophet whose visions and 
prophecies we desire to study, is not an uncommon name in 
divine history. Its meaning is /ehovah remembers. He is 
called the son of Berachiah, Jehovah blesses, the son of Iddo, 
the appointed time. There is here, as in many other instances 
in the Bible, a great significance in the Hebrew names. The 
name of the grandfather of Zechariah (who probably brought 
him up, as his father must have died early), his father’s name 
and his own read in English translation, the appointed time, Je- 
hovah blesses, Jehovah remembers. The Holy Spirit has inspired 
these very names; they are in themselves a commentary to the 
prophecies and visions God gave to Zechariah, for they speak 
of an appointed time of God’s blessings for Jerusalem and of 
His loving remembrance. 

Zechariah was born in Babylon in the captivity, for when he 
returned to the land of his fathers he was but achild. Like 
some other prophets he was a priest as well as a prophet. His 
work as a prophet was commenced by him when he was a 
young man, for thus he is called in one of the visions. The 
time of his opening address to the people is two months after 
Haggai had opened his lips in Jehovah’s name. Haggai re- 
ceived the word of the Lord in the sixth month in the second 
year of Darius, and Zechariah in the eighth month of the same 
year of the reign of that King, about 520 before Christ. 

Both prophets had the same thought given, namely, to en- 
courage the Jewish remnant in the blessed work of rebuilding 
the house of the Lord. This work had suffered an interrup- 


4 


tion ; the Samaritans were the cause of it. They had applied 
to join in the work, but as the remnant considered them idol- 
ators and as not belonging to God’s people, the application 
was rejected. These Samaritans tried after that in various 
ways to hinder the rebuilding, which had so blessedly begun. 
At last they succeeded in obtaining a decree which forbade 
the building of the Temple. All work had to be stopped and 
ceased for abeut fourteen years. But when the King who had 
forbidden the prosecution of the work had died and Darius 
became King, the building of the Temple was once more 
made possible. The leaders of the people in the enterprise 
were Serubbabel and the Higu Friest Joshua. But again they 
were hindered from the outside, while on the other hand the 
people themselves had lost much interest and possessed no 
longer that love and zeal for God’s house, which was so promi- 
nent after their return. Thus Haggai said: This people say, 
Lt is not the time for us to come, the time for the Lord's house to 
be built . . . It ts a time for you to dwell in your cetled 
houses, while this house lieth waste. Waggai, chapter 1. ~* 

In that critical moment these two prophets made their ap- 
pearance, and God gave them visions of comfort and glad tid- 
ings to encourage the disheartened, selfish and unbelieving 
people. 

The visions and prophecies of Zechariah, however, do not 
only give an assurance that there could be no failure in the 
work the remnant had taken up anew, but more than that in 
them the glorious future of Jerusalem and Zion is unfolded. 
They lead up to the grand finale of the history of God's an- 
cient people, the time when Israel, redeemed and restored for- 
ever, will sing the grand and glorious Hallelujah. 

It is, of course, true that Zechariah did a blessed work : 
the people who lived in his day; he had a special mission tu 


5 


the people who lived in his day; he had a. special mission to 
perform and succeeded in it, but the Spirit of God in the mes- 
sage of comfort for that time gives the history of events then 
in a distant future. The Babylonian captivity of Israel fore- 
shadows their greater dispersion in which they are to-day 
wanderers all over the earth, and the restoration which took 
place in the time of Zechariah is highly typical of that coming 
sestoration for which we hope and pray. 

Zechariah may therefore be fitly called the Prophet of the 
Restoration. Surely it is a deplorable blindness in some 
teachers of the Word, who see in the book of Zechariah noth- 
ing but past history, and who claim that all has been fulfilled 
in the return of the small Jewish remnant from the captivity, 
and whatever promises of mercy given to Jerusalem and the 
land of Judah find now their spiritual fulfillment in the church. 

It will be our aim in a series of studies in Zechariah to con- 
sider mostly the relation of these visions to the end of this 
age, and the beginning of the next, the millennial glory. We 
shall find that instead of the book of Zechariah being all ful- 
filled prophecy, as some would have it, it is indeed mostly un- 
fulfilled, and even some of the prophetic promises which on 
the surface seem to have seen a fulfillment, were only in part 
realized. And how important at this time to study the book 
of Zechariah! We are living in the time when that greater 
restoration with all its events forerunning and connected with 
it are about to come to pass. It is needless to say that we 
firmly believe that Zechariah wrote all of the book which 
bears his name. 

Several of the Jewish commentators confess an inability to 
explain the book. The well-known Jewish commentator Sol- 
omon Ben Jarchi (generally known by the name Rashi), says : 
“The prophecy (of Zechariah) is very dark, for it contains 


6 
visions much like dreams, which want interpreting, and w 
will never succeed in finding the true meaning until the Teacher 
of righteousness arrives.” Abarbanel makes a similar confes- 
sion. 
We praise God that the Teacher of righteousness has come, 


even the Spirit of Truth, who guides into all truth and reveals 
the things to come. 


CHAPTER I. 


The Opening Address of the Prophet to His Nation. The 
Night Visions and Thetr Meaning. The First Night 
Vision, 

The opening address of the prophet (chapter i: 1-6) forms 
an excellent introduction to the visions of comfort and warn- 
ing which he had and revealed to the people. It is a very 
pointed and earnest call to repentance: Zhe Lord has been sore 
displeased with your fathers. They were disobedient and stiff- 
necked. The former prophets, Jeremiah and Isaiah, had 
called them to turn from their evil ways, but they did not hear. 
And now, where are the fathers? They had passed away like 
the disobedient ones in the wilderness; God’s judgment and 
displeasure had overtaken them. But the faithful God of 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, whose gifts and calling are without 
repentance, comes once more to His chosen people, the seed 
of Abraham, and the Spirit, through Zechariah, speaks a direct 
message to return, and utters the promise that the Lord will 
also return unto them. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts: Return 
unto me saith the Lord of Hosts, and I will return unto you saith 
the Lord of Hosts. 

The name Jehovah appears three times in this short exhor- 
tation. Each time the name is in another connection. Jehovah 
speaks, they are to return to Jehovah, and Jehovah will re- 
turn to them. Surely in profane literature such a repetition 
would be rejected as useless and superfluous, but in the Book 
where every word and phrase is God-given, we cannot pass it 
by as having no significance. Like in many other passages in 

7 


8 


the Old Testament we have here a revelation of the one God 
as Father, Son and Spirit. This revelation was often made in 
divine history, and when the measure of Israel’s apostacy 
was at last filled up, they had indeed rejected Jehovah in re- 
jecting Jehovah-Jesus, and also Jehovah, the Spirit. And 
while this exhortation was one for Zechariah’s contemporaries, 
it is the great exhortation to the Jewish remnant for all times. 
The nation having forsaken Jehovah in His revelations as 
Father, Son and Spirit, will have to return and listen to Jeho- 
vah who speaks, to Jehovah whom they rejected, and Jehovah 
in His merciful and loving manifestations will return to them 
as a nation and to their land. 

This return of Israel to which Zechariah exhorts will take 
place in a set order clearly revealed throughout the word of 
God. We hear in Romans ii. that Paul speaks of a remnant 
according to the election of grace. That remnant is the rem- 
nant which turns to Jehovah now during this dispensation, and, 
of course, all Jews who are now turning to Jehovah-Jesus, and 
to whom Jehovah, the Spirit, also comes, are members of the 
body of the Lord Jesus Christ. As soon as the church, the wit- 
nessing body in the earth, is removed by that glorious event 
which is our blessed hope, another Jewish remnant is called, 
and that remnant will be Jewish throughout, ‘keeping the 
commandments and having the testimony of the Lord Jesus 
Christ.” Of course that remnant will have returned to Jeho- 
vah, and will be the witnessing and the suffering body in the 
great tribulation. The believing and longing cry of that 
remnant, “Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the 
Lord,” will at last*welcome Him, the Pierced One and King of 
Israel as well as King of Glory, to this earth, and then the 
remnant of the nation in all lands will turn to Him. This is 
the divine programme for Israel. 


9 


After these opening words, delivered probably to the assem- 
bled people, Zechariah received his wonderful night visions. 
They were not mere dreams, but the events which he describes 
passed before him in visions. He saw them all in one night. 
They are eight in number, and have not found many interpre- 
ters. They were not only given in one night, but just as one 
followed rapidly the other, so are they all closely connected, 
and giving events which are to follow one after the other. 
That we have here a revelation which may fitly be termed ¢he 
Apocalypse of Zechariah is unquestionable. After all these 
visions had passed, Joshua, the High Priest, is crowned with 
two crowns foreshadowing Him who is to be a Priest upon 
His throne. This crowning is a climax in Zechariah’s night 
visions which lead up to that coronation. Divine interference 
in behalf of Jerusalem and the land of Judah, God’s dis- 
pleasure upon the nations for their abominations, and the 
overthrow of Israel’s enemies are clearly depicted in the first 
two night visions, while in the others we see the promised 
prosperity returning to the land, God’s glory appearing once 
more, the nation once more inhabiting the land and cleansed 
from their guilt, filled with the Spirit, wickedness judged, 
Babylon set up and overthrown, and the chariots of God ap- 
pearing. ¢ 

The first night vision is especially suited for a close study 
for our times, for the events and conditions in that first vision 
are a true picture of the peculiarities of the times in which we 
live. Indeed we are rapidly nearing the fulfillment of this 
first night vision. 

This is the vision: Zechariah sees a man riding upon a red 
horse and he halts in a valley among myrtle trees. He is sur- 
rounded by a large army of angels upon red, sorrel and white 
horses, and the man upon the red horse becomes the centre of 


Io 


the hosts of heaven. The angels give their reports unto the 
man in the midst, who is also called the Angel of the Lord. 
These angels had walked to and fro through the earth (like 
the evil spirit and his demons, Job 1., so the good angels walk 
to and fro through the earth), and they report to the Angel of 
the Lord, telling him that all the earth sitteth still and is at. 
rest. Prosperity and peace seems to be what the angels saw, 
but over against this bright picture there is the dark scene— 
Jerusalem trodden down, the house of the Lord unfinished, a 
persecuted suffering remnant. 

And now the Angel of the Lord becomes the intercessor for 
Jerusalem and turns to Jehovah, the Lord of Hosts sitting 
upon His throne. O Lord of Hosts, how long wilt Thou not 
have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah against 
which Thou hast had indignation these three score and ten years ? 
He receives an answer of comfortable words. God is once 
more jealous for Jerusalem, and very angry and sore dis- 
pleased with the nations, the nations who are in greater part 
responsible for the condition of His inheritance—they have 
helped forward their affliction. God promises to return to the 
city with prosperity, and that the house shall be built in it, and 
the Lord shall yet comfort Zion and shall yet choose Jerusalem. 

The first question which arises in the interpretation of this 
vision is concerning the person who leads the angelic hosts, 
He is called a man riding upon a red horse. This does not 
mean that he was nothing but a man, but it means that he 
appeared in the vision to Zechariah as a man, he had a human 
body. Later he is called the Angel of the Lord, and as such, 
he acts as successful intercessor for Jerusalem, and receives a 
loving answer from Jehovah. The leader must have been a 
divine person incarnate. The name Angel of the Lord is one 
of the Old Testament names for the Son of God, and there 


It 


can be only one satisfactory interpretation of who the rider 
upon the red horse is, and that is, He must be the Son of God. 
There are three chief reasons for this interpretation. In the 
first place, the color of the horse which He rode was red ; this 
denotes blood, and is the color of the Son of God, for He is 
the Lamb of God slain from the foundation of the world, and 
He is the Lion from the tribe of Judah, who will arise and 
slay His enemies, coming to judge the nations (Isaiah Ixiii). 
He is the Leader as well as the Centre of the heavenly hosts, 
for to Him all power is given in Heaven and in the earth, and 
all things are in His hands; and in the third place, the inter- 
cession which the Angel of the Lord makes is the intercession. 
which belongs to the Son of God. The heavenly company 
comes to a stop in a deep valley, and the Angel of the Lord 
stands there among the myrtle trees. 

Jewish interpretation (in the Yalkut) says: He was staying 
among the myrtles which were in the Meftzullah (depths). 
Now myrtles (Hadassim) mean nothing else than saints, as it 
is said (Esther ii: 7), and He was bringing up Hadassah 
(Esther), and the depths means nothing else than Babylon. 
We believe this as correct an interpretation as any. Myrtles. 
denote lowliness and sweetness, and the dark, dreary valley 
stands for persecution, suffering, and being outcast. All this 
was true of the remnant, and it is true as well of the church. 
What a comfort it must have been to the patriotic prophet 
and to all true believers among the returned exiles, to learn 
that in that vision it was made so clear that Jehovah, the 
Angel of the Lord, was with them in all their lowliness and 
suffering. The Angel, who so wonderfully delivered their 
father Jacob, and whom he called the Angel the Redeemer, 
and who had so often appeared in the miraculous events of 
the past, this same Angel, with all the army of heaven at His. 


12 


command, was still with them, though the cloud of glory was 
missing. 

May we not forget that the Angel of the Lord, the Son of 
God, our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, is still with 
His people Israel. He has indeed not cast them away, whom 
He foreknew. He is their King and their Priest, and for all 
we know, the mighty angels who are under His direction, may 
be assembled now as they were in Zechariah’s vision, and He 
Himself ready to reveal His love and mercy to Jerusalem. 

And what is the report of the angels to their leader? They 
have walked to and fro through the earth, they have found 
nothing but prosperity. All the earth sitteth still and is at 
rest, the nations at ease, a perfect picture of prosperity. The 
nations are seen in a flourishing state, but His nation is in 
trouble and His inheritance laid waste, the nations having 
like wild beasts trampled it into the dust. While the large 
cities of the nations are increased and have plenty, the city of 
a great King is forsaken. History shows that indeed at that 
time there was no war, but peace everywhere and prosperity 
enjoyed selfishly by the nations. Should not these nations 
have an interest in that land and in that people? But they 
were living for their own ease and comfort. What does it mat- 
ter if there is yonder a poor and suffering people? 

Prosperity, universal prosperity, and with it universal peace, 
is the cry at the close of another century, and will be more so 
as we advance towards the end of this age. Civilization, 
world conquest, commercial extension and a universal peace, 
seem to be the leading thoughts among the nations of our 
times. Truly it is realized by some that our boasted civil- 
ization, liberty and prosperity is nothing but a smouldering 
volcano which may burst open at any moment and make an 
end of all boasting, but the majority of the people even in 


13 


Christendom are sadly deluding themselves with idle dreams. 
And what of God’s thoughts and His eternal purposes? What 
of His oath-bound covenant promises? They are being mis- 
interpreted, set aside and forgotten. Thus it will continue till 
the climax is reached, so clearly foretold in the second Psalm, 

“Why do the nations rage 

And the peoples imagine a vain thing? 

The kings of the earth set themselves 

And the rulers take counsel together, 

Against the Lord and against His anointed. 

Let us break their bands asunder 

And cast away from us their cords.” 

This is a true picture of the nations as the King of Kings 
at last will find them when He returns.with and in His glory. 
The great sin of the nations, which is Anti-Semitism, will be 
considered later. 

The nations at ease, prosperous and increased, and Jerusa- 
lem trodden down, the land waste and desolate, in the hands 
of the enemy, is the mark of this age up to its end. 

But now comes the interference of Him who sitteth in the 
heavens. The angel of the Lord intercedes and cries to the 
Lord of Hosts, “How long?” It has been so much over- 
looked that He who is our Intercessor, the Great High Priest 
in the Heavens, is, according to the flesh, of the seed of 
Abraham, and He stands there in His place in His glorified 
humanity. If the High Priest in the Old Testament carried 
upon a breast-plate nearest to his heart the names of the 
twelve tribes of Israel, may we not assume that the true High 
Priest, who is the King of Israel as well, has them just as 
near to His loving heart? He loves His own, and longs for 
the time when they will crown Him Lord of all. And is it 
not very significant that the Spirit at this present time teaches 


14 


so many children of God to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, 
that He may establish and make Jerusalem a praise in the 
earth? The Spirit and the Bride say ‘‘Come,” and surely the 
dearest thought in the Saviour’s heart is being laid upon the 
hearts of His children, in whom the Spirit dwells, to pray 
and intercede with Him for the peace of Jerusalem. This 
prayer, heard from so many lips to-day in the church waiting 
for her Lord, is but an echo of His “How long?” and prayer 
for His people. 

The interceding angel of the Lord is not left without an answer 
from the Lord of Hosts whom he has addressed in behalf of 
Jerusalem. It must be noticed that the answer is not the one 
which Jehovah gives to the angel of the Lord, but the answer is 
transmitted by the Lord through another angel who talked with 
the prophet. So the angel that talked with me said unte me, Cry thou, 
saying, Thus satth the Lord of Hosts: Iam jealous for Jerusalem 
and for Zion with a great jealousy, Then follows the message in 
its details. And Tam very sore displeased with the nations that are 
at ease: for Iwas but a hitile displeased, and they helped forward the 
affliction. Therefore thus saith the Lord: I am returned to Jerusalem 
with mercies, my house shall be built in it, saith the Lord of Hosts, 
and a line shalt be stretched forth over Jerusalem. Cry yet again, say- 
ing, Thus saith the Lord of Hosts ; My cities through prosperity shall 
vel be spread abroad ; and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall 
yet choose Jerusalem. We desire to take up separately some of 
these comfortable words, We firmly believe that the time of their 
fulfillment is not only at hand, but that we are really living in the 
days when God once more remembers His suffering people and is 
about to rise in judgment upon His and their enemies, and turn 
in mercy to Zion. 

First then stands the declaration that God is jealous for Jerusa- 
lem and for Zion with a great jealousy. The word used in the 


uf) 


original for jealous means burning, and is correctly translated with 
that word, for jealousy is a burning emotion. Men are jealous of 
that which is their own when it is in the hands of another or in 
danger of being taken away and misused. In this sense God is 
likewise jealous of His own. Jerusalem is His city, the city of a 
great king ; Zion is His holy hill, and Israel His own people. 
All has fallen into the hands of the Gentiles and isinjured by 
them. His people scattered and dispersed, the holy hill dese- 
crated and Jerusalem trodden down by the Gentiles. True, God 
has permitted it all, prophets have spoken of it, and their pro- 
phecies concerning Jerusalem’s desolation have all been literally 
fulfilled, but now God is seen to rise and to claim once more in 
great jealousy that which is His Own, We look away from the 
partial fulfillment of this prophecy in Zechariah’s time. God 
looked down from heaven then, and His eyes beheld the sad pic- 
ture of the desolate land, the unfinished temple and the dis- 
heartened and punished people. At the end of our dispensation, 
God looks down from heaven, and while the nations are prosper- 
ous and at ease, He sees His city controlled by His enemies. 
The holy hill of Zion, where Jehovah revealed Himself so often, 
has become the place of idolatry. His name is not honored but 
dishonored. Indeed, the Land and Jerusalem attracts once more 
the attention of the world. Nations are desirous of owning the 
Land and gaining a foothold there. The visit to Palestine of the 
German Emperor, the representative of Lutheranism and the 
avowed friend of one of the darkest characters of our times, the 
man whose throne seems almost unshakable, and who holds the 
Land in the grasp of his bloody hands, is highly significant. All 
the other nations have watched this visit, and Zionism especially 
rejoices in the fact of the friendship of the Protestant Emperor 
with the Sultan and hopes much from it for the realization of its 
well planned schemes, It is to be expected that as the end 


16 


draws nearer, Palestine will become the great centre around which 
the nations gather. Scheming nations, religious and political 
ambitions for world rule and world power, and connected with it 
Commercialism, which seems to become more and more the god 
of this world, are the programme for the near future, and upon 
the entire scene are the eyes of the covenant-keeping God of Abra- 
ham, and with His burning eyes He looks on with jealousy for 
Jerusalem and very great jealousy for Zion. (Joel ii: 18.) 

These are only the opening words of the revelation which is given 
to Zechariah. It is God's attitude. Zechariah hears now a very 
plain and important statement from the lips of the interpreting 
angel. The statement is threefold. 

1. Z was but a little displeased. Jehovah is speaking concerning 
His inheritance that He was, on account of their apostasy and . 
idolatry, but a little displeased. This was primarily true of the 
Babylonian captivity. It was but for a moment God was angry. . 
It is so now, though the children of Israel have been in dispersion 
for well-nigh twenty centuries, but still it is true even now. or 
a small moment have I forgotten thee. In overflowing wrath I hid my 
Jace from thee for amoment, but wiih everlasting kindness will I have 
mercy on thee, saith the Lord, thy Redeemer. His displeasure with 
His people is never final, it is only temporary. This is clearly 
seen in the entire Word of God. If it were final, if God would 
be displeased forever with Israel, we might just as well close the 
Bible, join the higher critics and end in unbelief, apostasy and 
perdition. J will make a_full end of all the nations whither I have 
scattered thee, but Iwill not make a full end of thee; but I will correct 
thee with judgment and will in no wise leave thee unpunished, (Jere- 
miah xxx : 11.) 

2. They have helped forward their affiction, The Lord is now 
speaking of the nations who are at ease. He holds them responsible 
for a greater affliction than He really had designed to come upon His 


17 


people. By their attitude towards chastised Israel they have made 
their affliction much worse than God meant it to be. Of course, 
it was true during the seventy years God’s people spent in 
Babylon, but how much more true is it in the dispersion which 
has been their lot for so many sad centuries, 

Where shall we begin in treating the awful truth which is put 
here in such simple language? Where shall we find words earn- 
est enough to picture the terrible facts in connection with it and 
sound a warning for our times? Some time ago a person said, 
‘‘The Jews are to-day more stiff-necked and blinder than ever 
before.” Who has made them thus? Surely judicial blindness 
and hardness of heart ; ears which do not hear are given by God, 
but, alas, the nations, or so-called Christendom, have helped 
forward their affliction ; they have made matters worse a thousand 
times, and Satan, who hates Israel, has been the author of all 
things calculated to increase the affliction of poor down-trodden 
Israel. Surely the increased stiff-neckedness and the increased 
blindness is one which is. traceable to the nations. Every reader 
knows something of the history of the Jews, whatit hasbeen since 
they left the home land—a long, long tale of suffering, tears and 
blood. Most unjust outrages have been committed against them; 
torture upon torture ; the stake and worse than that; and all in 
the name of Jesus. Itisa shameful history. Many a time Jews, 
after hearing the Word preached, have stood up and opened in 
answer this awful book of history with its blood-stained pages, 
asking the question, ‘‘Can Hebe our Redeemer, whose followers 
have treated us thus in Hisname?” And nota few can tell us of 
their own sufferings in being banished from foreign lands. Hard- 
ly a month passes without some new outrage upon the generally 
harmless and innocent people in Eastern Europe. Cruelty, injus- 
tice, wickedness and crime are practiced against them, and thus 
their affliction has been increased. 


18 


The same is true of the counterfeits of the Christian religion. 
Is ita wonder that the Jew turns away in disgust from religions 
which demand worship of pictures, statues, holy places, etc.? 
Satan has used it all to keep Israel from a true knowledge of 
Him, who is the King of Israel. And in Protestant lands the Jew 
does so rarely see that pure and true love of Him who came to 
fulfil the law and in whom God as love has been manifested. 
Instead of treating the Jew as a brother, ‘beloved for the Father’s 
sake—nay, for Jesus’ sake, who was a Jew according to the flesh 
—he has been despised, ridiculed, ostracized and treated as 
inferior to Gentiles. Still there are worse days coming yet. The 
nations of Christendom in the past have helped forward their afflic- 
tion, but Satan, through these very nations, will once more afflict 
Israel—once more stretch out his hand to touch the nation of 
destiny. As never before in the history of the world, God’s own 
chosen people—the Jews—make themselves felt, and correspond- 
ingly as never before the Gentile nations are getting ready to rise 
up against the Jew to down him if it were possible. The enemy, 
thus prophecy tells us, will try to exterminate the wonderful na- 
tion through nations who are doomed to destruction. This is 
still future. However, these coming events are rapidly approach- 
ing. Anti-Semitism is increasing all over the world, and only 
God's Spirit and the prayer of the Church keeps back the out- 
break which will mark the beginning of Jacob’s trouble. (Jere- 
miah xxx : 7.) 

3.—L am very sore displeased. This is God’s anger with the na- 
tions who have sinned against His people. The crowning sin of 
the nations is Anti-Semitism, which means anti-Bible, anti-Christ 
and anti-God. If Christendom would believe the Word of God 
it could never he the enemy of Israel. Our age will end in 
the judgment of nations, and that judgment will be on account of 
the sins committed against His people. For behold in those days 


Ly 


and in that time when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah 
and Jerusalem, I will gather all nations and will bring them down 
into the valley of Jehosophat, and I will plead with them there for 
my people and for my heritage, Israel, whem they have scattered 
among the nations and parted my land. (Joel iii: 1-3.) Haste 
ye and come all ye nations round about and gather yourselves 
together thither ; cause thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord; 
let the nations bestir themselves and come up to the valley of Jeho- 
sophat ; for there will I sit to judge all nations round about. Put 
ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come, get ye down, for 
the wine-press is full, the vats overflow, for their wickedness is 
great. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision! for the 
day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision. The sun and 
the moon are darkened, the stars withdraw their shining, and the 
Lord shall roar from Zion and utter His voice from Jerusalem ; 
and the heavens and the earth shall shake ; but the Lord will be 
arefuge unto His people and a stronghold to the children of 
Israel. (Joel iii: 17, etc.) For behold the Lord will come with 
fire, and His chariots shall be like the whirlwind, to render His 
anger with fury and His rebuke with flames of fire. For by 
fire will the Lord plead and by His sword with all flesh, and 
the slain of the Lord shall be many. (Isaiah Ixvi: 15.) This 
judgment of nations is likewise referred to in Matthew xxv. by 
the lips of our Lord. Generally the last part of that chapter is 
taken to mean the universal judgment, the great white throne. 
This is an error. Zhe Son of Man shail come in His glory and all 
the angels with Him. Thus the passage reads: Zhen shall He sit 
on the throne of His glory, and before Him shall be gathered all the 
nations, and He shall separate them one from another as the shepherd 
separateth the sheep from the goats. The judgment takes place and 
nations are punished and rewarded according to their treatment 
of the brethren of the Son of Man, the King of Glory. 


20 


At that time, when the enemies of Israel are overcome and 
punished for their wickedness, Israel, once more miraculously 
saved, will break forth in praise of the Lord and sing the glorious 
psalms of victory which to-day are still prophetic. If it had not 
been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against 
us, then they would have swallowed us up alive when their wrath 
was kindled against us; then the waters would have overwhelmed 
us, a stream would have gone over our soul; then the proud 
waters would have gone over our soul. Praise to Jehovah! who 
has not given us as prey to their teeth. Oursoul is escaped as a 
bird out of the snare of the fowler! The snare is broken and 
we are escaped. Our help is in the name of Jehovah, who has 

~made heaven and earth. (Psalm cxxiv.) 

The words which follow, and which are really the good and 
comfortable words, contain the divine programme of the restora- 
tion of His people Israel. What is mentioned here in a few sen- 
tences is given in detail in the fourth and fifth night vision as well 
as in the closing chapters of the prophet. J am returned to Jerusa- 
Lem with mercies. This does not mean a spiritual return or a return 
of God’s mercies to Jerusalem only, but it means likewise His 
literal return when He appears the second time ; and connected 
with this second appearing of the great Jehovah in Jesus Christ 
will be seen the Shekinah cloud as Israel had it in the wilderness 
and the first temple. This is seen in the second chapter. The 
Lord had withdrawn from His people. J will go away and return 
to my place, (Hoseav:15.) For behold your house ts left unto you 
desolate. For I say unto you, Ve shall not see me henceforth till ye 
shail say, Blessed ts he that cometh in the name of the Lord. (Mat- 
thew xxiii : 38, 39.) The Lord being absent in His person from 
His people, Israel is forsaken, the land desolate. There can be 
no true restoration of Israel till He has come whose right it is. 

) many good people think that the present Zionistic move- 


21 


ment of the Jews is that promised salvation for the scattered na- 
tion. This is not so. It is an attempted restoration. Here in 
the good and comfortable words Zechariah hears, the return of 
the Lord stands first. Then His house is to be built. While it 
meant in the prophet’s time the building of the second temple, it 
means in connection with the coming restoration the building of 
that great millennial temple which Fzekiel saw in visions and de- 
scribes in detail—the temple which will be indeed a house of 
prayer to all nations, and the glory of this latter house shall be 
greater than the former. The rebuilding of the city of Jerusalem 
is next in order. A line is to be stretched forth upon Jerusalem. | 
The city is enlarged, for from henceforth Jerusalem is to be the 
centre of the earth. (Ezekiel xxxviii:12.) My cities in pros- 
perity shall overflow. The blessing will not be confined to the 
Temple and to Jerusalem, but there wiil be an overflow, and all 
the cities in the land will flow over with prosperity. For the Lord 
shall comfort Zion ; He will comfort all her waste places, and He will 
make her wilderness like Eden and her desert like the garden of the 
Lord. Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgwing and the 
voice of melody. (Isaiah li : 3.) 

Oh, happy time! when wilt thou come? Even so come, Lord 
Jesus, our Lord and Israel’s King! Other visions wiil show us 
that Jerusalem will then indeed be a praise in the earth, for many 
nations will then be joined to the Lord, and the streams of living 
~aters will overflow and bring joy, salvation and healing to the 

tions around who join in the Hallelujah chorus of Jeshurun. 


CHAPTER IL. 


The second night vision. The four horns and the four smiths. 
The third vision. The man measuring Jerusalem. Resto- 
ration and glory of Jerusalem foretold, 


The second night vision of Zechariah is closely connected 
with the first. In the first vision the time is given when the 
Lord will turn in mercy to Jerusalem—the time when the na- 
tions are at ease, and, having helped forward the affliction of 
His people, are ripe for judgment. The scenes have passed 
away, and now the prophet lifts his eyes again and he sees 
four horns, The question he asks of the angel is answered by 
him, that these are the horns whtch have scattered Judah, Israel 
and Jerusalem. Then four smiths appear, and the angel in- 
forms the prophet that these are come to fray them (the four 
horns), ¢o cast down the horns of the nations which lifted up 
their horn against the land of Judah to scatter zt (chapter i: 18- 
21.) The four horns are the powerful and proud enemies of 
the people of God. Why four horns? Some have said because 
the enemies of Israel have come against the land and Jerusa- 
lem from all four cardinal points of the compass, and have 
scattered the people east and west, north and south. Others 
mention different nations who were at Zechariah’s time in ex- 
istence and instrumental in scattering Israel. The horn is a 
symbol of power and pride, and in prophecy stands for a king- 
dom and for political world power. The ten horns which 
Daniel saw on the terrible fourth beast rising from the sea 
denote ten kingdoms, and in Revelation xvii: 12 we read, 
“The ten horns that thou sawest are ten kings.” The four 
horns in this second vision must be therefore kingdoms—world 

22 


ao 


powers. The number four, as it is well known to every stu- 
dent of the prophetic Word, is found twice in the book of 
Daniel. Nebuchadnezzar’s great image was divided into 
four parts, each standing for a world power, namely: the 
Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, the Grzco-Macedonian and 
the Roman power. The latter is still in existence and will 
be till the stone smites the image at its feet and pul- 
verizes it. Daniel’s vision (chapter vii) brings before him 
four mighty beasts, the last having ten horns, just as the 
limbs of the image ended in feet with ten toes. With such 
a revelation in the book of Daniel it is very easy to under- 
stand that the four horns can mean nothing else than the same 
powers of Gentile rule and supremacy existing during the en- 
tire time when the kingdom has been taken from Israel. 
These four world powers are horns. They unite strength 
and pride, and are bent upon scattering Israel. They are the 
enemies of Israel, and therefore the enemies of God. And 
now the four smiths appear on the scene to fray them—to cast 
down the horns of the nations. Four horns are overcome and 
broken down completely by four smiths. It does not follow 
that the four smiths must be four other powers. The vision 
seems to teach two facts: first, the horns will be broken and 
cast down ; and in the second place, God has for every hostile 
power which has sinned and sins against his people a corre- 
sponding greater power to overcome it, break it into pieces and 
cast it down. However, we believe the vision will have its 
fulfillment in the time of Jacob’s trouble. The elements of all 
the four world powers will then in some way be concerned in 
the onslaught on Jerusalem—a confederacy of nations ; repre- 
sentatives of many nations will come up against Jerusa-. 
lem, and it will be then that the four horns are broken by the 
four smiths and the casting down will be done, ’ 


24 


The third night vision is one of the most interesting and 
instructive. As the third one, it forms the climax of the good 
and comfortable words which were spoken concerning Jeru- 
salem. The number three stands in the Word of God for 
resurrection, life from the dead. Thus in Hosea, concerning 
Israel, “ After two days Thou wilt revive us, and on the third 
day Thou wilt raise us up” (Hosea vi: 2). In this third vision 
Zechariah sees the glorious restoration of Israel, which has 
been the burden of so many prophecies, and the glory which is 
connected with that restoration. In this night vision Zechariah 
hears of a restoration and of a glory which has never yet been 
fulfilled in the history of God’s people. Those teachers of the 
Word who see in Zechariah’s night visions nothing but fulfilled 
prophecy, cannot answer certain questions satisfactorily, and 
their only refuge must be a spiritualizing of this restoration. 
Another thought before we take up this third vision. The 
vision of restoration comes after the enemies of Israel have 
been cast down. That prophecy might be fulfilled ; prophecy 
about a believing, suffering Jewish remnant; prophecy con- 
cerning Jacob’s trouble, etc., a mock restoration, generally 
termed a restoration in unbelief, is to take place. There can 
be no doubt whatever that we are privileged to see the 
beginning of this restoration of part of the Jewish nation to 
the land of the fathers in unbelief. It is one of the signs of 
the nearness of that event for which the Church hopes, prays 
and waits—“our gathering together unto Him.” The worid 
and the lukewarm Christian does not see it, but he who loves 
the Word and lives in the Word, has eyes to see and a 
hearing ear and knows what is soon coming. The true resto- 
ration, however, will only come as it is seen so clearly in these 
night visions after the enemies have been overcome, the horns 
cast down, the image smashed—in other words, after the Lord 
has come. 


25 


We may divide the third night vision into two parts. In 
the first part a man is seen with a measuring line measuring 
Jerusalem, and the restoration of the city and its enlargement 
is promised ; and in the other part promises of blessings are 
given as well as glimpses of the glory which will attend the 
restoration. 

Zechariah sees a man with a measuring line in his hand. 
The prophet asks him, Whither goest thou? And he answers, 
To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof and 
what ts the length thereof. There is nothing here which indi- 
cates that the man who starts out to measure the city is 
identical with the man on the red horse of the first vision. 
This man here seems to be only a person appearing to im- 
press the coming enlargement of Jerusalem upon the prophet’s 
mind. Similar visions where measuring takes place are found 
in Ezekiel xli, where the temple of the Millennium is meas- 
ured, and in Revelation xi, where a reed is given to John to 
measure the temple of God, which is the temple standing in 
Jerusalem during the time of Jacob’s trouble. Here in 
Zechariah’s vision it is the measuring of Jerusalem. What 
Jerusalem is it? Of course, the Jerusalem in Palestine, which 
will, in its restoration, become the centre of the earth. In the 
new earth, after the thousand years, there will be another 
Jerusalem in the earth, the new Jerusalem come down out of 
heaven from God (Rev. xxi: 2). Of this new Jerusalem we 
read, “And the city lieth four square, and the length thereof 
is as large as the breadth: and he measured the city with a 
reed twelve thousand furlongs. The length and the breadth 
and the height thereof are equal’’ (Rev. xxi:16). Herve is 
the measurement of the new Jerusalem: As long as it is broad 
and extending upward into the air. What a wonderful city 
that will be, the glorious centre of a new heaven and a new 


26 


earth, our home for all eternity! The man in Zechariah’s 
third vision measures only the length and the breadth of the 
city because in the coming restoration of Jerusalem there is 
no height to be measured. 

Now follows the appearing of another angel who meets with 
the one who had been speaking to Zechariah, and he brings 
from the throne of God a message for the prophet. He said, 
Run, speak to this young man saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited 
as villages without walls, by reason of the multitude of men and 
cattle therein, The influx of men and cattle to Jerusalem 
will be so enormous that the city must be enlarged and it will 
spread out into the plain. Another prophet, the seer of 
Israel’s glorious future, Isaiah, has spoken likewise of this. 
enlargement in the following beautiful words: ‘As for thy 
waste and desolate places, and thy land which has been de- 
stroyed, surely now shalt thou be teo strait for the inhabitants, 
and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away. The chil- 
dren of thy bereavement shall yet say in thine ears, The place 
is too strait for me, give place to me that I may dwell”’ (Isaiah 
xlix: 19, 20). Notice the city is to be inhabited as villages. 
This denotes the peace which Jerusalem will then enjoy. A 
blessed security for the city which for so long a time was 
trodden down by the Gentiles. There will be no walls. No 
need of walls to shelter men and cattle, for the enemies of 
Israel have been scattered and broken down, the warfare of 
Jerusalem is accomplished. At the end of the Millennium, 
which will have been a thousand years of unbroken peace for 
the land which for thousands of years knew no peace, Satan, 
with Gog and Magog, will come against the land and its in- 
habitants. This last final struggle the Holy Spirit revealed 
through the prophet Ezekiel (chapters xxxviii and xxxix). 
It is interesting to notice there the condition of the land and 


27 


the people as the enemy who comes up against the land finds 
them: Thus says the Lord God : It shall come to pass in that 
day, that things shall come into thy (enemy) mind, and thou 
shalt devise an evil device : and thou shalt say, I will go up 
to the land of unwalled villages. I will go to them that are 
quiet, that dwell securely, all of them dwelling without walls, 
and having neither bars nor gates: to take the spoil and to 
take the prey: to turn thine hand against the waste places 
that are now inhabited, and against the people that are gath- 
ered out of the nations, which have gotten cattle and goods, 
that dwell in the centre of the earth (Ezekiel xxxviii: 10-12). 
What a wonderful Word our God has given us! How every- 
thing is harmony! Zechariah’s vision shows what Jerusalem 
will be in the beginning of the Millennium; and Ezekiel, by 
tne Spirit of God, puts before us the same conditions at the 
end of the thousand years. 

The reason of Jerusalem’s peace, security and prosperity 
will be the glory of the Lord. This glory will be in the midst 
of the city, and will also form a wall of fire around the city. 
For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about 
the city, and I will be the glory in the midst of her. Glory 
and defence are here combined. They always go together. 
This has been in a degree already the happy lot of Israel in 
the past, for He guided them with His glory. It wasa cloud 
by day and a fire at night by which the Lord had revealed 
Himself to His people, and out of that glory cloud He pro- 
tected them and punished their enemies. How much greater 
will that glory and defence be in that time of fullness when Is- 
rael is no longer a disobedient, stiff-necked people, but the 
holy people, the kingly nation. What a glory that will be 
when the King comes back with His kingly glory, attended 
by the many, many brethren who have suffered with Him and 


28 


now share His glory! What a glory that will be when He, 
who is our life, will be manifested, and we with Him in His 
glory! It will be unspeakable glory. Cry aloud and shout 
thou inhabitant of Zion, for great is the Holy One of Israel in 
the midst of thee. And it shall come to pass, that He that is 
left in Zion and he that remaineth in Jerusalem shall be called. 
holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jeru- 
salem when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the 
daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jeru- 
salem from the midst thereof by the blast of judgment and 
burning. And the Lord will create over the whole habitation 
of Mount Zion and over her assemblies a cloud and smoke by 
day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, for over all the 
glory shall be spread a canopy. There shall be a pavilion for 
a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a refuge and 
- for a covert from storm and from rain. (Isaiah iv.) This 
glory during the Millennium will no doubt not only hover over 
the land, but will be visible over the entire earth, and the 
knowledge of the glory of the Lord will cover the earth as the 
waters the sea. 

It is interesting to see how Talmudical literature falls in with 
these thoughts. A few quotations from these old writings of 
the Jews will no doubt be acceptable to the reader. Rabbi 
Isaac Napcha says: The Holy One said, I kindled a fire 
in Jerusalem (in wrath) Lament. iv: 11, and Iam going to build 
her up again with fire, as it is said, “‘I will be unto her, saith 
the Lord, a wall of fire round about, He that kindled the fire 
shall surely make restitution.” The Pesikta Rabethi has this: 
What is this: “And for aGlory I am in the midst of her.” Is 
it not the case that the glory of the Holy One is none other 
than on high, as it is said, “ His glory is above the heavens,” 
The glory is in order to show every creature in the universe 


29 


the superior excellence of Israel, since it is on their account 
that the Holy One brings down the Shekinah from the highest 
heaven and lets it dwell in the earth. 

We have now in the vision a continued description of that 
happy condition of Jerusalem and all that is connected with it. 
First, we notice the summons for the Jews who are then still in 
dispersion. oa, ho, flee from the land of the North, saith the 
Lord, for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the 
heaven, saith the Lord. Ho, Zion, escape that dwellest with the 
daughter of Babylon. 

It is not to be expected that when the glory appears and the 
King of Glory comes again and His feet stand there on the 
Mount of Olives, that the entire Jewish nation will then live in 
the land. This will not be the case; only a part of the nation 
was restored in unbelief, and in the midst of them a believing 
remnant, whose faith, suffering and salvation we hope to de- 
scribe later. Two-thirds of all the inhabitants of the land will 
be swept away in the great tribulation. After the Lord has 
come, the others will be restored. It is significant that the 
land of the North is mentioned here Later, in the eighth chap- 
ter, we read: “I will save my people from the East country 
and from the West country,” but those living in the land of 
the North come first. Of course, Babylon was meant as far as 
this vision had anything to do with the restoration which had 
taken place in part from the Babylonian captivity. The North 
country, which figures in the coming restoration, is not Baby- 
ion, but another land. Russia is directly north of Palestine, 
and in this northern land, the territory once inhabited by Gog 
and Magog, about one half of the Jews now living have their 
homes. About six millions of Jews are living to-day in Euro- 
pean and Asiatic Russia. Their deplorable condition in that 
land of the North is well known, and there, likewise, the national 


30 


awakening has been the most marked and Zionism has its 
most ardent advocates. A large multitude is getting ready in 
the North country for a mighty exodus. Like their forefathers 
in Egypt, they will flee from the land of the North, and thus 
prophecy is literally to be fulfilled. 

Zion is to separate from the daughter of Babylon. What is 
Babylon? We hope to answer this question and give a descrip- 
tion of her when we come to consider the seventh night vision, 
the woman in the Ephah. In this third vision of restoration we 
hear next what is to take place after the glory. The expression 
“‘after the glory’ means undoubtedly the glorious appearing of 
the Lord coming with all His saints, sitting upon the throne of 
His glory, and His glory thus manifested. A/ter the glory hath 
He sent Me to the nations which spoiled you: for he that toucheth you 
toucheth the apple of His eye. Who is the one who is being sent to 
the nations? It is without a question He, whom the Father sent. 
He sent Him once, the only begotten, into the world in the form 
of a servant, when He made Himself of no reputation, but Jeho- 
vah will send Him again. And when He again bringeth in the 
Firstborn into the inhabited earth He saith, And let all the 
angels worship Him. (Heb. i:6, 7.) The Father sends Him 
again to establish His glory, and after the manifestation He is sent 
to the nations which spoiled Israel. All Scripture speaks of this. 
While He will in His coming overcome the armies of nations who 
are gathered in that day against Jerusalem, He will likewise con- 
tinue, after His glory, to judge nations. He willrule in the midst 
of His enemies. He will do that among the nations what the 
second psalm declares, thou shalt break them with a rod of iron, 
Thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel. For, behold 
I will shake Mine hand over them, and they shall be a spoil to those that 
served them. In this rule and judgment the Lord of glory will 
be assisted by the saints. Know ye not that the saints shall judge 


Sue 


the world? (a Cor. vi: 2.) Israel will likewise be used in that 
judgment. While He is the lion of the tribe of Judah who now 
roars to the dismay of all His enemies, Israel, His people, be- 
comes the lioness. ‘‘ Behold the people riseth up as a lioness, 
and as a lion does he lift himself up. He shall not lie down till 
he eat the prey and drink the blood of the slain.” (Numbers 
xxili: 24.) Israel will then no longer be the tail but has become 
the head. The true form of government for the earth has been 
restored, a Theocracy through His chosen and restored people, 
the seed of Abraham. Things will then be changed completely. 
The nations shall take them (the children of Abraham) and bring 
them to their place, and the house of Israel shall possess them in 
the land of the Lord for servants and for handmaids, and they 
shall take them captive whose captives they were, and they 
shall rule over their oppressors. (Isaiah xiv: 2.) Strangers shall 
stand and feed your flocks and aliens shall be your vine dressers. 
(Isaiah lxi : 5.) 

We must not overlook the loving words concerning Israel, He 
that toucheth you toucheth the apple of His eye. Israel is the 
apple of the eye of God. Through Moses God declared the same 
truth. He kept him as the apple of His eye. (Deut. xxxii: 10.) 
In Hebrew the pupil of the eye is called the gate, because through 
it enters the light. Thus Israel is the pupil, the gate, through 
which the light has come and comes, for salvation is of the Jews. 
And what is so sensitive, so delicate and easily injured as the 
apple of the eye? And against this apple of the eye of God the 
nations and Christendom have sinned. May we believing Gen- 
tiles understand more fully that Israel is the beloved one and 
may we be kept from doing harm to His people. 

The overcoming of the enemies of Israel, the spoiling of these 
nations which spoiled Israel, and all that is connected with it 
by the sent One ofGod, the Son of God will be the evidence for 


32 


Israel that Jehovah has sent Him. And ye shall know that the 
Lord of Hosts has sent Me. The same statement is repeated in 
this vision, but we shall see in another connection. It is, sv to 
speak, constitutional with the Jew that he wishes to see and then 
believe, and surely he will see and believe, or rather know, when 
the Lord comes. : 

In the tenth verse of the second chapter of Zechariah we read 
now that the daughter of Zion will sing and rejoice. The reason 
of her song and joy is, For lo, I come and I will dwell in the midst of 
thee. To-day orthodox Jews are chanting in Hebrew the magnifi- 
cent psalms which speak of a coming deliverance and manifesta- 
tion of God’s glory, but it is only with their lips, and the heart is 
still hardened and the eye blinded. The dark night is rapidly 
approaching, the night in which a believing remnant of Jews will 
fulfill much of that suffering, waiting, and blessed assurance of 
salvation which is so clearly outlined in the psalms. And after 
that, the whole nation will break out in mighty songs of joy, and 
while there, in the Father’s house, the blood-bought hosts will 
sing their hallelujah, a delivered, cleansed and spirit-filled nation 
in the earth will shout her hallelujah, in which nation after nation 
will join, till at last it has been done what seer after seer saw and 
heard, the earth as well as the heavens filled with His glory, the 
Kingdom come, and His will done in the earth as it is done in 
Heaven. 

Again, the promise is given that the Lord will dwellin the midst 
of her. How is this to be understood? Will the Lord dwell 
continually in person, after his second coming, in Jerusalem? 
Will He be seen there in His Holy Temple by all who come up 
to Jerusalem ? Some Scriptures indicate that He will be present in 
His blessed person at different seasons. The strongest statement 
in this direction is Zechariah xiv: 16. In this passage we have 
the fact of a yearly coming up to Jerusalem of nations (probably 


33 


representatives of nations) to worship the King, and that at the feast 
of tabernacles. His throne, no longer His Father’s throne, upon 
which He sits now, but his own throne during the Millennium, will 
no doubt be in the New Jerusalem which, as a bright and glorious 
vision, will be seen then by all who live in the earth way up in 
the firmament, and the angels of God ascending and descending 
upon the Son of Man. A vice-regent, a Son of David, will oc- 
cupy David’s throne in Jerusalem. The Glory of the Lord will 
appear in the Holy City, and the new name of Jerusalem will be 
Jehovah Shamah, the Lord is there. It is impossible to give the 
details of these glories, for they are not clearly revealed. It is 
enough to know that the Church, His Body, shall truly be united 
with her glorified head, and meet her Beloved, her Bridegroom 
andher Lord. It is enough to know that Israel will surely see 
the King in His beauty and crown Him Lord of all. Even our 
brightest imaginations will not reach the glories of that day. In- 
deed, not half has been told. 

The Lord cometh to dwell in Zion. Many nations shall join 
themselves to the Lord in that day and shall be My people. This pro- 
mise is likewise followed that this will be evidence from which 
the people will know that the Lord of Hosts has sent Him. How 
often the orthodox Jew has come to us and told us that when 
Messiah comes all their enemies will be cast down—there will be 
peace for Jerusalem and the nation Israel ; and then saying, Ah, 
where is that peace?—behold our enemies! When Messiah 
comes we shall know Him by what He does for us in over- 
coming our enemies. Likewise the orthodox Jew will say, 
Where are the many nations who join themselves to the 
Lord, the nations who worship the Lord of Hosts? When 
Messiah has come, he will say, We will know Him by the 
fact that nations shall join themselves unto the Lord. It will 
hardly do to tell the well informed Hebrew that there are now 


34 


Christian nations in existence. Thus the Jew waits for the fulfill- 
ment of these prophecies at some future time, and seeing them 
accomplished he hopes to know then his Messiah and King. 
Only the small remnant, according to the election of grace, sees 
Him now by the eyes of faith—Him who is altogether lovely, and 
in whom alone these prophecies can find their fulfillment. To- 
day individuals from Jews and Gentiles are joining themselves to 
the Lord, but in that day of His appearing and manifestation 
nations will be converted, and many nations shall go and say, 
““Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the 
house of the God of Jacob, and He will teach us His ways and 
we will walk in His paths.” ‘‘ Lift up thine eyes andsee: they all 
gather themselves together—they come to Thee. Thy sons shall 
come from far and thy daughters shall be carried in the arms. 
Then thou shalt see and be lightened, and thine heart shalt 
tremble and be enlarged, because the abundance of the sea shall 
be turned unto thee. The wealth of the nations shall come unto 
thee, the multitudes of camels shall cover thee—the dromedaries 
of Midian and Ephah, they all shall come from Sheba ; they shall 
bring gold and frankincense, and shall proclaim the praises of the 
Lord.” (Isaiah lx : 4-7.) Only then will India and China, South 
America and Africa be won to Christ and the world converted to 
God. But the land of Judah is to be the portion of the Lord 
(verse 12). 

This vision of restoration and the coming of glory ends with 
one of the sublimest exhortations in the Word of God. Be silent, 
all flesh, before the Lord, for He is waked up out of His holy habita- 
tion. The exhortation does not belong really to the restoration. 
It is an appeal to all flesh to be silent before the One who is raised 
up—the coming One. Now is the time when God is silent. He 
is silent to the wicked deeds of men. He 1s silent in regard to 
the nations who are treading down Jerusalem and who are scat- 


35 


tering Israel. The flesh speaks now and is not silent, and the 
language it speaks is rebellion against God and against His 
Anointed. And louder and louder speaks all flesh, and in the 
midst of a boasted civilization, at the dawn of a new century, the 
days of Noah and the days of Lot are at hand. Gain, pride, 
possession, expansion, is the universal cry—a mad hunt after 
Mammon is seen in individuals and in nations; and while 
the flesh speaks thus, and its language becomes more and 
more defiant, God keeps silence. But our God shall come 
and keep silence no longer. Rapidly His day—the terrible 
day of the Lord—is approaching; the day in which He will 
roar out of Zion. Oh, what a hush there will come upon 
those that dwell in the earth when the darkened sun and the 
falling stars will herald the approach of a God who will keep 
silence no longer. Oh, dear reader, Jew or Gentile, listen! 
The signs of the times truly tell us that the Lord who is to come 
must have already risen from His holy habitation. He is com- 
ing. Soon He will gather His saints unto Himself before the 
day of wrath breaks, when neither gold nor silver will deliver. 
Wilt thou not become silent before Him, the coming One? Will 
not every reader yield himself to that wooing spirit of Him, whose 
power does silence the flesh? Be silent all flesh! He is waked 
up out of His holy habitation ! 


- 


CHAPTER II. 


The fourth vision.—Joshua the high priest accused by Satan, but 
cleansed by the angel of the Lord.—The branch.—The stone and 
the seven eyes upon tt.—The coming peace. 


The fourth vision is like the first and second, closely connected 
with the foregoing one. It gives the crowning event of Israel's 
restoration. The prophet recognizes in the figure which is seen 
by him Joshua the high priest, whois standing before the angel 
of the Lord, while at his right hand stands Satan to oppose him. 
Joshua was not clothed with his clean, priestly robes, but he 
wears filthy garments, Jehovah rebukes Satan and terms Jeru- 
salem a brand plucked from the fire. After the accuser is re- 
buked, the filthy garments of the high priest are removed, his 
iniquity is forgiven, and he is clothed with festal raiment. The 
prophet is so carried away with the vision that he asks that a 
clean mitre is to be put upon his head. And now, after the high 
priest is thus clothed, the angel of the Lord charges him with an 
important message : If thou wilt walk in My ways and keep My 
charge, thou shalt judge my house and also keep my courts. I 
will give thee access among those standing here, etc. The servant 
—the branch—is promised, and the stone which is laid before 
Joshua is to have seven eyes. The iniquity of this land is to be 
removed in one day, and the vision closes with the peaceful 
scene, every man inviting his neighbor under the vine and under 
the fig tree. 

The authorized version has a superscription for this chapter, 
‘‘Under the type of Joshua the restoration of the church is prom- 
ised.” This is not alone very misleading but also erroneous. No 
restoration of the church is necessary, and as far as fallen, apostate 

36 


37 


Christendom is concerned, there is no promise of restoration, but 
the Lord will spew her out of His mouth. Others speak of this vision 
as a type of the justification of the sinner, but we need not 
spiritualize Old Testament visions to get assurance of our justi- 
fication. The Epistle to the Romans is sufficient for that. The 
High Priest Joshua stands here for Jerusalem and for the sinful 
nation Israel. The calling of Israel to be a nation of priests is 
too well known, so we need not to enlarge on it. But it isa 
nation stiff-necked, disobedient, unclean and defiled. Disobedi- 
ence and sin have been the cause of Israel’s misfortune and Jerusa- 
lem’s ruin. What would be a restoration of Israel to the land 
without a healing of their sins and a regeneration of the nation? 
It is this divine forgiveness and cleansing of the nation, which so 
many prophets uttered in Jehovah’s name, which is here so won- 
derfully shown in this vision, Like the priests in the temple, 
standing before Jehovah, thus Joshua and Israel is before the 
Lord. Though Joshua is standing before the Lord in filthy 
garments, yet he is still the High Priest. The filthy garments 
do not change the office to which God had called him. Oh, 
wondrous truth, which we meet all through the Word! Israel, 
though in dispersion and in sin, is still the priest, called by Him 
who is a covenant-keeping God! And is it not a perfect picture 
of Israel as it is yet to-day? A priest, but defiled and unclean. 
In Isaiah Ixiv we have part of that wonderful prayer which the 
remnant of Israel is yet to utter. It begins with that sublime 
prayer, Oh, that Thou wouldest rend the heavens, that Thou 
wouldest come, that the mountains might flow down at Thy pres- 
ence. And then follows the confession: We are all become as 
one that is unclean, and all our righteousness is as a polluted 
garment. Alas, how little Israel knowsat this present time of such 
a confession. On the day of atonement the lips confess sin and 
unrighteousness in similar words, but it is still the lips and not the 


38 


heart. But at last Israel will confess her guilt and the blood- 
guiltiness like David did. 

In the vision Satan is seen. This is not the enemy who at 
Zechariah’s time tried to hinder the rebuilding of the temple, but 
itis Satan, the old serpent, the accuser of the brethren, the ad- 
versary. Heis the enemy of Israel. He has tried in the past to 
hurt and to destroy the nation of destiny. He knows the pur- 
poses of God concerning Israel better than many a learned doctor 
of divinity, and therefore, he has opposed that people and opposes 
them still. His opposition has been mostly through nations. How 
much could be said on this topic! -The end of this age will re- 
veal the enemy of Israel, the adversary, as never before in the his- 
tory.of the world. There is to be war in heaven; Michael and 
his angels going forth to war with the dragon; and the dragon 
warred, and his angels, and they prevailed not, neither was their 
place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was 
cast down, the old Serpent, he that is called the Devil and Satan, 
the Deceiver of the whole world, he was cast down to the earth 
and his angels were cast down with him. (Rev. xii: 7-9.) His 
wrath will be directed against Israel and Jerusalem. It is the time of 
which Daniel spoke. And at that time shall Michael stand up, the 
great prince which standeth for the children of thy people ; and 
there shall be a time of trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation, even to that same time. (Daniel xii: 1.) Once more 
Satan will try to destroy the people, but the Lord shall rebuke 
him, Israel will be again, as so often before, like a brand 
plucked out of the fire. So it has been in the past. Way back 
when Israel was in Egypt and God was about to send the deliv- 
erer, He called Moses from out of the burning bush—Israel’s true 
type, burning, but never consumed. Oh, how the fire of perse- 
cution and adversity has been raging, but again and again the 
hand of God snatched the burning brand out of the fire at the 


39 


right moment. The Lord who hath chosen Jerusalem will rebuke 
Satan. This has not yet come. The coming Lord will commis- 
sion an angel out of heaven, having the key of the abyss and a 
great chain in his hand. And he will lay hold on the dragon— 
the old Serpent which is the Devil and Satan—and bind him for 
a thousand years, and cast him into the abyss and shut it and 
seal it over him. (Rev. xx:1, 2.) Then follows the cleansing 
of Israel and the new charge, all so clearly given in this vision. 

The filthy garments are removed by those that stand before the 
angel of the Lord. The iniquity is taken away, and in place of 
the filthy garments there is the rich apparel and the fair mitre upon 
the head. How blessedly all this is waiting for its fulfillment in 
Israel’s regeneration! When He appears after the times of over- 
turning, He whose right it is, His people Israel will be found by 
Him in true penitence, acknowledging their offence. It will bea 
national repentance, a mourning on account of Him, which Zech- 
ariah describes in detail in the twelfth chapter. 

This will be followed by national cleansing, forgiveness of 
sin for the entire remnant which is left, and the new birth of the 
nation by the outpouring of the Spirit. Israel is the nation to be 
born in a day (Isa. Ixvi:8). This great miracle of divine 
grace, the regeneration of Israel by the blood of the once rejected 
King, is spoken of again and.again in the Word. The Church 
has taken it all for herself or spiritualized these promises. We 
can refer only to a*few: ‘‘ He will turn again and have compas- 
sion upon us; He will tread our iniquities under foot ; and Thou 
wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea” (Micah vii: 19). 
«‘T will take you from among the nations and gather you out of all 
countries, and will bring you into your own land. And I will 
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean. (How 
ridiculous that teachers and preachers refer to this text in defence of 
sprinkling as a mode of baptism.) From all your filthiness and 


40 


from all your idols will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I 
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take 
away the stony heart out of your flesh and I will give you a heart 
of flesh ” (Ezek. xxxvi: 24-26). ‘‘I, even I, am He that blotteth 
out thy transgressions for Mine own sake, and I will not remem- 
ber thy sins” (Isa. xliii: 25). ‘‘I have blotted out, as a thick 
cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud thysins ; retura unto Me 
for I have redeemed thee. Sing, oh ye heavens, for the Lord has 
done it; shout ye lower parts of the earth ; break forth into sing- 
ing ye mountains, oh forest, and every tree therein ; for the Lord 
has redeemed Jacob and will glorify Himself in Israel” (Isa. xliv: 
22, 23). And this is Israel’s triumphant song: ‘‘I will greatly 
rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God ; for He has 
clothed me with the garments of salvation, He has covered me with 
the robe of righteousness, as a priest decketh himself with a garland, 
and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels’’ (Isa. lxi: 10). 

And now comes a very solemn charge. Zhus saith the Lord of 
Fosis : if thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, 
then thou also shalt judge my house, and shalt also keep likewise my 
courts, I wiil give thee places to walk among these that stand by. 

Israel was disobedient and did not keep the first charge. It is 
now repeated. It is likewise conditionally as was the first, but 
no apostasy can follow, for a complete healing has made that 
impossible. In analyzing this charge, we see clearly what Israel’s 
earthly calling is and wherein Israel’s millennial glory and work 
will consist : (1) /udgimg in the house of the Lord, and from there 
ruling and judging of nations, by Israel the head of the nations, 
The Church will be higher than this, sitting with Him in His throne, 
and likewise judging, being with the glorified Head over it all; 
(2) Israel will 4eep Hrs courts. In the new millennial temple there 
will be ordinances, and that temple will be a house of prayer for 
all nations, while the Church will be in the temple above; (3) 


4l 


Israel will have places fo walk among these that stand by. This 
may have a double meaning—walking among the ministering 
angels which will ascend and descend upon the Son of Man, and 
places to walk among those that stand by—the nations. Israel’s 
cleansing will take place not in heaven but in the earth, and 
nations as well as angels will be witnesses of it. Among these 
nations redeemed Israel will have places to walk. The Church 
will occupy the many mansions in the Father’s house, and go in 
and out in blessed fellowship with the Lord of glory and all His 
saints ; and, perhaps, for all we know, there may be places to 
walk for the Church in distant worlds. 

The whole redeemed and restored nation will then be a mir- 
acle. Hear now, O Joshua, the high priest, thou and thy fellows 
that sit before thee, for they are men which are a wonder: for behold 
Iwill bring forth my servant the Branch. 

The Jews are now God’s standing miracle, but how much more 
will they be a wonder when the Spirit has filled them! They will 
heal the sick and do the same works Jesus their Elder Brother 
did. What will then come to this sin-cursed earth through 
Israel’s fullness? A miracle—life from the dead. But never be- 
fore He, whose name is the Branch, appears. Oh, how necessary 
it is for us to to be reminded that it will take place when He 
appears and the Branch is brought forth. 

Next comes the stone laid before Joshua, and upon the stone 
seven eyes, and engraving is seen on it. Generally this stone 
is intérpreted as meaning Christ. One of the names of Christ 
is—a stone, a rejected stone, corner stone, a precious stone, etc. 
The true believers are likewise termed stones, living stones. The 
stone in Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, falling out of heaven, smashing 
the image and becoming a great mountain which filled the entire 
- earth, is both Christ and His kingdom, which is not of this earth 
(it is and comes from above). However, it seems to us that the 
only correct interpretation of the stone upon which are the seven 


42 


eyes is that it means Israel restored, and as such, the nucleus of the 
kingdom of God and His Christ in this earth. The seven eyes speak 
of the sevenfold Spirit which will be upon Israel ; the engraving of 
the stone stands for the beauty and glory with which God will bless 
His covenant people. That this interpretation is the only cor- 
rect one becomes at once evident when we reach the closing 
sentence of the ninth verse, and [ will remove the iniquity of that 
land in one day. What land? It is Israel’s land, and therefore the 
whole vision must stand in vital connection with His people. The 
one day, of course, in the first line, must be that day when Christ 
died for our sins and Israel's sins as well, when the veil was rent. 
But alas, the Jews cried then, ‘‘ His blood be upon us and upon our 
children!” How terribly this awful prayer has been answered ! 
Truly the blood has been upon them and their children. But 
soon—oh may it be very soon—another day will come when the 
blood shall be once more upon them and their children—when 
the blood shall cleanse and wash away Israel’s sin—one day 
when Calvary’s blood, the blood of the Son of God, will remove 
the iniquity of that land and its inhabitants. 

All is waiting for that. There can be no kingdom of God in 
the earth, no conversion of the world, no millennium before Israel 
has been cleansed, redeemed, restored, and the iniquity of the 
land is removed. This all-important truth is likewise mentioned 
in afew words at the close of this, the fourth night vision of the 
prophet : Jn that day, satth the Lord of Hosts, shall ye call every man 
his neighbor under the vine and under the fig tree. This is the pic- 
ture of prosperity, peace and love. No prosperity and peace till 
the millennium has come, no millennium until Israel is restored ; 
no true restoration of Israel until the Lord comes with His 
saints. What Zechariah hears about that blessed time of peace 
Micah and other prophets received also from God, ‘‘ Every man 
shall sit under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall 
make them afraid” (Micah iv : 4), 


CHAPTER IV. 


The fifth vision.—The candlestick and the two olive trees.—The 
great mountain becoming a plain,—Zerubbabel the prince finishing 
the house of the Lord. 


The first three chapters of Zechariah are the foundation of the 
entire book. The events in these chapters are again and again 
touched upon in the following visions and prophecies of Zech- 
ariah. For this reason have we paid special attention to these 
three chapters, which speak so clearly of the time of Israel’s 
restoration, the restoration itself and the different events connected 
with it, and much which might be said on the visions of the 
prophet which now follow can be omitted, as the reader has the 
key to the situation in the studies made. 

There was a rest forthe prophet between the fourth and fifth 
night vision. He had fallen into a deep sleep. He may have 
been overcome by the grand and important visions, and is now 
awakened by the angel with the question, ‘‘ What seest thou?” 
The new vision is a very striking one. A golden candlestick 
appears before the seer. An oil receiver is seen on top, from 
which the oil flows to the seven lamps of -ne candlestick through 
seven pipes. Two olive trees stand alongside of the candlestick 
and hang their fruit-laden branches over the golden bowl, filling 
it with oil, which flows through the seven pipes into the seven 
lamps. The question of the prophet, ‘‘ What are these, my 
Lord?” is answered by the angel with this statement, ‘‘This is 
the word of Jehovah to Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might and not 
-by power but by my Spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts. Who art thou, 
oh great mountain, before Zerubbabel? Be a plain! He shall 
bring forth the topstone with shoutings of grace, grace unto it. 

43 


44 


The hands of Zerubbabel who have laid the foundation shall also 
finish it, and they shall rejoice and see the plummet in the hand 
of Zerubbabel—even the seven. The eyes of the Lord shall run 
to and fro through the entire earth.” For the third time the 
prophet asks for information about the two olive trees and 
receives the answer: ‘‘ These are the two sons of oil, that stand 
by the Lord of the whole earth.” , 

The vision of the candlestick and the two olive trees is one of 
the most difficult in the Bible and needs prayerful and thoughtful 
study. 

The general interpretation is that the golden candlestick repre- 
sents the Church, that she is the golden light-bearer, so valuable 
and precious. She is the light in the dark world. The oil and 
the seven pipes are the Holy Spirit who fills the lamps of the 
candlestick ; the two olive trees, Joshua and Zerubbabel, Priest 
and King. The victory which the Church is to gain is one not 
by power or might but by His Spirit, etc. This interpretation 
seems to fit in with a number of passages in the New Testament, 
the seven candlesticks in Revelation first chapter and the teaching 
of the New Testament about the Holy Spirit and His work. 
However, it is hardly a satisfactory explanation. We do not doubt 
fora moment that the Church is represented by a candlestick, 
especially the Churches; or rather, the Church in her seven 
periods. Of course the Holy Spirit’s type is oil, and He is the 
one who accomplishes the work, etc. All this we do not and can- 
not doubt fora moment, but after considering it all it does not 
satisfy us, and we feel that we must look for a better and a deeper 
meaning of the fifth night vision. If its fullest meaning is the 
Church and the work of the Holy Spirit in the Church, how 
could it be then harmonized with the first night visions of Israel’s 
restoration? ‘The above interpretation seems to us overlooks 
entirely the fact that the vision of the candlestick being given 


Eras 


with the others in one night, must be connected with them 
in some way. In other words, the vision of the golden 
candlestick must have some relation to the restoration of 
Israel. 

We desire to call attention to the fact that the vision is one 
which speaks of perfection, completion, fullness. The perfect 
and divine number seven is found three times in the vision, seven 
lamps, seven pipes, and seven eyes. The seven lamps are united 
to one stem, this is union, and above it, is a golden bowl. The 
Spirit conquers, and not power or might does it, but His power. 
The great mountain becomes a plain. The topstone is brought 
forth and crowns the building which is finished by Zerubbabel. 
Shoutings, ‘‘ Grace, grace, unto it,” are heard, and the seven eyes 
run to and fro the whole earth. It is a vision of fullness 
and accomplishment. The candlestick shines and sheds its 
glorious light, its pure gold glitters and reflects the light of the 
seven lamps. The bowl is filled with oil, and the two olive trees 
give a continual supply. The high mountain removed, the temple 
finished, joy and victory abound. The candlestick in the vision 
is exactly like the one in the tabernacle, only the two olive trees 
are something new. The candlestick in the tabernacle represents 
Christ, the Light of the world, and is likewise a type of the Jewish 
theocracy. Theocracy, the government of this earth by the im- 
mediate direction of God, is once to be established, and when it 
is, it will be like a bright and glorious candlestick shedding light 
and dispersing the darkness. We think the Va/kut on Zechariah 
(a Hebrew commentary), is not so very far out of the way when 
it says, ‘‘The golden candlestick is Israel.” It seems to us very 
clear that the vision represents the Jewish theocracy restored, 
Israel in their glorious inheritance as the light of the world. But 
what about the Church as a candlestick? The Lord is seen in 
Revelation to walk among seven candlesticks, which represent the 


46 


seven Churches and prophetically the seven periods of this dis- 
pensation, ending with Laodicea. The end of this age will not be 
a bright and glorious candlestick, filled with oil, conquest and 
glory, but it will be failure and the removal of the candlestick 
which failed in giving the light. The nominal Church is far from 
being the light of the world, and Christendom nears rapidly a 
dark and dreary night. The true believer, who is filled with the 
Spirit, of course, is the light of the world as an individual, he 
reflects the light and glory of His Master, and thus every child of 
God is a light. But the home of the true Church, the body of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, is not the-.earth, to remain here perma- 
nently, but her home is the Father’s house, her destination, union 
with her glorified Head and sharing His glory. Israel and Gentiles 
will be left in the earth, while the Church is with her Lord. When 
He appears, the King of Israel and King of Glory, it will not be 
to re-establish the Church in the earth, for she is to sit with Him 
in heavenly places, but Israel, His beloved people, will become 
the light-bearer, the light which is to enlighten the Gentiles 
and fulfill its original calling. It is a true saying, whatever is 
spoken ot Cnrist is aiso spoken of His Church, and it is just as 
true, whatever is spoken of Christ is also spoken of Israel. Of the 
coming Messiah, we read in Isaiah xlix., ‘‘I will give thee fora light 
to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end 
of the earth,” but this is likewise true of his brethren according to 
the flesh, Israel will be a light to the Gentiles. 

The candlestick of pure gold, precious, and uniting seven 
lamps filled with oil, represents Israel’s glorious fullness. All will 
be united under one Head, and no longer seven candlesticks and 
confusion of religious teachings, but there will be one Shepherd 
and one fold. This will be accomplished not by power or might 
but by His Spirit. He will accomplish God’s blessed purpose in 
Israel by the wonderful outpouring which is promised through 


47 


Joel, and which was only partially fulfilled on the day of Pente- 
cost in Jerusalem, and never since. The Jew feels still in some 
degree his mission, and what else is this awakened national life 
as it is now known by the name of Zionism, than a reaching out 
for it. But there is still the blinding, money, political powers, in 
reality their enemies, different influences and combinations are 
looked upon by them as the means to bring about that which is 
born into every Jewish heart—supremacy and rule. It is not 
by power or might, but by the Spirit. He will come yet upon 
the nation and fill them with His blessed power as He filled once 
their own rejected Brother Jesus, and what He was. Israel will be 
for the nations left in the earth. Zerubbabel, who is now men-. 
tioned, was Israel’s prince at the time of Zechariah. A mountain 
is seen which is before him, a mighty obstacle, but it sinks and 
falls, becomes a plain. The Hebrew has it in the form of a com- 
mand—‘‘ Bea plain!” The mountain represents a kingdom, a 
power, and seems to stand here for anti-Christ and His power. 
Zerubbabel as prince is the type of the Prince of Peace, Israel’s 
King. His hands have laid the foundation, just as Zerubbabel 
had laid the foundation of the temple, and just as Zerubbabel 
finished it, bringing forth the headstone which crowns the new 
house of the Lord, thus Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews, 
who has laid the foundation and who is the foundation, the 
precious stone, He will finish it. He is the Author and Fin- 
isher, and itis all grace. When the foundation of the temple 
was laid there were mighty shoutings, and likewise when it was 
finished. The priests and the Levites sang one to another in 
praising and giving thanks unto the Lord, for He is good, and 
His mercy endureth forever toward Israel, and all the people 
‘shouted with a great shout (Ezra iii: 11). What shoutings there 
will be when at last the fullness of the Gentiles is come in and all 
Israel is saved, when the headstone will be brought forth, what 


48 


mighty hallelujahs will be heard in the heavens and in the earth, 
praising—grace—all of grace. Without pointing out the other de- 
tails of this vision which are now easily understood, we desire to make 
a few remarks on the two olive trees standing at the right and at 
the left of the candlestick supplying the same with oil. There 
can be no doubt that these sons of oil, as they are called, repre- 
sented Joshua and Zerubbabel, living at the time of Zechariah, the 
one the priest and the other the king. What deeper meaning is 
here? It is probably the easiest explanation to say that these two 
olive trees are types of Him who is a Priest upon His throne and 
whose blessed Person will supply the candlestick with the oil, His 
own Spirit ! 

These two olive trees are likewise seen in Revelation, the 
eleventh chapter. Here they are the two witnesses who give their 
testimony during the great tribulation in Jerusalem, and who 
stand in direct relation to that theocracy which is then about to be 
established in Israel. We believe that these two witnesses are 
Moses and Elijah, the same who appeared with our Lord upon 
the mountain of transfiguration. 


CHAPTER V. 
The vision of the flying roll—The vision of the woman in the Ephah, 


The three remaining night visions are of a different character. 
The first visions the prophet had were visions of comfort for Jeru- 
salem and the dispersed nation, the overthrow of Babylon and 
all their enemies, divine forgiveness and the theocracy restored. 
Now follow the last three visions, and these are visions of judg- 
ment. Judgment precedes Israel’s restoration, and is very promi- 
nently connected with it. 

The sixth night vision is the one of the flying roll. The 
prophet’s eyes seem to have been closed after the fifth vision, for 
we read, ‘‘And I lifted up my eyes again.” The flying roll he 
sees is twenty cubits long and ten cubits broad. The interpreting 
angel tells the prophet that it is the curse that goeth forth over the 
face of the whole land; for every one that stealeth shall be cut 
off on this side according to it, and every one that sweareth shall 
be cut off on that side according to it. The Lord of hosts has 
brought it forth and it is to enter into the house of the thief, and 
into the house of him that sweareth by His Name to a falsehood, 
and it shall lodge in the midst of His house and consume it, 
both its wood and its stone. 

That this vision means judgment is evident at the first glance, 
Ezekiel had a similar vision. ‘‘And when I looked, behold, an 
hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book was therein ; 
And he spread it before me; and it was written within and with- 
out: and there was written therein lamentations, and mourning, 
and woe (Ezek. ii: 9, 10). Ezekiel was to eat that book. This 
reminds us at once of the books in Revelation (chapers v. and x.), 
which are likewise connected with God’s judgments in the earth. 


49 


50 


The flying roll is written on both sides, signifying the two tables 
of stone, the law of God. Stealing and swearing falsely are men- 
tioned because the one is found on the one side of the two tables 
of stone, and the other on the other side. However, it is no 
longer ‘‘ Thou shalt not,” but on the flying roll are written the 
curses, the awful curses against the transgressors of God’s law 
which are now about to be put into execution. The curse is 
found in its awful details, as it refers to an apostate people, in 
Deuteronomy xxvii. and xxviii, The roll is of immense size, 
and on it are the dreadful curses of an angry God. The vision 
must have been one of exceeding great terror. Imagine a roll, 
probably illumined at night with fire, moving over the heavens, 
and on it the curses of an eternal God—wherever it moves its 
awful message is seen; nothing is hid from its awe-inspiring 
presence. It reminds one of the fiery handwriting on the wail in 
the king’s palace. Surely such an awful judgment is coming by 
and by, when our God will keep silence no longer. One of the 
sublimest judgment Psalms, the fiftieth, mentions something simi- 
lar to this flying roll. ‘‘ When thou sawest a ¢hze/, then thou con- 
sentedst with him, and hast been partaker with adulterers. Thou 
givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit. Thou 
sittest and speaketh against thy brother ; thou slanderest thine own 
mother’s son. These things hast thou done, and I kept silence ; 
thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thyself: but I 
will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes” 
(Psalm 1:18-21). The flying roll stands undoubtedly in con- 
nection with wickedness, theft and false swearing, as it 1s found in 
so many forms in unbelieving Israel, but it finds also a large ap- 
plication in the judgment of wickedness throughout the earth in 
the glorious day of His appearing. 

But the roll enters the house of the evil doer and remains there 
to punish not only the wicked persons but also to consume the 


51 


timber and the stone. This may stand for the two facts: the se- 
cret places will be entered in that judgment, and it will be a thor- 
ough judgment which will consume all that is connected with 
wickedness. In Leviticus xiv. we read of the cleansing of the 
leper, that the leper’s house which was infected was completely 
destroyed. Elijah’s sacrifice was consumed by fire, and not alone 
the sacrifice but also the wood and the stones and the very water. 
God’s fire will again fall from heaven to consume the wood, hay, 
and stubble, nothing will be hid. Oh, what a burning day that 
day of the Lord will be when His well earned curses will be car- 
ried out, and none can escape. 

Another application still of this vision of the flying roll may be 
made in connection with the established theocracy during the 
coming age. However, space forbids an enlargement. 

The next vision is one of great interest and not a little diffi- 
culty. It claims our attention more than any of the other visions. 
In it we see again wickedness and judgment. The angel now 
calls the prophet’s attention to some startling vision. He sees an 
ephah going forth. And he said, this is their aim (literally ayn 
eye) in all the land. And, behold, a round piece of lead was 
lifted up, and this is a woman sitting in the midst of the ephah. 
And he said, This is wickedness ; and he cast her in the midst of 
the ephah, and cast the weight of lead in its mouth. And I 
lifted up mine eyes and saw, and, behold, two women came forth, 
and the wind was in their wings, and they had wings like stork 
wings, and they lifted up the ephah between earth and heaven, 
And I said to the angel that talked with me, Whither are these 
taking the ephah? And he said to me, To build for her a house 
in the land of Shinar; and it shall be established and settled 
there upon its own base. 

_ That we have here a most striking and intensely interesting vis- 
ion is at once evident. Alas! that so few students of the Word 


52 


should pass it by without digging down to the depths and com- 
paring scripture with scripture to find its true and final meaning ! 
The vision is generally taken to mean wickedness in connection 
with Israel, and having its fulfilment in their captivity. Many 
other interpretations have been advanced which are, however, 
unsatisfactory. We have to look deeper and give this vision a 
very prayerful study. After much study and research we believe 
that the whole vision is identical with the final Badylon, the great 
harlot of Revelation, her fall and judgment, and all that is con- 
nected with it—wickedness put away, sealed up, the wicked one 
destroyed, and Satan chained. 

What are the leading figures inthe vision? An ephah—which 
isa Jewish measure standing here for commerce. The aim (eyes) 
of all the land (or earth) are upon it. Commercialism is very 
prominent in Revelation in connection with the full measure 
of wickedness, the climax of ungodliness. In Revelation xviii 
merchants are mentioned who have grown rich through the abun- 
dance of her delicacies. ‘Then the merchants are seen weeping, 
for no man buys their merchandise any more. And then a long 
list follows, including al the articles of modern commerce. Com- 
pare this with the awful description of the last times in James v. 
Rich men are commanded to weep and howl, for miseries are 
come upon them, They heaped treasure together for the Zas¢ days, 
and it was a heaping together by fraud, dishonesty in keeping 
back the hire of the laborers. They lived in pleasure (luxuri- 
ously) and been wanton. Indeed, here is that burning question 
of the day, capital and labor, and its final outcome, misery and 
judgment upon commercialism, riches heaped up, and all in 
‘wickedness. In Habakkuk ii: 12 the woe of judgment of that 
coming glory of the Lord is pronounced upon him that buildeth 
a town with blood and establisheth a city by iniquity! The peo- 
ple are seen laboring for the fire and wearying themselves for 


53 


vanity. Luxuries, increase, riches, etc., are mentioned in the 
second and third chapters of Isaiah, chapters of judgment. Other 
passages could be quoted, but these aresufficient for our purpose. 
They show us that the climax of wickedness as it is in the earth 
when judgment will come, and Israel's time commences once 
more, will be connected with commerce, riches and luxuries. 
The ephah points to this. 

In the second place let us notice that in the mzdst of the ephah 
there is seen a woman, She is called wickedness. The Hebrew 
word wickedness is translated by the Septuagint with “‘ wvouda” 
anomia. We find that the Holy Spirit uses the same word in 2 
Thes. 2:8, and then shall be revealed the wicked one (4voso5) 
whom the Lord Jesus will slay with the Spirit of His mouth. The - 
woman in the ephah personifies wickedness, She has surrounded 
herself with the ephah and sits in the midst of it. Have we not 
here the great whore having a golden cup in her hand full of 
abominations and filthiness of her fornication? Undoubtedly. 
This woman isthe type of evil and wickedness in its highest form. 
Let us glance at that wonderful description of that woman in Rey- 
elation. She is the great whore sitting upon many waters. She 
sits upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, 
having seven heads and ten horns, The woman is arrayed in pur- 
ple and scarlet decked with gold, precious stones and pearls. 
Upon her forehead is seen her name, Mystery, BABYLON the 
Great, the mother of harlots and abominations in the earth. She 
is drunk with the blood of the saints. The woman in the ephah 
represents the same great whore, Babylon the great. This be- 
comes at once clear when we take into consideration that the 
woman in the ephah is carried swiftly away and a house is built 
for her in tne land of Shinar, and it shall be established, and set 
there upon her own base. Now the land of Shinar is Babylonia, 
There it is where the God-opposing power has its home and where 
it will end in final and total destruction. 


54 


But it is certainly worth the while to follow this up. The first 
city erected after the judgment of the first age was the city in the 
plain of Shinar. There they built a city and in it a tower, whose 
top was to reach into the heavens, to make themselves a name. 
Self, worship of the creature, had reached its climax, and con- 
fusion and judgment came swiftly. The Babylon of the Revela- 
tion is the very same attempt, only in its fullest development. It 
is Cain’s city—human strength, human wisdom, stored in it. 
A number of the wicked generation, after the confusion of 
tongues, remained in the land of Shinar as inhabitants of 
Babylon. In it wickedness, idolatry, luxuries, earthly glory 
and commerce prospered. Only a few of the inspired descriptions 
of ancient Babylon may be mentioned here: The Golden City, 
Isaiah xiv: 4. The lady of Kingdoms, Isaiah xvii:5. Stand now 
with thine enchantments, and with the multitudes of thy sorceries, 
wherein thou hast labored from thy youth, Isaiah xlvii: 12. The 
praise of the whole earth, li: 41. Babylon! a golden cup in the 
Lord’s land, that made all the earth drunken, the nations have 
drunken of her wine, therefore the nations are mad, Jeremiah li: 7. 
It is the land of graven images, and they are mad upon their 
idols, Jeremiah 1:38. O thou that dwellest in many waters, 
abundant in treasures, Jeremiah li: 13. Babylon was in splendor 
and outward glory for the kingdoms of the world, God opposing 
what Jerusalem was for the land. Jerusalem is the city of a great 
King and Babylon may be termed the city of the prince of this 
world. According to Herodotus, the walls of Babylon were 60 
miles in circumference. They were 87 feet thick and 350 feet 
high. The city had 25 gates made of solid brass. The city con- 
tained 676 squares, beautifully and symetrically arranged. The 
river ran through the city, surrounded by high walls, and in it 
were brass gates and steps leading to the river banks. A wonder- 
ful bridge spanned the river. No such city ever stood in the ~ 


55 


earth again. Even the great cities of our days—Paris, London, 
New York and Berlin—do not reach the splendor, luxury and 
wealth of ancient Babylon. The king’s palace had a wall 
around it six miles long. The hanging gardens were consid- 
ered the wonder of the world. The waterworks of Babylon, sup- 
plying the immense city and its hanging gardens from the river 
Euphrates, were more powerful and larger than any modern water 
supplies. A Roman historian gives a vivid description of the city. 
*‘Nothing could be more corrupt than its morals, nothing more 
fitted to excite and to allure to immoderate pleasures. The rites 
of hospitality were polluted by the grossest and most shameless 
lusts. Money dissolved every tie, whether of kindred, respect or 
esteem. Drunkeness and the grossest immoralities were practised 
in public.” 

The worship of Babylon was idolatry, and it is a fact that 
all idolatry can be traced to Babylon. She is the mother of all 
abominations. Babylon was destroyed, but has a promise of 
restoration and return of her glory before her final and total de- 
struction comes. 

Roman Catholicism is generally taken to be the Babylon of the 
Revelation. It is more correct to say Rome is an offspring of 
Babylon. Ancient Babylon had a religious ceremonial like the 
Rome of to-day. Indeed, the ancient Babylonian worship is re- 
vived in modern Rome. Babylon is the mother and Rome is the 
living daughter; while Rome again has her daughters—the ‘‘ isms” 
of Christendom. Babylon means concentration and confusion. 
A boasting, high minded Christendom—Roman and so-called 
“¢ Protestant ’—is rapidly nearing its awful apostacy and judgment. 
The cry, so popular in our times—the Fatherhood of God and 
the brotherhood of men and ofa social Christianity—is really the 
cry of old, Let us make us a name; it is concentration. Money, 
riches and commercialism play a very important part in the popular 


56 


religious enterprises. All is getting ready for Laodicea—increase 
in riches and proud boastings. Influential men, money, etc., 
control the affairs of Christendom. Error and loose morals are 
spreading in every direction. Great schemes are planned ; insti- 
tutions of learning—in which infidelity, in the form of higher criti- 
cism, is taught—are erected and endowed by the “ church” with 
millions of dollars, as if this earth were to be the home of the 
church for ever. The twentieth century is prophesied to become 
the most glorious, and one would not know where to stop if all 
the beautiful air castles and promises of would-be prophets were 
to be named. The supremacy of the Anglo-Saxon race, its civil- 
izing influences and power for good, etc., are harped upon at 
present as being a mighty factor in the final conversion of the 
world. But in the midst of this boasting Christendom, heaping 
their bricks together for their proud tower, blindness has already 
become greater than the blindness of the Jews. In the midst of 
Christendom, the sorceries and idolatries of ancient Babylon are 
being strangely revived and leading many astray. The luxuries 
of Babylon, fostered by modern inventions and commercialism, 
are seen on aJl hands. One only needs to study statistics to 
see what this ‘‘Christian nation” expends a year for luxuries and 
what for the preaching of the gospel, the only power for salvation. 
The near future will undoubtedly bring the long looked-for union 
of churches, concentration for reformation, lifting up of humanity, 
etc., etc., and when man in his own thoughts and making himselt 
‘a name seems almost to have succeeded, He who sitteth in the 
heavens and who laughs at their foolish efforts will no longer 
laugh but will speak once more in His wrath, and Babylon will 
fall. Whoever has eyes opened by the Word and the Spirit, 
must see how well the woman has succeeded in putting the leaven 
of error and wickedness into the fine flour, and the leaven is doing 
its perfect work in leavening the whole lump. 


57 


But we must return to the vision. The ephah is carried, and 
in it the woman, by two women with wings of storks into the land 
of Shinar, and there a house is built and it is established on her own 
base. Babylon as it is described in the Revelation xvii and xviii 
can hardly mean exclusively corrupted ecclesiastical systems, apos- 
tate Christendom as it is seen to-day. The Babylon of the Reve- 
lation is still future, and its fullest development falls in the time 
when the body of the Lord Jesus Christ is no longer in the earth. 

It is remarkable that certain prophecies concerning Babylon in 
Isaiah and Jeremiah have not yet been fulfilled. If we hold to a 
literal interpretation of the Scriptures then of necessity Babylon is 
to be rebuilt. The desolations of Babylon prophesied by these 
two prophets have not yet taken place. The destruction is to be 
suddenly by fire, and that destruction has never been. Still more 
startling is the fact that the prophecies of Isaiah and Jeremiah con- 
cerning Babylon and its final destruction are identical with Reve- 
lation xvii and xviii. The vision of the ephah and the woman 
in it being swiftly carried to Shinar and housed there upon her 
own base, as well as other prophecies concerning Babylon, point 
to an actual rebuilding of ancient Babylon as a great commercial 
center and world power as well as religious centralization. There 
are many indications in this direction in our times. Railroads 
are planned to India. Russia is advancing in the same direction. 
Maybe the restoration of the Jews in unbelief as it has commenced 
will hasten such a project as it has been already mentioned by 
statesmen, an international center for commerce and arbitration 
in central Asia. It concerns the true believer very little what the 
final Babylon will be. He does not belong to it, neither to the 
present Babylon as it exists in Christendom ; nor will he see the 
future Babylon, for the Lord will then have gathered His saints. 
The removal of the church from the earth will bring about a 
great change, and all that is to be done will be done swiftly, in- 


58 


dicated by the stork’s wings. What men in that gross darkness, 
when the light of God, His Spirit, and His praying church is re- 
moved, will do in their rebellion against God and His Anointed 
no human being can now estimate or imagine. Finally, the 
vision of the ephah and the woman, so to speak, sealed up in it, 
may denote also the overthrow and judgment of wickedness. 
Babylon fallen, cast down. Anti-Christ, the man of sin, slain by 
the brightness of His coming. Satan chained in the pit for a 
thousand years. The last vision of the prophet is likewise a vision 
of judgment, followed by the crowning of Joshua with the double 
crowns of silver and gold. 


CHAPTER VI. 


The Last Night Vision of the Prophet.—The Vision of the Four 
Chariots Coming from Between the Mountains of Brass.—The 
Crowning of Joshua with Crowns. 


The prophet lifts up his eyes again and sees four chariots which 
come out from between two mountains which were of brass. In 
the first chariot the horses are red, in the second they are black, 
in the third white, and in the fourth speckled bay. The angel 
explains that these are the four spirits of the heavens which go 
forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth. The black 
and the white horses go forth into the north country, the speckled 
go to the south country, and the bay went forth and sought to go 
that they might walk to and fro through the earth, and so they did. 
The last verse of the vision reads: ‘‘ And he called me and spake 
to me, saying, Behold, these that go forth in the land of the north 
have caused my spirit to rest upon the land of the north.” 

We notice first the similarity of the last vision with the first con- 
tained in the opening chapter of Zechariah. The visions opened 
with the hosts of heaven upon red, speckled and white horses, 
having walked to and fro through the earth. We learned from 
the first vision that its meaning was judgment; that God was 
displeased with the nations, and is once more jealous for Jerusalem 
and ready to turn in mercy to Zion, and the hosts of heaven are seen 
in that first vision preparing for judgment. In the last vision the 
chariots of judgment are seen coming forth to sweep over the 
earth, to be followed by the crowning with crowns of the high- 
priest. The riders of the first vision may be termed the advance 
guards of the judgment, but the chariots now put the divine 


39 


60 


decrees into execution. The riders halted in a valley amidst a myrtle 
grove, but the chariots rush forth to execute their terrible work from 
between two mountains of brass. These mountains mean undoubt- 
edly Mount Moriah and the Mount of Olives. They rush through 
the Valley of Jehoshaphat. The brass is mentioned to denote 
the firmness and stability of these mountains, which shall never be 
moved. We do not think that in the four chariots there is an 
allusion to the four world-powers. The judgment of them is now 
come, The stone is falling and smiting the image at its feet and 
pulverizing it, putting it completely out of existence. The 
chariots are God’s powers, agencies for judgment in the earth, 
which wiil pass swiftly along, shown by the fast running chariots. 
In Rev. vi the seven seals are opened, and there go forth the four 
terrible riders upon white, red, black and pale horses, The riders 
in the Apocalypse are the riders which go through the earth during 
the great tribulation, but in the eighth night vision of Zechariah 
we see the chariots of God’s wrath. The vision falls in the time 
when heaven opens and He appears riding upon a white horse, 
His name Faithful and True, coming in righteousness to judge 
and to make war. Wonderful vision of Him who is clothed with 
a vesture dipped in blood! He is followed by the armies of 
heaven upon white horses, all clothed in fine linen white and 
clean. ‘‘And out of His mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it 
He should smite the nations, and He shall rule them with a rod 
of iron, and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath 
of almighty God” (Rev. xix). Immediately after the appearing of 
the King of Kings and Lord of Lords with all His saints, ‘‘ An 
angel is seen standing in the sun, and he cried with a lond voice, 
saying, to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and 
gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great God ; that 
ye may eat the flesh of kings and the flesh of captains and the 
flesh of mighty men and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit 


61 


upon them, both free and bond, both small and great.” How 
terrible that wrath will be, what awful work these chariots will 
work in slaying the ungodly, rebellious people, and spoiling the 
armies of military Christendom no human pen can describe. 
‘* Before Him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth 
at His feet. He stood and measured the earth. He beheld and 
drove asunder the nations; and the everlasting mountains were 
scattered, the perpetual hills did bow. The sun and the moon 
stood still in their habitation. Thou didst march through the 
land in indignation, Thou didst thresh the nations in anger” 
(Hab. iii). O how our hearts as believers should praise our God 
and our Lord Jesus Christ who has delivered us from that wrath 
to come. And while the tribulation is not yet, and wrath will 
come after the tribulation, how should we redeem the time and 
witness of that great salvation to Jew and Gentile, and teach in the 
words of the second Psalm, ‘‘ Kiss the Son.’”’ His wrath shall 
soon be kindled. The time is short, and soon the scenes of 
terror, tribulation, and wrath will be enacted in the earth. The 
removal of the Church from the earth will be the signal for the 
beginning. 

The angel interprets to the prophet that the chariots are the 
four spirits of the heavens which go forth from standing before the 
Lord of the earth. These agencies for wrath were with God 
standing before Him the Lord of all the earth, but now at His 
command they descend to scatter death and destruction. They 
go forth in sets, and the north country and south country both 
sO prominent in the prophetic word are mentioned. The bay 
horses, however, are not confined to one direction, they go 
through the entire earth. At last in the judgment of the land of 
the north the Spirit is caused to rest. The overthrow of the 
enemies of Israel is complete and the Spirit is quieted. How 
long may the wrath last and for how long may the chariots do 


62 


their deadly work? Perhaps longer than we now think. The 
millennial reign of Christ, as foreshadowed in the bloody 
rule of David, followed by the peaceful reign of Solomon, may 
teach us lessons in this direction. The night visions have ended. 
They may be termed the Apocalypse of Zechariah. Daniel, 
Zechariah and Revelation go together in a wonderful harmony 
and explain each other. Alas! that just these three parts of 
the Bible should be so little studied and so little under- 
stood. 

The long night of visions for the young prophet Zechariah had 
passed by and the noise of the speeding chariots had left his ears. 
The morning must have been when he opened his eyes after behold- 
ing such wonderful things, and now the Word of the Lord comes - 
to him. 

A command is given to the prophet, which has a sub- 
lime prophetic meaning. The command will surely be once 
more carried out by Israel on that glorious morning when the 
Sun of righteousness has risen after a dark and dreary night of 
sin and tribulation as well as wrath is past. What is the com- 
mand? Take from the exiles, from Cheldai, from Tobiah, and 
from Jedaiah, and go thou on that day, go into the house of 
Jusiah the son of Zephaniah, whither they have come from 
Babylon. Take silverand gold and make crowns, and set them 
upon the head of Joshua the son of Josedek, the high priest, and 
speak to him, saying, Thus speaketh the Lord of Hosts, saying, 
Behold a man whose name is Branch, and from his place he shall 
grow up and build the temple of Jehovah. ’ Even He shall build 
the temple and bear majesty, and shall sit and rule upon His 
throne, and shall be a priest upon His throne, and the counsel of 
peace shall be between them both. And the crowns shall be to 
Chelem, and to Tobiah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen, the son of 
Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of Jehovah. And they 


63 


that are afar off shall come and shall build in the temple of 
Jehovah, and ye shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me to 
you, and it will come to pass if ye will hearken unto the voice of 
Jehovah your God. 

Some consider this to be the ninth vision of the prophet. It is, 
however, the Word of the Lord which comes to the prophet. 
There can be no doubt but the command was actually carried 
out and Cheldai (robust), Tobiah (God’s goodness), and Jedaiah 
(God knows), gave their silver and gold, and crowns were made 
out of it and placed upon the head of Joshua the high priest. 
But the action had a much deeper meaning. It was a highly 
typical one. It must have astonished Joshua and the people to 
hear such a command, for the royal crown did not belong to the 
high priest but to the descendant of David. He must have 
understood that the whole command had a symbolical bearing. 
Joshua hears it from the Word of the Lord that another person is 
only typified by him, ‘‘ Behold the man whose name is the Branch,” 
It is this man the Branch who will be a priest upon the throne. 
This, of course, is our Lord Jesus Christ. The name of the high 
priest Joshua is in itself very significant, for the meaning is, God is 
salvation, Saviour, Jesus. Pontius Pilate was fulfilling prophecy 
when he stood there leading out Jesus of Nazareth before that 
tumultuous multitude, and when he said ‘‘ Behold the man.” If 
the assembled Jews had known the Scriptures they would have 
recognized the phrase. But how did he then come forth? He 
wore a crown of thorns upon His meek and loving brow, and the 
people gazed into the blood-stained face of the Lamb of God now 
ready to be placed upon the altar and slain, But once again it 
will sound forth, ‘“‘ Behold the man,” for when He appears it will 
be after He has gathered His saints, and then He will come as 
the Son of Man in the heavens, and the sign of the Son of Man 
will be seen there. He will be crowned again, too, but not with 


64 


the crown of suffering and shame, but with the crowns of glory. 
Thus he is seen in Revelation xix : 12 as wearing many crowns, 

He comes to build the temple of Jehovah, bearing majesty, 
sitting and ruling upon His throne. He is now the builder of the 
spiritual temple which is composed of living stones (Eph. ii: 21 ; 
1 Peter ii: 5). But when He comes again there will be the build- 
ing of another temple. It is now no longer His Father’s throne 
but His own, upon which He is a priest as well. The King of 
Kings and the Lord of Lords has now taken possession of His 
inheritance. The times of overturning are over and He whose 
right it is has come. There is a very instructive thought in the 
fact that the persons of the exile, as mentioned above, were to 
bring the silver and the gold out of which the crowns were to be 
made. The time will come when the whole exiled nation, so 
long scattered and peeled, though even in dispersion, the richest 
nation of the earth, will bring their silver and gold, their glory 
and their all and lay it at the feet of the King. 

The CX Psalm will then find its fulfillment: “Thou art a priest 
forever after the order of Melchizedek.” Melchizedek united the 
offices of a king and a priest in one person, ‘‘ For this Mel- 
chizedek, king of Salem, priest of the Most High God, who met 
Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed 
him ; to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all ; first, being 
by interpretation King of Righteousness, and after that also King 
of Salem, which is King of Peace. Without father and without 
mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor 
end of life, but made like unto the Son of God ; abideth a priest 
continually” (Heb. vii: 1-3). The whole will be realized in the 
restoration of the kingdom to Israel. Perhaps the fourteenth verse 
will also find a literal fulfillment then after the crowning of the 
King by His own people who rejected Him once, and a memorial 
of that event will be seen in the temple throughout the millennium. 


65 


They that are afar off are now seen coming, and build not the 
temple of the Lord but in the temple. The Gentiles, of course, 
are they that are afar off and who are even now building in a 
certain sense in the temple of the Lord, but when He has returned 
_ and sits upon His throne this prophecy will find its final fulfill- 
ment. And when shall it all come to pass? An answer is given 
which refers us to the opening words of the first chapter. ‘‘ And 
this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the 
Lord your God.” 

In the whole command of the crowning of the high priest, 
Israel’s future glory is likewise seen. Their great and high calling 
will be realized in that day when the man the Branch comes forth 
and turns away ungodliness from Jacob. Israel will be as His 
earthly people like the Priest upon His throne, a royal priesthood, 
a holy nation, a peculiar people. The kingdom has then come, 
and the will of God is being done in earth as it is done in heaven. 
And oh how blessedly for the believer’s heart to think God’s own 
thoughts and move in the purposes of God, Our own individual 
salvation eternally assured, we ought to cry continually ‘‘ Even 
so, come Lord Jesus.”—Amen, Amen ! 


CHAPTER VIL. 


The question put to the Prophet concerning the Fast.—The Rebuke 
given and their Failure shown. 


The night visions had come to an end. In them, as we have 
seen, the whole future of Israel, their restoration to the land and 
regeneration, as well as the theocracy and the judgments con- 
nected with it, were revealed. Nearly two years had passed by 
since that memorable night of visions, and during these two years 
the people had, obedient to the heavenly visions and- encouraged 
by them, built the house of the Lord. Soon the temple was to 
be completed and worship once more to be restored. A question 
rose then in the minds of some of the people about the keeping of 
certain fast days by which they commemorated events of judg- 
ments upon their nation and city. The principal day of fasting 
was the day set apart for remembering the destruction and burn- 
ing of the city of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. This day was 
kept by the Jews on the tenth day of the fifth month. Messen- 
gers are sent with,this question to the prophet, and this occasion 
is used by the Lord to give a new message to the nation through 
the prophet. i 

The seventh chapter is divided into three sections. 1. The oc- 
casion for the prophecy (verses 1-4). 2. The rebuke (verses 4-8). 
3. Looking over the past (verses 8-14). But the seventh chapter 
does not answer the question put to the prophet. If a reader of 
the word stops reading with the seventh chapter, and does not 
continue to read the eighth, he will be much perplexed. The 
seventh and eighth chapters of Zechariah go together; in fact 
they should form only one chapter. The eighth chapter contains 

66 


67 


two sections. 1. Promises of blessings again and teachings con- 
cerning their walk (verses 1-17). 2. The solemn fast days will 
be no more; instead of them there will be feast days. Whole 
nations will seek the Lord and be joined to Israel. Thus the end 
of chapter eight answers the question of the people concerning 
the fast days. At the first glance we notice that these two chap- 
ters, though starting from a desire of the people in the prophet’s 
day, are yet awaiting their final and greatest fulfillment. Israel 
still fasts and is still the forsaken. Still there is mourning and 
weeping over the departed glory, and once a year is the solemn 
fast kept which reminds the seed of Abraham of the sad fate of 
Jerusalem and the Temple, twice destroyed on the same day. 

But let us glance at these sections in these chapters, and make 
a short comment on them. 

Chapter VII: 1-4. The question.—It comes from the people of 
Bethel. The two men who represent the people have Assyrian 
names—Sherezer, meaning prince of the treasury, and Regem- 
melech, the official of the King. Perhaps they were born in exile 
and received their names there, and may have held the position 
indicated by their names. Their concern for a human institution 
not at all commanded in the word of the Lord, as it was the case 
with the fast day in question, shows the lack of spirituality in 
them. They should have been more concerned about true 
obedience than with an insignificant ceremony. It has always 
been so with the people. When the Lord came He said to the 
leaders, ‘‘ Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat and swallow a 
camel” (Matthew xxii: 24). And they are still concerned with 
ceremonials and know not the true obedience. But the same 
conditions, alas! exist too in Christendom. The question itself 
about weeping on that day for so many years shows that they were 
tired of it. It wasa burden to them. If they had the true faith 
and in it obedience, they would not have come with that question 


68 


at all, but with joy and gladness would they have looked to the 
future, and known that the promised restoration as seen by the 
prophet was surely to come. 

II, The reproof. Verses 4-7.—The word of the Lord comes 
now to the prophet. The message is for all the people and for 
the priests. The two fasts are mentioned. The one in the fifth 
month as already stated was the one in remembrance of the 
destruction of the city. The fast of the seventh month was kept 
on the anniversary of the murder of Gedaliah at Mizpah (Jere- 
miah xli). But why did they keep these fast days? Why do they 
keep these days indeed still? The Lord asks, ‘‘Is it unto 
me, unto me?” No, it was not for the honor and glory of God, 
but their own selfish interests were at the bottom of it. Indeed 
God had never asked them to fast. These institutions were man- 
made, and highly displeasing to Jehovah. And is it not so now, 
not alone with the Jews but with Christendom? Oh, the man- 
made institutions and outward observances which only dishonor 
God and are for the selfish interests of the people! The eating 
and drinking, the fast being over, was not unto the Lord, but unto 
themselves. It was obedience the Lord required. Had they lis- 
tened to the words spoken by the prophets they would not have 
been in captivity, there would have been no need for a solemn 
fast. Unbelief was at the bottom of it all, and so it is still with 
the nation in dispersion. 

III. The closing verses of the seventh chapter Jook over past his- 
tory. In the first place the Lord says what he desires to see done 
by them: True judgment executed, mercy and truth shown by 
every man to his brother, oppress not the widow and the father- 
less, the stranger nor the poor, let none of you imagine evil 
against his brother in your heart. These precepts were spoken to 
them by the propnets before the captivity. ‘‘Wash ye, make you 
clean ; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes ; 


69 


cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the 
oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow ” (Isaiah i.) 
But they did the very opposite, and continued in an outward 
service without obedience of the heart. 

This disobedience became their ruin and brought on the dis- 
aster. The description of their waywardness fits that people in 
their entire history. They refused to attend and offered a rebel- 
lious shoulder. They made their ears too heavy to hear, their 
heart they made an adamant that they might not hear the law and - 
the words which Jehovah of hosts sent by His Spirit. These con- 
ditions prevailed in a still intenser form when our Lord Jesus 
Christ appeared among them. At last God Himself put judicial 
blindness upon them and still their heart is like adamant, but that 
heart of stone will be removed at last by the Spirit of God and a 
heart of flesh given in its place. (Ezek. xxxvi). 

And now follows the manifestion of the wrath of Jehovah of 
hosts. He.had cried and they did not hear, and now they called 
but He did not hear. The prayers of orthodox Judaism especially 
on their fast days are beyond description and pleading for mercy. 
Still there is no answer to the many prayers. ‘‘ Your new moons 
and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto 
me; I am weary to bear them. And when ye spread forth your 
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you ; yea, when ye make many 
prayers, I willnot hear; yourhandsare full of blood.” (Is.i: 14, 15.) 
Alas! it is worship with the lips. The believing remnant alone in 
the future will be heard in their pleadings, and the Lord will send 
at last the salvation out of Zion, and the Deliverer will come who 
turns away ungodliness from Jacob. The fourteenth verse puts 
the dispersion and the judgment before us in a nutshell. They 
are whirled among all the nations whom they know not. The land 
itself becomes desolate behind them. As soon as the people 
leave whose land it is, the land flowing with milk and honey be- 


7O 


comes a wilderness, and when they return it will be again the land 
of blessing. 

What a testimony the land and the people is! Both speak of 
God’s righteous judgment, and the truth of His word. A whole 
nation scattered among all the nations and still kept intact. Their 
land trodden down by the Gentiles, waste and desolate. The land 
mourneth, indeed. Prosperity will come to that land again, but 
not by human efforts and human wisdom. The attempts of un- 
believing Israel now.in transforming the wilderness may prove 
successful, and colonies after colonies will be established. The 
time of Jacob’s trouble, however, will sweep it all away. 

The question concerning the fast is answered in the next chap- 
ter. The great and wonderful future of the land, the people, and 
of Jerusalem, prosperity and blessing is clearly shown in it. No 
more mourning, but joy ; no more shame, but honor ; no desola- 
tion, but restoration and His people saved from the East and 
West, nations at last being converted through Israel’s blessing and 
testimony. We will look at these promises and let them pass be- 
fore us in our next chapter. 


CHAPTER VIIL 


The Gracious Answer to their Question.—Promises of Blessing, Res- 
toration, Prosperity and Salvation.—No more Fast Days.— 
Nations tobe added to Jerusalem. 


The eighth chapter contains the most blessed promises concern- 
ing the future of Jerusalem and the people Israel. Now the 
question concerning the fasts is answered in a way the petitioners 
never expected. The promises which are given in this chapter 
were only partially fulfilled in Zechariah’s day in the returned and 
believing remnant, the actual fulfillment is still future. In the 
first night vision we heard the words, Cry yet saying, Thus says 
the Lord of hosts, My cities through prosperity shall yet be 
spread abroad, and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion and shall yet 
choose Jerusalem. The eighth chapter gives the details of the 
promised prosperity. The perfect picture of Jerusalem’s glorious 
future is unrolled before our eyes. Though still future, with the 
eyes of faith we can look at it and rejoice in the vision when at 
last the covenant keeping God of Abraham has established Jerusa- 
lem and made her a praise in the earth. It is a grand and 
glorious prophecy which is before us, and while we now consider 
it as believers and members of His heavenly people, we may well 
think of the time when He, who is our Lord and Israel’s King, 
shall come and we with Him, and when in Him all these blessings 
will be carried out. Not long ago we saw teachings on this chap- 
ter consisting of entirely spiritual applications for believers’ com- 
fort, prosperity and increase, etc. The New Testament contains 
all the comfort and blessing for believers, and we need not rob Israel 
of promises belonging to them and connected with their future. 

71 


72 


We divide the chapter into eight sections, which we will now 
briefly review : 

1. Zhe Restoration Announced. Verses 1-3. The jealousy of 
the Lord for Jerusalem is again stated, like in the first chapter, I 
am jealous for Jerusalem (14th verse). Here, however, is the 
word fury added. The Hebrew verb signifies, I have been and 
am still jealous of her with great fury. The fury denotes the 
wrath which fell upon the ungodly nations, the horns of the 
second night visions, which are now passed out of existence," 
broken to pieces. Now to Jerusalem, no longer trodden down 
by the Gentiles, the enemies being scattered, the Lord Him- 
self has returned and His glory is seen there again. It had 
departed, but now the sign of his presence and favor is again given. 
The city becomes a new city, called The City of Truth, How 
different this name is from the others which Jerusalem bore and 
which so fittingly described her fallen condition and abomination. 
She was called the city which had grievously sinned, like an un- 
clean woman (Lament. i: 8, 17), a harlot and a murderer (Isaiah 
i: 21) spiritually called Sodom and Egypt (Rev. xi), but nowa 
new name is given her, The City of Truth. He who is the Truth 
has turned the lie and ungodliness from Jacob, and truth is the 
characteristic of the city. The mountain of the Lord of hosts 
becomes the holy mountain. 

2. Jerusalem will have Rest and be Largely Inhabited, Verses 4 
and 5. What a picture in comparison wtth the former desolation! 
Jerusalem was forsaken and a desolation, a city of heaps. It is 
even so now, few cities of the earth present such an awful misery 
as modern Jerusalem does. It will all be changed, and just as 
great as the misery and desolation was the blessing and the in- 
crease will be. Old men in the streets, bowed down by old age, 
and alongside of them boys and girls who run about in childish 
play. No more fear, they shall dwell safely and none shall make 


73 


them afraid. _ The increase in descendants is even now very great 
among the Jews and the city is rapidly becoming a Jewish city 
again, and thus everything is preparing for the final conflict. Only 
after Jerusalem’s warfare is ended will there be peace. 

3. Lhey are Brought back from the Captivity. Verses 7, 8. 
When they heard of a restoration they thought this very marvelous. 
Had they not been scattered into the four winds? Could they 
ever be brought together again? ‘Therefore the Lord says, Be- 
cause it is marvelous in the eyes of the remnant of this nation in 
those days, shall it be marvelous in My eyes also? saith the Lord 
of hosts. At this present time Jews and Gentiles doubt the 
promises of restoration, it is marvelous in their eyes. But He 
who scattered Israel will gather them again. He knows also 
where the so called Lost Tribes are, the house of Israel, and we 
need not try to help God to find them. When the time comes 
He will bring them all back. In the second chapter we noticed 
that the North Country is mentioned, and we called attention to 
the fact that the North Country, Russia, is inhabited by nearly 
one-half of the entire Jewish race. In that land the persecutions 
are the greatest and also the desire for a return to the land. The 
restoration in unbelief is one especially from the Jews in the 
North Country. Here in the eighth chapter the East and the 
West countries are mentioned, the far East, India, China, etc., 
and the West, our own country and the isles of the sea. The rich 
Jews may now be satisfied in the countries, away from the home- 
land, where they prospered, but at last they will return and the 
Lord will send fishers to fish them and hunters to hunt them out. 
mc ser. XV > 16.) The Gentiles will bring them back to their own 
land (Isaiah Ixvi: 20). All will then be His people and He will 
be their God. 

4. The Land is Blessed.—Fruitfulness and Plenty.—The Remnant 
to Possess all these Things. Verses 9-12, What a contrast there 


74 


is now seen! For before these days there was no hire for man, 
nor any hire for beast . . . Little fruit was had from the 
ground, there was nothing for man and beast . . . Neither 
was there any peace to him that went out or came in on account 
of the affliction . . . There was no rest, no peace, but un- 
certainty and affliction. Those that went out from the land had 
no peace, and they that came into the land found no peace. The 
curse said, No rest for the sole of their feet, and how literally it 
has been fulfilled. Again the people seek a resting place in the 
land without their God and their Saviour, all in the confidence of 
the flesh, They will succeed in their restoration plans only to 
find themselves at last in greater difficulties and facing worse 
afflictions than ever before. Then eVery one will be against his 
neighbor (verse 10). Money spent by the millions in building 
channels for irrigation, planting of trees and vines, building 
railroads, etc. (just what modern Zionism proposes and has 
undertaken to do), may succeed in transforming the land in spots 
into a fruitful garden, but the time of Jacob’s trouble will sweep 
that allaway. The Lord will be gracious to the very land in the 
day of His manifestation, There will be a seed of peace, the 
vine will give her fruit, the ground her increase, the heavens their ~ 
dew. They shall build houses and inhabit them, they shall plant 
vineyards and eat the fruit of them ([saiah Ixv: 21). For ye shall 
go out with joy and be led forth with peace, the mountains and 
the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees 
of the field shall clap their hands. Instead of the thorn shall 
come up the firtree, and instead of the briar shall come up the 
myrtle tree, and it shall be to the Lord for a name, for an ever- 
lasting sign that shall not be cut off (Isaiah lv: 12-13). The 
remnant of the people left after the great tribulation will inherit 
this all. 

5. The Curse Changed into Blessing, Verses 13-15. They had 


75 


been a curse among the nations, but now at last the nations 
of the earth blest in the seed of Abraham. As He had pun- 
ished them so He blesses them now. Comfort ye, comfort 
ye my people, says your God, speak ye to the heart of Jeru- 
salem and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, 
that her iniquity is pardoned, for she has received of the Lord’s 
hand double for all her sins (Isaiah xl: 1, 2). Literal were the 
curses threatened concerning Israel and Israel’s land, literally 
they were all fulfilled. And are there not many more promises of 
blessing for the people and for the land spoken by the same true 
and faithful God who uttered the threatenings and carried them 
out to the very last? And will not the Lord fulfill these prom- 
ises of blessing literally to the minutest details? Assuredly He 
will. It is remarkable that this simple truth is not seen and under- 
stood in Christendom of to-day. According to the popular idea God 
has punished the Jews and will continue to do so, and the church 
has taken Israel’s place and inherited all the blessings. It is this 
false notion which is responsible in a great measure for the dreadful 
confusion existing in Christendom. The thing against which Paul 
warned is practiced in Christendom, Boast not against the branches 

Be not highminded, but fear. For if God spared not 
the natural branches (Jews) take heed lest He also spare not thee 
(Gentiles), God is able to graft them (Israel) in again. (Romans 
xi, ) 

6. Israel will be a Holy People. Versesi6and17. These are 
the words ye are to do, speak ye every man the truth to his neigh- 
bor, execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates ; let 
none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor and 
love no false oath, for all these are things which I hate, saith the 
Lord. Untruth, false oath, speaking one against the other are 
characteristic sins of Israel. But the character of the nation is 
now to be entirely changed. They are now indeed to be a holy 


76 


people, with hearts circumcised, loving God with all their hearts 
and their neighbors as themselves. A new heart also will I give 
you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away 
the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of 
flesh. And I will put My Spirit within you and cause you to 
walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. 
(Ezekiel xxxvi : 26, 27.) 

7. No more Fast Days, but Feast Days. Verses 18 and 19. 
‘The fast of the fourth month and the fast of the fifth and the fast 
of the seventh and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of 
Judah joy and gladness and cheerful feasts ; therefore love the truth 
and the peace. This is now the answer to their question. The 
fasts of the fifth and seventh month were the fasts commemorating 
the burning of the temple and the taking of the city by Nebu- 
chadnezzar, and the other the anniversary of the murder of 
Gedeliah and his friends. The fast of the tenth month was kept 
in remembrance of the siege of Jerusalem which was commenced 
in that month and the fast of the fourth month was kept on account 
of the taking of Jerusalem. These fasts commemorated there- 
fore all national calamities. A greater calamity happened of course 
later when at the same time Jerusalem was destroyed by the 
Roman armies, the temple and the city burned to the ground and 
not a stone left upon another. The Jews are still keeping national 
fasts on account of these calamities. Not alone in Jerusalem are 
there Jews and Jewesses going to the small piece of ancient 
stone masonry, which is said to be all left of the magnificent 
temple in Jerusalem, to mourn there especially on the ninth day 
of Ab, but the mourning among the orthodox Jews on that day is 
world-wide. In the synagogues of Russia and New York, San 
Francisco and in South Africa, everywhere where there are ortho- 
dox Jews the Lamentations of the prophet Jeremiah are chanted 
in a mournful tone. But the time is coming when all will be 


77 . 


changed. With Jerusalem rebuilt and peacefully inhabited, 2 
temple full of God’s glory, and over it all the heavenly glory 
and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the 
Son of Man, there will be no more need of fasting and 
mourning, but all will be changed in gladness and joy. The 
Songs of praise which are found at the close of the book of 
Psalms will then undoubtedly be sung by restored Israel. 

8. The Conversion of the World and Conquest for the Lord will 
Follow Through Converted and Restored Israel, Verses 20-23. 
These verses have often been spiritualized. How much harm 
there is done by taking such words and promises out of their con- 
nections and fitting them to a time and people for which they 
were never meant. Can God give His blessing to such teaching 
of His Word? We believe not. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, 
It shall yet be that nations will come, the inhabitants of many 
cities. And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another say- 
ing, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord and to seek the 
Lord of hosts: I will go also. And many peoples and strong 
nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem and to 
pray before the Lord. This the world has not yet seen. Indi- 
viduals have turned to the Lord, and His own are gathered out of 
all nations and languages, but such a picture as it is seen here has 
not yet been seen. The conversion of peoples and strong nations. 
is still future. It will not come by modern missionary efforts, 
consisting not alone of preaching, but as it is done to-day, by 
educational work in heathen countries, as well as other humani- 
tarian institutions, such as hospital work, orphanages, etc. 
Nations can never be converted by these efforts, nor has God 
given His Church promises that nations and the world is to be 
converted by the preaching of the Gospel of grace. Individuals, 
of course, are converted and will be converted by the Word faith- 
fully preached. A people is thus taken out for His name. And 


. 78 


to this agree the words of the prophets, as it is written, After this 
I will return and will build again the tabernacle of David, which 
is fallen down (Israel’s time commencing again, in restoration and 
regeneration) and I will build again the ruins thereof and I will 
set it up; that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and 
all the nations upon whom my name is called, saith the Lord, 
who doeth all these things. (Acts xv:14-:7.) It is sad to think 
that Christendom ignores such a revelation of the divine purpose 
and order and goes on in entirely different lines. We are 
living now in the time of the outcalling of a people, the 
Church, the body of the Lord Jesus Christ is formed. When 
that body is completed, which does not mean the conversion 
of the world, the Lord will come for His outcalled saints and 
then with His saints in glory. This will be followed, accord- 
ing to the words of the prophets, as we have so clearly seen in 
these studies by the building again of the tabernacle of David 
and all that is connected with it, and then the residue of men, 
the nations, will seek the Lord. It is also to be noticed that these 
nations will seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem and worship 
there before Him, This means that Jerusalem will become the 
great center of not alone world government but also of worship. 
The last chapter in this book of Zechariah shows nations coming 
up to Jerusalem on the feast of tabernacles. 

The last verse of the eighth chapter is the grandest of all. Thus 
saith the Lord of hosts, in those days it shall be that ten men 
shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, even shall take 
hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew saying, we will go with you; 
for we have heard that God is with you. This shows clearly what 
so often is doubted, namely, that the Jew converted and filled 
with the Spirit will be the instrument for the conversion of the 
nations. At this present time when a poor Jew shows himself, 
even in a so-called Christian (?) land like ours, he will occasionally 


79 


be followed by ten menor more who will mock him and call him 
names and perhaps assault nim (by no means a rare occurrence), 
But it will all be changed in the day of Israel’s glory. It will then 
be known that Israel is the blessed people, and ten men out of all 
languages will beseech the Jew to take him along to the most 
blessed spot in the earth, to Jerusalem. 

Thus ends one of the most striking prophecies concerning the 
future of the Seed of Abraham and Abraham’s land. How 
strange that so few Christian people care to study these sublime 
revelations, which tell us how true and faithful our God is and 
which makeit so clear and plain that the Bible is divine, the Word 
of God. May He teach us, who love these truths, who love Him 
and His appearing, who is not only Our Hope but Israel’s Hope 
as well, may He teach us more and more to know His thoughts 
and purposes and to find our delight in them. 


CHAPTER IX. 


The Second Part of the Prophecies—The First Burden—/Judgment 
upon Hadrach, Hamath, Tyre and Stdon—His People Kepi— 
The King of Peace and Righteousness Announced— Victory 
over the Enemies. 


With the ninth chapter begins the second part of the book. In 
it God shows through the prophet new and glorious visions of the 
Kingdom, the conflicts which His people Israel will have, their 
victories and final deliverance, ending with the sublime visions in 
the fourteenth chapter. The Deliverer, the King Messiah, is seen 
here likewise, suffering, rejected, pierced and slain, the Shepherd 
is smitten and rejected, false shepherds take charge of the flock, 
and calamities follow till the true Shepherd appears again and 
they look upon Him whom they pierced. The Gentiles are seen 
at last coming up to Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of 
Hosts. Like the first part of the book, we have in the second a 
series of prophecies which are progressive, leading up higher and , 
higher till the whole purpose of God is made known, and the 
summit of Glory to God in the Highest, Peace on earth, is 
reached, in the establishment of the Throne of Jehovah in and 
over the earth. Oh, how blind man is! that he passes by the 
thoughts of his God and does not consider them, nor find delight 
and pleasure in them. The words of man are read and studied, 
and the Word of God is set aside. The great mass in Christen- 
dom is wise in their own conceits and hastens on to the great 
waking up, when it will be too late. It is for the few to look 
into these things and to know the secrets of our God. Let us 
do it faithfully and prayerfully. 

Twice in this second part of Zechariah we meet with the 
phrase ‘‘The burden of the Word of Jehovah.” The first time it 
stands in the beginning of the ninth chapter, and the second time 

80 


Sr 


in the twelfth chapter. We may conclude from this that the ninth, 
tenth and the eleventh chapters were given as one prophecy, and 
the twelfth to the fourteenth were perhaps given some time later. 
The land of Hadrach against which the first burden in chapter 
ix. commences cannot be correctly located. Its close connection 
with Damascus and Hamath show that the land of Hadrach must 
have been a province of the Syrian kingdom then in existence. 
The Pheenician cities Tyre and Sidon are next, and then mention 
is made of four Philistine cities. Against these, Syria, Phoenicia, 
and the cities of the Philistines, a great calamity and overthrow is 
prophesied by Zechariah. They are conquered by the hosts of 
an enemy, and the rich treasuries of Tyre are heaped together in 
the streets—silver as the dust and gold as the mire—the bulwarks 
are smitten, and she herself consumed by fire. From there the 
conquest goes on rapidly to the Philistinian cities, and the King 
of Gaza perishes. The question arises, What conquest and ca- 
lamity is this? Is it accomplished or is it still future? History 
records one great conqueror who rapidly overthrew the countries 
and cities mentioned in this burden. Alexander the Great and his 
expedition so successfully carried cn is undoubtedly meant here. 
All students of the prophetic Scriptures know how prominently 
he likewise stands out in the Book of Daniel. The young mon- 
arch, after the battle of Issus, besieged and quickly captured 
Damascus. Sidon was easily taken, but Tyre resisted him some 
seven months and was burned to the ground. Gaza and the 
other cities came next. Thus the burden of the Word of Jeho- 
vah as uttered here by Zechariah was literally fulfilled in the Syrian 
conquest of Alexander the Great. However, history tells us that 
the armies of the youthful monarch passed by Jerusalem a num- 
ber of times without doing harm to the city. This is remarkable, 
and in accord with the prophecy of Zechariah, for we read in the 
eighth verse, ‘‘ And I will encamp against mine house, against the 


82 


army, against him that passes through and returns, and no 
oppressor shall come over them any more, for now I have seen it 
with mine eyes.” 

The Jewish historian Josephus gives a very interesting ac- 
count of the oppressor, and how Alexander the Great punished 
the Samaritans, and the reason why he did not besiege and con- 
quer Jerusalem. ‘The account which Josephus gives is so im- 
portant that we have to quote from it. 

«« After the destruction of Tyre, the conqueror marched against 
Gaza, which was razed to the ground. While Alexander was at 
the siege of Tyre, he sent to demand the surrender of Jerusalem. 
The High Priest sent an answer in which he stated that Jerusalem 
had entered into an alliance with the Persian monarch. After 
taking Gaza, Alexander advanced suddenly against Jerusalem. 
Jaddua, the High Priest, and the entire city were much frightened. 
But in a vision God told the High Priest to be of goodycheer, to 
decorate the city and open the gates wide, and to go forth in his 
priestly robes with all the priests in his train, and the people of 
the city clad in white garments. Jaddua obeyed and the doors 
were opened, and the astonished enemy beheld a startling specta- 
cle. No sooner had Alexander seen the High Priest in his gold 
embroidered robes with the holy name engraved on the turban, 
then he fell upon his face and worshipped. His attendants were 
greatly astonished. The Syrian kings who stood around feared that 
Alexander had lost his reason. One at length asked why he, whom 
all the world worshipped, should do homage to the High Priest of 
the Jews. Alexander replied that he did not worship the High 
Priest but his God. Ina vision in Macedonia that figure in that 
very dress appeared to me. He exhorted me to conquer Persia. 
Alexander entered with the priest into the city to offer sacri- 
fices. The High Priest then acquainted him with the prophecies 
of Daniel, showing that a Greek was to overthrow the Persian 


83 


empire.” The account is without doubt a correct one, and we re- 
late it here because this prophecy of the Alexandrian conquest 
shows the wonderful escape of Jerusalem that the oppressor shall 
not come over it. 

However, it is to be noticed that the eighth verse says that no 
oppressor shall come over them any more. This puts before us 
again the final deliverance of Jerusalem and Israel’s land as it is 
seen in the last chapter. It is said that history repeats itself, but 
divine prophecy again and again announces events for the near 
future, and in it is seen a foreshadowing of other events, and the 
original prophecy awaits a greater and final fulfillment. The sen- 
tence quoted, that no oppressor shall come over them any more, 
brings the first burden of the word of Jehovah in connection with 
the coming final deliverance of Israel when they shall be planted 
upon their land, and they shall no more be plucked up. A final 
destructive visitation will be upon the enemies of Israel and Jeru- 
salem ; in fact, many of the ancient foes of Israel are seen revived 
in prophecy in the latter days then to be swept away, while Jeru- 
salem will again be miraculously saved. In our exposition of the 
fourteenth chapter we hope to show the details of this. 

The second section of the ninth chapter, verses 9-11, which is 
so closely connected with the burden from verses 1-8, strengthens 
the above exegesis. Who would say that verses g-11 have seen a 
complete fulfillment? The greater part of it is still future, and so 
it is likewise with the third section of the ninth cape Let us 
quote first verses Q—1I1 : 

Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion, 
Shout aloud daughter of Jerusalem, 
Behold thy King cometh to thee, 
Just and having salvation, 

Meek and riding upon an ass, 
Even upon a colt, the she-ass’s foal, 


84 


And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, 

And the horse from Jerusalem, 

And the battle bow shall be cut off, 

And He shall speak peace unto the nations, 

And His dominion shall be from sea to sea, 

And from the river to the ends of the earth. 

As for thee also, for the sake of thy covenant blood, 
I send forth thy prisoners from the waterless pit, 
Return to the stronghold—Prisoners of hope 

Even to-day I declare I will render double unto thee. 


This stands in contrast to the Grecian conqueror, and it needs 
no proofs that the coming King whom Zechariah beholds is the 
King Messiah. The Jews acknowledge it as such. One of the 
greatest Jewish commentators says (Rashi): It is impossible to in- 
terpret it of any other than King Messiah. An interesting fable 
is based upon this prophecy, and well known among orthodox 
Jews. Rabbi Eliezer says, commenting on the words lowly 
and riding upon an ass, ‘‘ This is the ass, the foal of that she-ass 
which was created in the twilight, This is the ass which Abraham 
our father saddled for the binding of Isaac his son. This is the 
ass upon which Moses our teacher rode when he came to Egypt, 
as itis said, And he made them ride upon the ass (Ex. iv: 20). 
This is the ass upon which the Son of David shall ride.” Other 
interesting quotations could be given from Jewish writings, but 
this is sufficient to show that the Jews believe it to be a Messianic 
prophecy. And what blindness that they do not see Him who is 
the Messiah ; but is not the so-called ‘‘ higher criticism” existing 
to-day in Christendom being taught in churches and schools, that 
there are no Messianic prophecies in the Old Testament, much 
greater blindness? Alas! so it is, and the outcome can be noth- 
ing else in the end than the denial of the divinity of our Lord, or 
Unitarianism. 


85 


Every reader of the new Testament knows that this prophecy is 
quoted in the Gospels. Let us look to the Gospels and see its 
application. First, in the Gospel of Matthew, chapter xxi: 5: 
All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by 
the prophet, saying, Tell the daughter of Sion, Behold thy King 
cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, upon a colt the 
foal of an ass. The context shows a great multitude there crying, 
Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the 
name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest. But soon the cry 
is changed into, This is Jesus the prophet from Nazareth of Gal- 
ilee. Notice the Holy Spirit quoting from Zechariah leaves out 
the sentence, ‘‘He is just, having salvation.” This is not an 
error, but it is the divine right of the Spirit who gave the prophe- 
cies in olden times to apply them correctly in the New Testament. 
In the Gospel of Mark in the eleventh chapter there is likewise 
the description of Christ’s entry into Jerusalem, but Zechariah is 
not quoted. The same is true of the account given by Luke, 
chapter xix., and here He is mentioned as the King that cometh 
in the name of Jehovah, peace in heaven and glory in the high- 
est. In the fourth Gospel, chapter xii: 15, the account of His 
coming to Jerusalem is much shorter than in the other Gospels. 
It says there, Fear not, daughter of Sion; behold, thy King com- 
eth, sitting upon an ass’s colt. 

We see from this that the four Gospels give each an account of 
the entry of the Lord into Jerusalem; two of them quote from 
Zechariah and the other two do not. The quotations themselves 
are differing from the prophecy in Zechariah ix. in two respects. 
The first words, Rejoice greatly, is not at all used. In Matthew 
it is, Tell the daughter of Sion, and in John, Fear not daughter 
of Sion. The sentence, He is just and having salvation, is left 
out in both. 

A superficial exposition of the Word claims that Zechariah’s 


86 


prophecy was fulfilled in the event recorded by the Gospels. As 
far as His entry into Jerusalem is concerned, riding upon the colt 
the foal of an ass (and note in Matthew it is shown that both the 
colt and the ass are brought to Him. He could ride of course 
only upon one, but the she-ass had to go along in fulfillment of 
prophecy), and the way He came, meekly, in this respect the 
prophecy was fulfilled. This entry of the Son of Man into Jeru- 
salem was His formal presentation to Jerusalem as its King, but, 
as stated above, the Messianic cry of welcome Blessed is He, 
soon changes into, Jesus the prophet from Nazareth in Galilee, 
and that again in the final cry of rejection, Crucify Him, crucify 
Him! There was no salvation for Israel then, and no kingdom 
for Him, hence no rejoicing is mentioned in the quotations. 

It is His second coming to Jerusalem as the Son of Man in 
His glory which will bring the fulfillment of Zechariah ix: 9-11. 
True, the colt, the she ass’s foal, will not be the animal He rides, 
but He will come upon a white horse followed by the armies of 
heaven. He comes then truly for Jerusalem, fulfilling the 
prophecy, Just is He having salvation (marginal reading, Vic- 
tory). There will be again the welcome cry of the 118th Psalm, 
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of Jehovah, preceded by 
the plea, Hosanna, save now. 

The tenth and eleventh verses show clearly that the prophecy is 
yet to be fulfilled and can be only fulfilled in the coming of the 
Son of Man in His glory. One of the reasons why modern Juda- 
ism rejects Jesus of Nazareth, and does not believe Him to be the 
promised Redeemer, is in this prophecy. Rabbi F. De Sola 
Mendes, of New York, brings in a little book, ‘‘A Hebrew’s 
Reply to the Missionaries,” the following argument: ‘‘ We reject 
Jesus of Nazareth as our Messiah on account of His deeds. He 
says of Himself: ‘Think not that I am come to send peace on 
the earth; I came not to send peace but a sword,’ etc. But we 


87 


find that our prophets ascribe to the true Messiah quite different 
actions. Zechariah says (ix: 10), He shall speak peace to the 
nations. Jesus says He came to send the sword on the earth; 
whereas, Isaiah says of the true Messianic time, ‘ They shall beat 
their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning- 
hooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation; neither 
shall they learn war any more.’” 

Of course the Jew is right in expecting the literal fulfillment of 
this prophecy, and it will be fulfilled when He comes again and 
the restoration of all things will follow, as spoken by the mouth of 
all his holy prophets. 

When He appears again, in like manner as He went into 
heaven, that is not for His saints but with His saints, there will be 
peace for Ephraim and for Jerusalem, and the kingdom is then 
restored to Israel, that is, to the house of Judah and the house of 
Israel. The chariot, the horse, and the battlebow will be cut off. 

Not alone will He bring peace to the covenant people but to 
the nations. He will speak peace. ‘‘And He shall stand, and 
shall feed His flock in the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of 
the name of Jehovah His God, and they shall abide; for now 
shall He be great unto the ends of the earth. And this man shall 
be our peace” (Micah v:4, 5). There will be abundance of 
peace (Ps. Ixxii: 7). His dominion will be from sea to sea 
and to the ends of the earth. 

The prisoners of hope to be released, by the blood of the cove- 
nant, from the pit wherein there is no water, is the nation whose 
captivity is now ended. How strange that people should take a 
passage like this and interpret it as meaning the restitution of the 
wicked and the ungodly from the pit. There is nothing taught 
in the Word like that which some people term a larger hope. The 
restitution (restoration) of all things is not left to the fanciful 
interpretation of the human mind, but is clearly defined by the 


88 


Word itself, as spoken by the prophets. In the vision of the dry 
bones in Ezekiel xxxvii, Israel’s complaint is, Our hope is lost. 
But when He is manifested, who is indeed the Hope of Israel, the 
prisoners (the captives), will be released and cleansed. Refrain 
thy voice from weeping and thine eyes from tears. . . . ‘‘ There 
is hope for thy latter end, saith the Lord, and thy children shall 
come again to their own border” (Jer. xxxi:17). The exhorta- 
tion to return to the stronghold follows. Israel will then sing, ‘‘ He 
brought me up out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, 
and He set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings” 
(Ps. xl: 2). Double will be rendered unto them, as promised, 
‘*Speak to the heart of Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her war- 
fare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, that she has 
received of the Lord’s hand double for all her sins” (Is. xl: 2). 
‘‘For your shame ye shall have double, and for confusion they 
shall rejoice in their portion; therefore in their land they shall 
possess double; everlasting joy shall be unto them” (Is. Ixi : 7). 
And now we come to the third section of this chapter. The 
scene changes once more. The chapter commences with scenes 
of war, strife, battles and overthrow, and it ends with scenes of 
war and words of cheer for Zion. In the middle stands the King 
and His advent, the kingdom of peace, which He will establish. 
Alexander’s successor, Antiochus Epiphanes, and Zion's suc- 
cessful resistance, is undoubtedly the first fulfillment of the third 
section. The Prophet Daniel speaks likewise of this terrible man 
of sin, Antiochus Epiphanes (chap. viii), Not like Alexander, 
passing by Jerusalem, he invaded the land of Judah, and 
endeavored to force the idolatry of Greece upon the Jews. En- 
tering Jerusalem, he slew 40,000 of the inhabitants, and a larger 
number were sold as slaves. He then entered the temple, seized 
the rich treasures stored there, and commanded a big swine to be 
sacrificed ‘upon the altar of burnt-offering, and with the blood the 


89 


sacred place was defiled. A bitter struggle commenced, for Anti- 
ochus tried to exterminate the Jews and their religion as well. 
Every observance of the Jewish religion was forbidden, the Sab- 
bath had to be profaned, and unclean food had to be eaten. 
Idols were set upin the temple. Instead of the Jewish feasts, the 
feasts of idols, with all their shocking abominations and immo- 
talities, were introduced, and the Jews were forced to join in them. 
Thousands suffered martyrdom. But all at once a few people 
stood up against the abominations, the Maccabeans, and in a 
struggle lasting about twenty-five years, they fought successfully 
against the enemies. Miraculous victories were achieved, and 
‘thousands and tens of thousands of the idolators slain, and Jeru- 
salem and the land freed from the abomination. 

This terrible visitation of the land and the wonderful victory of 
the Maccabeans is foretold by the prophet in the closing verses of 
the ninth chapter. We will quote the passage : 


‘“T bend for me Judah and fill the bow with Ephraim, 
And I will stir up thy sons, Zion, against thy sons, Greece, 
And make thee like the sword of a mighty man. 
Jehovah shall be seen over them, 
And His arrow shall go forth like lightning, 
And the Lord Jehovah shall blow the trumpet. 
He shall go with whirlwinds of the South. 
The Lord of Hosts shall cover them ; 
They shall devour and tread down slingstones, 
And they drink and make a noise as from wine, 
And they shall be filled like bowls, as the corners of the altar. 
And Jehovah their God saves them in that day, as the flock 
of His people ; 
For jewels of a crown shall they be, glittering over His land, 
_ For how great is His goodness and how great His beauty ! 
Corn shall make the young men flourish, and new wine 
maidens.” 


go 


But again we have to remark that this prophecy is only partially 
fulfilled. ‘The terrible tribulation of the land of Judah when 
Antiochus Epiphanes invaded the land, is but a type of the great 
tribulation, the time of Jacob’s trouble. Antiochus Epiphanes, 
in his awful fight against Jehovah and the Lord’s people, is a type 
of the final Antichrist, and the Jewish saints slain by him are 
types of the Jewish saints which will be beheaded during the tribu- 
lation. Jehovah will fight then, as it is stated here, against those 
nations in that day (Zech. xiv). The remnant of Israel will then 
be victorious. Thus everything is seen in this chapter in a past 
fulfillment, but only partial, and in it a future fulfillment, which 
will be complete. 

We cannot leave this chapter without calling attention to the 
blessed statement : 


‘«For jewels of a crown they shall be, glittering over His land.” 


The slain who suffered martyrdom are meant, and all those 
who fought for Jehovah’s name and honor. May not the state- 
ment in Hebrews xi. refer to this time? ‘‘ Others had trials of 
mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and imprison- 
ment: they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were 
tempted, they were slain with the sword; they went about in 
sheepskins, in goatskins: being destitute, afflicted, evil entreated, 
of whom the world was not worthy, wandering in deserts and in 
mountains and caves and the holes of the earth” (Heb. xi: 36-39). 

And all will find a repetition during the coming tribulation. 
But the time for reward has not yet come. The throne of glory 
is not yet revealed, and the jewels, the saints made up in a 
crown, glittering over the land, are not yet seen. But the assur- 
ance is given, ‘‘ They shall be Mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in 
that day when I make up my jewels” (Mal. iii: 17). ‘‘ Thou 
shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of Jehovah, and a royal 


gt 


diadem in the hand of thy God” (Isa. Ixii: 3). ‘And I saw the 
souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus and for 
the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, 
neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their fore- 
heads or in their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a 
thousand years.” Revel. xx:6. Oh, blessed hope of all the saints ! 
To be with Christ in Glory, in His throne, and sharing Hisrule. In 
that day of manifestation, when Christ our life is manifested, and 
we shall be manifested with Him in glory—glory never ceasing, but 
ever increasing, in the countless ages to come, redeemed sinners 
will be the jewels of His crown, and He shall see the travail of 
His soul and be satisfied. 


CHAPTER X. 


More Blessings promised to Judah and Israel.—The Nahon Victorious. 
—Judah and Ephraim blessed, gathered and restored, and their 
enemies overcome. 


The tenth chapter continues to unfold Israel’s future blessings 
and restoration, and in it Ephraim, the house of Israel, is espec- 
ially mentioned. The chapter begins with a contrast. In the 
first verse there is a call to prayer, and the assurance of an answer 
given ; in the second verse the idols are mentioned which Israel 
‘worshipped and which give no comfort. 

Ask of Jehovah rain in the time of the latter rain. The former 
rain and the latter rain are often spoken of inthe Word. It is of 
course first to be understood of the natural rain coming from the 
clouds upon the land, The rain withheld and the land becomes a 
desert, the rain given and the Jand flows again with milk and 
honey. I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, 
the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy 
corn, thy wine and thine oil. . . . Take heed to yourselves that 
your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, 
and worship them; and the Lord’s wrath will be kindled against 
you and He shut up the heavens, that there be no rain and that 
the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye perish quickly from off the 
good land which the Lord giveth you. (Deut. xi: 14-1 9) 

The first rain came upon the seed placed into the ground, while 
the latter rain was necessary to ripen the fruit. Israel’s sin, un- 
belief, disobedience and apostacy have shut the heavens and keep 
them shut so that there is no rain and the land is a wilderness, 
waste and desolate. An abundance of rain is promised to them 

‘when Jehovah appears again. Much of late has been said that 


g2 


93 


Palestine becomes fruitful once more. It is said that the statistics 
show that during the last years the rainfall has increased by so 
many inches. This statement is denied by others. Some be- 
lievers make much of this rainfall and think that it is asign of His 
coming, an indication that God’s favor is being restored to the 
land. This is incorrect. The abundance of rain, the latter rain, 

is not promised for the land at this present time, but it will come 
after the great tribulation, and is closely connected with the mani- 
festation of the Lord from heaven in the clouds. The fruitfulness 
as it is seen now in the land—by no means general, but only in 

spots—is brought about mostly by artificial means, such as irriga- 

tion. During the great tribulation there will benorain. (Rev. xi: 
6.) Modern Zionism, in its God-dishonoring unbelief, with its im- 
mense resources of wealth and influence, may succeed in transform- 
ing the land of the Fathers. Indeed this is their scheme—building 
railroads, channels for irrigation, factories, mines, institutions of 
learning, etc. But the great tribulation will sweep it all away 
once more, and disaster will come swiftly when the plan of a Jew- 

ish Kingdom, without Him who is the King of the Jews, seems to. 
be realized. It is not for the believer to look now for the promised 
latter rain. All this looking for signs has a tendency to foster the 
idea that the church will pass through the tribulation. If that 
were the case we might well look to the signs around us and look 
(as some believers do) where Antichrist is to come from. 

The latter rain stands in connection with the Lord’s manifestaton 
for Israel. Let us know, follow on to know Jehovah: like the 
morning His coming is sure, and He shall come like the rain for 
us, like the latter rain watering the earth. (Hosea vi: 3.) Oye 
children of Zion, rejoice and be glad in Jehovah your God; He 
gives you the former rain in a just measure, and sends you in 
showers the early and the'latter rain as in times of old. (Joel ii: 
23.) It is time to seek Jehovah, until He come to rain righteous- 


94 


ness upon you. (Hosea x: 12.) But the latter rain is also a type 
of spiritual blessings. It includes all the blessed promises in 
spiritual things, and especially does it stand for the full harvest 
which comes in after the heaven is opened and that great out- 
pouring of the Spirit takes place. (Joel ii: 28.) It is unscriptural 
to expect now in this time such a latter rain, just as it is unscrip- 
tural to expect now the rain upon the land of Israel. How many 
prayers there are now in Christendom, well meant undoubtedly ; 
prayers for the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, prayers fora new 
Pentecost, even prayers for the outward manifestations; all these 
prayers have no scriptural foundation, and cannot be answered 
now in the dispensation in which we live. There will be the 
latter rain, the outpouring of the Spirit upon all flesh; but it 
stands in connection with the day of the Lord and with God’s 
earthly people. 

Truly, as the beginning of Zechariah x. hasit, in the time of the 
latter rain there will be prayer for it, but the prayer does not come 
from the lips of church-saints, but it comes from the lips of the 
Jewish remnant. The assurance is given that Jehovah will send 
the showers of rain, and before they come He will create the 
lightning. The lightnings stand for His wrath and judgment, 
which will proceed before the showers of blessing. In His coming 
He will be like the lightning falling from the clouds. 

The second verse puts before us another picture. The apostacy 
of the nation and their idolatry are now brought before us. The 
original word for idols is teraphim, and these were household 
gods, which were consulted by them. Spiritism (or as it is also 
called Spiritualism), this awful delusion so strong in the last times, 
is not a new thing. We can trace it to the remotest ages, and the 
nations which are still in the darkness of heathendom still practice 
it. It is very powerful in India and in China, and upheld by the 
father of lies from where it springs. Israel knew it likewise, and 


95 


was closely connected with its abominations. The teraphim 
were little figures which in some way by movements or mysterious 
noises gave an answer to questions. Men did then go about as 
sorcerers, and mediums had visions and dreams. Hearken not to 
your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to 
your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you, 
saying, Ye shall not serve the King of Babylon. They prophesy 
a lie unto you. (Jer. xxvii: 9.) Let not your diviners that are in 
the midst of you deceive you. . . . Ihave not sent them, (Jer. 
xxix : 8, 9.) What an awful sin it was that Israel could thus join 
themselves to idols and practice the abominable things. Soon the 
punishment fell upon them and they were carried into captivity, 
as the second verse states. Therefore they have wandered like a 
flock, they are oppressed because there is no shepherd. Jehovah 
had been rejected by them, and in this rejection is seen the rejection 
which followed when they rejected the Son. Here Hosea iii: 4 
is to be taken into consideration, The children of Israel shall 
abide many days (the dispersion in which they are now) without 
a king and without a prince, without a sacrifice and without an 
image, without an ephod and teraphim. The next verse speaks 
of their conversion in the latter days. During their dispersion 
they will have neither the old worship of Jehovah nor will they 
hold any longer to the teraphim and ask guidance of them. How 
truly it has all been fulfilled, However there is a word which 
the Lord spoke, which is here likewise to be mentioned. It is 
one of the many misunderstood passages in the New Testament. 
We find it in Matthew xii: 43-45. When the unclean spirit is 
gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest 
and findeth none. Then he saith I will return to my house from 
whence I came out ; and when he has come he findeth it empty, 
swept and garnished. Then he goeth and taketh with himself 
seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in 


96 


and dwell there, and the last state of that man is worse than the 
first. Even so shall it be unto this wicked generation, The un- 
clean spirit of idolatry had left the nation after the return from the 
captivity, but there is in that wicked generation at last a return of 
the same evil spirit with seven others worse than the spirit of 
idolatry, and the last of that man (unbelieving Israel) is worse 
than the first. This seems to us is the true application of this 
passage. Israel is rapidly nearing the time when unclean spirits 
with idols will have control over them. He who comes in his 
own name, the false Messiah, the devil’s masterpiece with all his 
delusions and lying wonders, will be worshipped by them and the 
outcast demons will enter the house again. This is clearly seen 
in Zech. xiii: 2. It shall be in that day (after the nation has 
looked upon the pierced one), saith Jehovah of hosts, I will cut 
off the names of the idols from the land, and they shall be remen- 
bered no more ; and also the prophets and the spirits of unclean- 
ness will I cause to pass out of the land. A return to teraphim, 
sorcery, divination, etc., is already noticeable in our day. The 
superstitions of talmudical Judaism are many, and the modern re- 
vival of the ancient teraphim, in Spiritism, through mediums, 
tables, etc., finds not a few followers among the Jews. What will 
it be when the man of sin is in the earth? All the world will 
wonder after the beast. 

In verses 3-5 we see once more the events which belong to 
Israel’s future. Mention is made first of the House of Judah, 
Against the shepherds His anger is kindled, and the he-goats will 
be punished (false leaders of the people and theirenemies.) Then 
Jehovah visits His flock, the house of Judah, and He will make 
them like His goodly horse in war. Like heroes they are tread- 
ing down the foes, They fight successfully against the enemies, 
for Jehovah is once more with them and the day of vengeance has 
come, and the riders on horses are put to shame by them. The 


97 


parables of Balaam tell us what Israel will be at last, and how like 
a young lion they will spring upon the prey. Even now in dis- 
persion the Jew inspires terror and is feared by the nations, This 
fear, which produces anti-Semitism (so strong in our times), hasa 
good reason, for they will soon be the head of the nations and no 
longer the tail. 

The words in the fourth verse, From him (Judah) the corner- 
stone, from him the nail . . . have been differently interpreted. 
The nail is in the oriental house a large pin, often very beautifully 
ornamented, and the most costly things are hanged thereupon. 
And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place and he shall be for 
a glorious throne to his father’s house. And they shall hang upon 
him all the glory of his father’s house. (Isaiah xxii: 23, 24.) The 
Shemeth rabbah, a Jewish interpretation, says on this verse, this 
is King David; as it is said, the stone which the builders rejected 
is become the chief cornerstone. Some say it is spoken concerning 
the Lord, that He is the cornerstone and the nail. It refers to 
Him no doubt, but what is spoken of Him finds also a fulfillment 
in restored Israel. Thus Israel is yet to be the cornerstone upon 
which everything rests in the earth, and the nail upon which hangs 
the glory. 

The rest of the chapter speaks of restoration of the house of 
Judah and the house of Israel. The house of Judah will be 
strengthened, and the house of Joseph (the ten tribes) will be 
saved. Ephraim, standing likewise for the house of Israel, shall 
become like a hero, and their heart shall rejoice, and their sons 
shall see and rejoice, their heart shall exult in Jehovah. I will 
hiss to them and will gather them, for I have redeemed them, and 
they shall increase as they did increase. And I will sow them 
among many peoples, and in far countries tney shall re- 
member me, and with their children they shal] live and return. 
(Verses 7-9.) Their bringing back will be from the land of 


98 


Egypt and from Assyria. With it is the judgment of the nations; 
they will be cast down and the restored people shall walk in His 
name, 

The prophecy brings before us the old question concerning the 
ten tribes or the house of Israel. These tribes are generally 
called the ‘‘lost tribes,” and as such they have been found perhaps 
a hundred times by as many diffierent persons. The North 
American Indians, the Afghans, the Nestorians, tribes in the interior 
of Africa as well as in China, and even the Hottentots of South 
Africa, have been declared to be the lost tribes. We believe that 
this looking for the lost tribes and to locate them is something 
against which the Holy Spirit warns when He declares, Bnt avoid 
foolish questions and genealogies and contentions and striving 
about the law, for they are unprofitable and vain. (Titus iii: 9.) 
Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies, which 
minister questions rather than godly edyfing which is in faith. (1 
Tim : 1-4.) We think it wrong to go into such speculations on 
matters which the Lord purposely has hid in His Word. We 
would have nothing else to say on this topic were it not for a very 
strange teaching which has fascinated many minds and which has 
become very popular both in England andin America. We have 
reference to the so-called Anglo-Israel theory. According to this 
theory the lost tribes have been found in the Anglo-Saxon race, 
and that God has kept His promises made to the house or Israel 
and fulfilled them and fulfills them now in the two nations, 
America and England. Itis atheory, and the Word of God is 
used to prove it This may be done with any theory, and scrip- 
ture twisted out of its place can be made to prove almost anything. 
Anglo-Israel is a delusion, and it is strange that so many believers 
have become infatuated with it and suffer consequently from it. 
The theory is based upon a very serious mistake in the exposition 
of the prophetic Word. All through prophecy we find promises 


oy 


which belong to the house of Israel (and to Judah likewise), the 
conflicts, the victories over their enemies, temporal blessings, etc. 
These promises are to be realized in the latter days. The phrase 
“‘latter days,” however, is misunderstood, and believed to be 
the days in which we live; while in fact the latter days 
are still future and have not yet been reached. Prophecies 
which are spoken concerning the future are looked upon as 
already fulfilled. 

In this way the ninth verse in our chapter is misunderstood, 
And I will sow them among the peoples, and in far countries 
they shall remember me, and with their children they shall live 
and return. This passage is often quoted in Anglo-Israel litera- 
ture, and is always put down as being fulfilled in the Anglo-Saxon 
race. We claim that it has {not yet been fulfilled, but will be 
fulfilled when the house of Judah has been restored, and 
they as well as the house of Israel are in the land and form 
one people, God’s earthly kingdom people. This is true of 
all the promises which Anglo-Israelism claims to have found a 
fulfillment. 

It is true they are now scattered among the nations and the 
Lord knows them and He knows where they are and in due 
time He will send hunters to hunt them out and fishers to 
fish them in (Jer. xvi: 16); and they will be brought back to 
the land upon horses and in chariots, etc. (Isaiah Ixvi: 20.) 
After that they will be sown among the peoples. They are then 
in the far countries and increase as they did before and are a 
blessing to the nations and not a curse. Their seed shall be 
known among the Gentiles and their offspring among the people 
all that see them shall acknowledge them that they are the seed 
which the Lord has blessed. (Isaiah Ixi: 9.) Judah’s return 
will be from all directions, but according to the tenth verse 
Ephraim will be brought back from Egypt and Assyria. Anglo- 


100 


Israel is a very poor Ishmael attempt to help God to keep His 
promises. 

When all this takes place the Lord will pass through the sea 
and there will be affliction. The Nile is mentioned, and in Assyria 
the pride will be brought down, no sceptre any longer in Egypt. 
Only then after this manifestation will they walk (Judah and Israel) 
in His name, and not before. 


CHAPTER XI. 


Scenes of overthrow and slaughter.—The Shepherd with the two staves, 
Beauty and Bands.—He is rejected.—The thirty pieces of silver. 
—The foolish shepherd and his punishment. 


The eleventh chapter presents a verv dark scene. So far we 
have seen that the prophet saw in visiong and heard from the Lord 
nothing but blessings and mercies for Israel, restoration both 
national and spiritual, overthrow of all their enemies, destruction 
of the world powers, establishment of the theocracy and world 
conquest ; but now the scene changes completely. That which 
precedes all these blessed events, the events for which indeed the 
earth and groaning creation is waiting, is now unfolded in all the 
terrible details, Israel’s apostacy and dreadful punishment on ac- 
count of the rejection of the Shepherd, and instead of Him there 
is given a foolish shepherd. 

We will briefly review the entire chapter before taking up the 
study of it in details. The first three verses contain a sublime 
description of the visitation which was to come upon the land of 
Israel. In the fourth verse the nation is seen as a flock of 
slaughter, and the buyers who slaughter them are not guilty, and 
their sellers are getting rich by it. The inhabitants of the land are 
not spared ; all is waste and there is no deliverance. In the sev- 
enth verse the reason of all this judgment is seen. The Prophet 
does a symbolic act. As a shepherd he represents the good Shep- 
herd of Israel, the Messiah. He comes to save them from the 
terrible calamity, but he is rejected. The shepherd has two staves, 
Beauty and Bands. He breaks one first and asks his price, and 
they offer him the price of a slave, thirty pieces of silver, which 

IoI 


102 


he at the word of Jehovah casts from himself. The second staff 
is broken. Instead of the staves the Prophet takes the instru- 
ments of a foolish shepherd, undoubtedly weapons of destruction. 
They perish, they stray, they are wounded, they suffer and are de- 
voured. At last the foolish shepherd is punished. This is 2 
birdseye view of the chapter. We will consider the details under 
three divisions : The judgment upon the land and the slaughter of 
the flock ; the cause of it. The Shepherd rejected and set aside. 
And in the third place the foolish shepherd. 


LI. The judgment upon the land, the temple, and the slaughter of 
the flock (verses I-6). 


Open thy doors, Lebanon ; 

Let the fire devour thy cedars. 

Howl, fir tree; for the cedar is fallen ; 
Because the lofty ones are spoiled. 

Howl, oaks of Bashan, 

For the high forest is come down. 

A voice of the howling of the shepherds : 
For their glory is spoiled. 

A voice of the roaring of young lions, 
For the pride of Jordan is spoiled. 


What an awful picture these three verses present to us, and 
how sublime the language! Everything is swept away by a 
mighty conflagration. It starts among the lofty cedars of 
Lebanon ; the fir tree is its prey, and the oaks of Bashan as well 
as the high forest come down, and it ends at the Jordan. In the 
midst of it is heard the howling of the shepherds and the roaring 
of the young lions. We have in these three verses a description 
of the terrible and complete judgment which was to fall and which 
has fallen upon the land of Israel on account of their disobedi- 
ence and wickedness. The destruction of the temple by fire is of 


103 


course included in this scene of burning and devastation. Jewish 
interpretation sees especially in these verses the prophecy of the 
destruction of the temple in Jerusalem. The following is a quo- 
tation from the Talmudical tract Yoma. ‘‘Our Rabbis have 
learnt from tradition that forty years before the destruction of the 
temple the lot never used to fall to the right hand but to the left. 
The lamp of the evening light would not burn, and the doors of 
the temple used to open of their own accord, until Rabbi 
Yochanan, the son of Zakkai, rebuked them. He said to it, O 
Temple, Temple, why art thou terrifying thyself? I know well 
that thy end is to be destroyed, for already Zechariah, the son of 
Iddo, hath prophesied, Open thy doors, O Lebanon, and let a fire 
consume thy cedars!” As the time of Jerusalem’s overthrow and 
the devastation of the land drew nearer, after the rejection of the 
Lord Jesus Christ and His apostles, strange signs in heaven and 
earth were seen in Jerusalem and throughout the land. They were 
signs of warning of the coming doom, and must have had a spe- 
cial significance for the remnant of Jewish-Christians who still 
were in the doomed city. Josephus mentions a series of these 
signs: ‘‘A comet which had the appearance of a huge sword 
hung over the city fora whole year. While the people were as- 
sembled at the feast of unleavened bread, at the sixth hour of the 
night, a sudden bright light shone about the temple. On Pente- 
cost, when the priests entered by night into the temple they said 
that they heard many voices proclaim, Let us depart hence. A 
certain Jew, the son of Ananus, began suddenly to cry in the 
temple: ‘A voice from the East and a voice from the West! A 
voice from the four winds! A voice against Jerusalem and against 
the Temple! A voice against the bridegrooms and the brides! 
A voice against the whole people!’ Day and night in the narrow 
streets he repeated this cry in a loud voice. He was severely 
beaten. He uttered neither shriek nor pain nor prayer for mercy, 


104 


but raising his sad and broken voice he cried at every blow of the 
scourge, ‘Woe, woe to Jerusalem!’ For four years the son of 
Ananus paid no attention to anyone, and never spake excepting 
the same words, Woe to Jerusalem! He neither cursed anyone 
who struck him nor thanked anyone who gave him food, but con- 
tinued to cry, ‘Woe, woe to the city and to the temple !’” (Mil- 
man’s History of the Jews, Vol. II.) The above event spoken of 
in the tract Yoma, which the pious Rabbi Yochanan thought to 
be in fulfillment of Zechariah xi:1, is also mentioned by Jose- 
phus. He says, ‘‘The eastern gate of the inner temple, which 
was of brass and very heavy, and had been with difficulty shut by 
twenty men, was seen to open by itself about the sixth hour of 
the night.” ; 

Once more Jerusalem is to be compassed about by armies and 
then there will be signs in earth and in the heavens. Earthquakes 
will shake the city, mountains will sink down and valleys will be 
exalted, the sun will be darkened and the moon turned into 
blood, fire and smoke will arise. The climax of it all will be the 
manifestation of the Lord who will overthrow Israel’s enemies. 

Other interpreters among the Jews declare that this prophecy 
speaks of the destruction of the temple. 

The correct interpretation is that it includes all the devastation 
of the land, the burning of the temple, the slaughter of the flock, 
the spoiling of the shepherds, the Jewish leaders and the com- 
plete overthrow of the land and of the people. How awful the 
fulfillment of the prophecy has been! The Lord’s voice full of 
tears cried, long after Zechariah’s mournful vision, ‘‘ If thou hadst 

_known, at least in this thy day, the things which belong to thy 
peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days shall 
come upon thee that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee 
and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side. And 
shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee, 


105 


and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another.” The 
measure was full. After terrible wars amongst themselves, the 
fire advanced in the direction from Lebanon, in the form of the 
Roman army full of vengeance, spreading ruin and misery 
wherever they went, till after a long and dreadful siege Jerusalem 
fell, the temple was burnt, and over a million human beings were 
slain. Not one stone was left upon another. Up to now this 
judgment has been the most appalling, the tribulation then, the 
greatest; but there is another tribulation coming of which the 
former destruction of Jerusalem is but a faint type, and that trib- 
ulation which is even now so close at hand will find a climax in 
the day of wrath, the day of vengeance of our God. The next 
three verses speak of the flock of slaughter and the last attempt 
divine love made to save the doomed nation. Zechariah is com- 
manded to feed them. 

Thus saith Jehovah my God ; 

Feed the flock of slaughter ; 

Their possessors slay them and are not guilty : 

And they that sell them say, 

Blessed be Jehovah, for I am getting rich ; 

Their own shepherds pity them not. 

I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith Jehovah ; 

I will deliver the men every one into his neighbor’s hands, 

And into the hand of his king: 

And they shall smite the land, 

And out of their hand I will not deliver them. 

What a dreadful condition of the sheep of His pasture, the lost 
sheep of the house of Israel, God’s flock! Even so it was, 
strangers ruled over them, and they were their prey, getting rich 
on them and not guilty. Still worse their own shepherds, the 
civil and ecclesiastical rulers of the nation, spared them not. God 
had indeed given them up. Well may we stop and think for a 


106 


moment of the apostacy of Christendom and its final overthrow 
and judgment so clearly seen in the book of Revelation. Even 
now the flock of slaughter is seen and all getting ripe for the day 
of wrath ! 

The action of Zechariah by divine command, like the crowning 
of the high priest in the sixth chapter, is a typical one. Zecha- 
tiah is a type of the good Shepherd of Israel, the Messiah. The 
disobedient nation, the flock of slaughter, had taken God’s ser- 
vants and beat one and killed another and stoned another. When 
He sent servants more than the first, they did unto them in like 
manner (Matt. xxi: 35). After this came the last attempt of di- 
vine love. God sent His Son as a Shepherd to seek and feed the 
lost sheep. He was not accepted, but they rejected Him. We 
will consider this now in the second section. 


LIT. The Shepherd set aside and rejected (verses 7-14). 


‘*So I fed the flock of slaughter, verily the most miserable sheep. 
And I took to myself two staves; the one I called Beauty, the 
other I called Bands; and I fed the flock. And I cut off the 
three shepherds in one month; for my soul became impatient 
with them, and their soul also abhorred me. And I said, I will 
not feed you: the dying, let it die; and the cut off, let it be cut 
off ; and the left over, let them devour each the flesh of the other. 
And I took my staff, Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break 
my covenant’ which I had made with all the peoples. And it was 
broken in that day, and thus the wretched of the flock who gave 
heed to me knew that this was the word of Jehovah. And I said 
unto them, If ye think good, give me my wages; and if not, for- 
bear. So they weighed as my wages thirty pieces of silver. And 
Jehovah said to me, Throw it unto the potter ; the goodly price at 
which I am valued of them. And I took the thirty pieces of sil- 
ver, and threw them into the house of Jehovah, to the potter. 


107 


Then I broke my second staff, Bands, that I break the brother- 
hood between Judah and Israel.” 

Much has been written on this difficult passage. The very first 
sentence in the paragraph speaks of divine love. He came, the 
mighty God, the everlasting Father, and Prince of Peace, in the 
likeness of man, as a servant and a gentle shepherd to feed the 
miserable ones. Looking at the multitudes who followed Him 
when He had come, He was moved with compassion, for they 
were distressed and scattered as sheep having no shepherd 
(Matt. ix: 36). True shepherds indeed they had not. Prophets 
sent by Jehovah had long before ceased to come, and those who 
ruled them were miserable leaders of the blind, concerning whom 
Jehovah spoke through Ezekiel, ‘‘ Woe unto the shepherds of Is. 
rael that do feed themselves ; should not the shepherds feed the 
sheep? You eat the fat and clothe yourselves with the wool, ye 
kill the fatlings, but ye feed not the sheep. The diseased have ye 
not strengihened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, 
neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye 
brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought 
that which was lost” (Ezekiel xxxiv: 3-5). But now Jehovah 
Himself has come to be their Shepherd, ‘‘ Behold, I Myself, even 
I, will search for My sheep and find them out” (Ezckiel xxxiv: 
11). And when He came and God was manifested in the flesh, He 
turned indeed to the most miserable of the sheep—the publicans 
and the outcasts, sinners and harlots, gathered around Him. The 
Prophet as the type of the good Shepherd has two staves. The 
one is called Beauty (marginal reading, graciousness). The sec- 
ond one is Bands. The Shepherd carries a staff to protect and 
guide His flock. In the second Psalm the returning Lord is seen 
shepherding the nations with a rod of iron, but here the two 
staves cannot mean instruments for correction, but they are the 
staves of comfort and love. God’s mercy and favor are clearly 


108 


indicated in these two staves. The first one, Beauty, which is cut 
asunder first, and that before the wages of the Shepherd, the 
thirty pieces of silver, are given, stands no doubt for the gracious 
offer with which the King, preaching the kingdom, came among 
His people, to His own. He proclaimed that which prophets 
had spoken before, God’s mercy and love, long promised, now 
to be carried out. He Himself had come to redeem His people 
and deliver them from their mighty enemies as well as from the 
false leaders. But the offer, the kingdom preaching, 1s rejected, 
the staff, Beauty, is cut asunder, the covenant with the peoples 
(Amim in Hebrew), His own, is now broken. The kingdom is to 
be taken away and given to another nation. After the breaking 
of the staff, Beauty, there comes the giving of the wages, the 
thirty pieces of silver. The Shepherd who broke the staff is 
treated like a slave. 

The second staff in His hands, Bands, speaks of union, bind- 
ing together, bringing into fellowship. It typifies the priestly 
side of the good Shepherd who died for the flock. This 
staff is broken after the thirty pieces were given for Him, 
and cast into the temple. They cried, Away with Him! we have 
no King save Cesar! Crucify Him! His blood be upon us and 
upon our children! The cross bears the superscription, This is Jesus 
of Nazareth, the King of the Jews, and from the lips of the rejected 
King and Shepherd there came the prayer for His people, Father, 
forgive them, for they know not what they do. The doom came 
not at once upon the nation. Once more the love of the Shep- . 
herd is preached to the miserable sheep, and the remission of sins 
offered in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, but it ends in rejec- 
tion too; no bringing together into One followed. The foolish 
shepherd appears next, and after him the good Shepherd will ap- 
near again with His two staves, Beauty and Bands, kingdom and 
mercy, bringing and binding together. He will then be a Priest 


109 


upon His throne. This interpretation is the most satisfactory one, 
and in harmony with the entire scope of Zechariah’s visions and 
prophecies. 

Who are the three shepherds to be cut off in one month by the 
Shepherd? Are they persons or not? Many answers have been 
given to these questions, and many theories have been advanced 
to solve the difficulty. It is not necessary to mention any of 
them. The three shepherds are not persons, but they stand for the 
three classes of rulers which governed Israel, and were in that 
sense shepherds. We read of these shepherds in Jeremiah ii : 8, 
priests, rulers, and prophets. The Lord likewise mentions them 
in Matthew xvi: 21, elders, chief priests and scribes.) When He 
came He was indeed weary with them, and denounced their 
hypocrisies and wickedness. They in turn hated and abhorred 
Him, and conspired to put Him to death. The Lord Himself 
cut them off. He pronounced His woes and judgments upon 
them, but the judgment was not at once carried out. When Je- 
rusalem was taken their rule came to an end and they were cut off. 

But there are mentioned the wretched of the flock that gave 
heed unto the Shepherd, and they knew that it was the word of 
Jehovah. These wretched ones are the faithful ones who followed 
the Shepherd, the small remnant. (Compare with chapter xiii : 7.) 
The others who rejected the King and the Shepherd were indeed 
not fed, but were dying and cut off. 

The wages of the good Shepherd, thirty pieces of silver, and 
these thrown into the house of Jehovah to the potter is to be con- 
sidered next. _ Thirty pieces of silver was the price of a slave who 
had been killed. If the ox gore a manservant or a maidservant, 
the owner shall give unto their master thirty shekels of silver 
(Exodus xxi: 32). Oh, what unfathomable love! The Lord 
from heaven became like a slave. The love He looked for He 
found not. It was refused to Him, and instead He was insulted, 


Ito 


mocked, and treated like a miserable slave. There was one of 
the twelve who was called Judas Iscariot. He went to the chief 
priests and said, What are you willing to give me, and I will de- 
liver Him unto you? And they weighed unto him thirty pieces 
of silver (Matt, xxvi: 14). The money at the command of Je- 
hovah is thrown away by the prophet with indignation, into the 
house of Jehovah, to the potter. - Perhaps the prophet never knew 
the real significance of his act, but we know it from the New 
Testament. Then Judas which betrayed Him, when he saw that 
He was condemned, repented himself and brought back the thirty 
pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, saying, I have 
sinned in that I betrayed innocent blood. But they said, 
What is this to us? See thou to it. And he cast down the pieces 
of silver into the sanctuary, and departed and hanged himself. 
And the chief priests took the pieces of silver and said, It is not 
lawful to put them into the treasury since it is the price of blood. 
And they took counsel and bought with them the potters’ field to 
bury strangers in. Wherefore that field was called the field of 
blood unto this day. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken 
by Jeremiah, the prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces 
of silver, the price of Him that was priced, whom certain of the 
children of Israel did price, and they gave them for the potters’ 
field, as the Lord appointed me (Matt. xxvii: 3-9). How strik- 
ing the fulfillment. However, here is a difficulty. In Matthew 
itis stated that Jeremiah spoke the prophecy, and Zechariah’s 
name is not mentioned at all. How can this be explained? 

The prophecy certainly as it was fulfilled was not given by Jere- 
miah at all, but through Zechariah. There can be doubt that his 
name should appear here instead of Jeremiah, but that Jeremiah’s 
name is quoted must have a meaning. Rotherham 1n his transla- 
tion of the New Testament makes a foot note in which he says, 
‘‘Zech, xi: 12, 13: Perhaps as included in a scroll headed by 


ETE 


Jeremiah.” But this is not satisfactory. The question would be 
if there is anything in Jeremiah which could have a connection 
with the typical action of Zechariah. There is a similar action in 
Jeremiah, which, as a whole, speaks of the same event which 
Zech, xi: 13 has, and which is seen in fulfillment in Matt. xxvii. 
Read in Jeremiah the eighteenth and nineteenth chapters. The 
word ‘‘ Zopheth” in Jeremiah means an unclean place, a burial 
ground. It seems as if Jeremiah’s name appears here so as to 
call attention to the fact that the prophet spoke of the event like- 
wise, and that Zech. xi. and Jer. xviii. and xix. must be compared 
and read together. 


LIL. The foolish shepherd (verses 15-17). 


And Jehovah said to me, Take unto thee again the instruments 
of a foolish shepherd. For, behold, I raise up a shepherd in the 
land; the perishing he will not visit, the scattered ones he will 
not seek for, the wounded he will not heal, the stroag he will not 
feed, but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and their hoofs he will 
break off. Woe to the worthless shepherd that leaveth the flock ! 
The sword upon his arm and upon his right eye. His arm shall 
be utterly withered and his right eye completely blinded. 

The prophet now impersonates another,shepherd, one who is 
foolish and wicked, and in his hands he does no longer hold the 
staves of Beauty and Bands, but the instruments of the foolish 
shepherd to wound and to hurt are in his possession. This fool- 
ish shepherd is the opposite from the good shepherd. He came 
to heal, to seek, to save, and to feed, but the foolish shepherd 
scatters, does not heal, nor does he feed the flock ; but he eats the 
flesh of the fat. The description of this false shepherd is like the 
description of the shepherds in Ezek. xxxiv., as quoted before. 
Ezekiel’s prophecy concerning the gathering of the flock is future 
-still, but before He gathers the lost and scattered sheep of Israel 


112 


and brings them back to their land and gives them the one Shep- 
herd and David His servant, there will be false shepherds. The 
true One rejected, the nation becomes the prey of the foolish shep- 
herds. Poor, blinded Israel! How many wicked shepherds 
they have had, and how often the prey of wicked leaders. False 
Messiahs appeared among them again and again to find strong 
and numerous following. Still the foolish shepherd, the last one, 
the very embodiment of Satan himself, the accuser, has not yet 
come. Forerunners there have been many. Herod was one of 
them, but not that man of sin, the son of perdition who will ap- 
pear and be worshiped as God, right before the King of kings and 
the true Shepherd of His flock appears to slay that wicked one 
with the breath of His mouth and by the brightness of His com- 
ing (2 Thess. ii.). The Lord said, I am come in My Father’s 
name, and ye receive Me not; if another shall come in his own 
name, him ye will receive (John v: 43). That one who comes in 
his own name has not yet come, and when at last he is here, it 
will be for Israel the time of greatest trouble and tribulation for 
all them that inhabit the earth. The third section of our chapter 
finds its complete fulfillment in the Antichrist, the false Messiah, 
the beast, the little horn, the leader of the enemy, the false prince 
of Israel; thus the foolish shepherd is called throughout the pro- 
phetic word. The dreadful punishment will be executed upon 
the foolish shepherd in the day of the Lord’s coming with His 
saints for the salvation of His people Israel. 

The eleventh chapter in Zechariah is the darkest in Israel’s his- 
tory. The night began with their apostacy and rejection of the 
Lord of Glory, their own brother, their loving Shepherd, the Lord 
Jesus Christ. It ends in darkness greater still under the regime 
of the foolish shepherd. But the morning cometh after that dark 
night, and Israel’s sun will never set again. 


CHAPTER XI. 


The second burden, from Chapter xii.—xiv.——ferusalem and the nations. 
—The conflict of the end.—The chiefs of Judah and the strength 
promised to the feeble.—Nations destroyed.—Outpouring of the 
Spirit and looking upon Jehovah, the pierced One.—The great 
national mourning. 


We have before us the second burden, which begins with the 
eleventh chapter and closes with the fourteenth. The events seen 
in the first burden, that is in chapters ix., x. and xi., were in part 
fulfilled, but in the second burden we find prophecies which have 
seen no fulfillment whatever; they are all future. There is only 
one prophecy which is fulfilled, the one of the smitten shepherd 
at the end of the thirteenth chapter. The great future events 
which are recorded in the second burden are: The victory of Je- 
rusalem over the hostile nations, the outpouring of the Holy 
Spirit, the appearing and beholding of the pierced One, the 
national repentance of Israel, the cleansing of the nation, the final 
conflict and the Lord coming with His saints, the complete over- 
throw of the enemies and the establishment of the kingdom in 
the earth, with Jerusalem as a center. These three chapters form 
indeed a glorious finale to the wonderful visions and prophecies 
which Jehovah gave to the prophet. The fourteenth chapter is 
the summit. : 

Not a few interpreters have committed the serious error and 
have tried to find a fulfillment of these chapters somewhere, and 
if no historical events could be made to suit the occasion, a spir- 
itual application had to be made and a spiritual fulfillment in the 


H1/3 


II4 


so-called ‘‘Israel of the New Testament,” the church, invented, 
which of course never satisfies the prayerful student of the word. 

In reading the twelfth chapter carefully, it will be seen at once 
that here we have prophecies which not alone refer to Jerusalem 
and Judah exclusively, but which cannot yet have seen a fulfill- 
- ment. The end of the chapter shows Israel’s conversion. The 
Spirit is poured out. They look upon the pierced One, Jehovah ; 
repentance and cleansing follows throughout the land. This 
brings before us the hour of Israel’s salvation, the same which the 
Holy Spirit unfolds through Paul, in Romans xi. Itis an event 
which will take place after the fullness of the Gentiles will have 
come in (the church removed from the earth). And so all Israel 
shall be saved ; even as it is written, There shall come out of 
Zion a Deliverer; He shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob : 
And this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their 
sins (Rom. xi: 25-27). There is no saved Israel now and there 
can be no national turning of Israel unto the Lord at this present 
time, but when the Lord comes and they shall look upon Him, 
that salvation will be at hand. This coming of the Lord to Israel 
when they shall see His glory will be preceded by nations rising 
against Jerusalem. Not one nation, but nations, will make war 
once more with Jerusalem ; nor will Jerusalem in that future siege 
fall into the hands of the enemies, but the city and the people will 
be victorious. The period of the Maccabees is not meant, nor is 
there anything in the past which could even be a partial fulfill- 
ment of Zech, xii. It is all future. 

Let us look now at the details of the chapter. Thus saith the 
Lord, who stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the foundation 
of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him (verse 1), 
The speaker is Jehovah, the Almighty One who created the 
heavens and the earth, and who formeth the spirit of man within 
him. Why such a beginning of this second burden? To show 


115 


that He who has given all these promises is able to do it. Men 
may fail and are powerless to give help. Indeed, Israel will be 
utterly helpless then when the enemy comes in like a flood, but in 
that hour of extremity Jehovah Himself, the Omnipotent One, the 
One through Whom and in Whom and for Whom heaven and 
earth were created, will come, and in His majestic appearing de- 
liver Jerusalem and His people at last. But when He appears 
for their salvation and they look upon Him, they see Jehovah 
whom they pierced, Jehovah-Jesus, the One who was once re- 
jected, but who now comes in power and in glory. This first 
verse Shows the speaker in the entire chapter is Jehovah, and is 
one of the strongest Old Testament passages which show that the 
Redeemer, the One who came as an obedient servant to suffer and 
to die, is Jehovah. 

Behold, I make Jerusalem a cup of reeling 

To all the nations round about ; 

Upon Judah also shall it be, 

In the siege against Jerusalem. 

And it shall come in that day, I make Jerusalem 

A burdensome stone for all the peoples : 

All that are burdened with it shall be wounded ; 

All the nations of the earth shall gather against it. 

(Verses 2 and 3.) 

This brings us back to the first and second night visions con- 
cerning the nation’s that are at ease, and thus helped forward their 
affliction, the four horns which scattered Judah and Israel. The 
ending three chapters bring out much of the details of what we 
saw in the first three chapters in an outline. What an unfolding 
there is now! Jehovah remembers Jerusalem and is jealous for 
her, and Jerusalem is now to become a cup of reeling (like a 
drunken man) unto all the nations round about. Isaiah long be- 
fore Zechariah saw the judgment coming. The cup of fury which 


116 


Jerusalem drank is now to be emptied by the enemies, and they 
will have to drink the cup of reeling. Awake, awake, stand up, 
O Jerusalem, which hast drunk from the hand of the Lord the 
cup of His fury ; thou hast drunken the bowl of the cup of reel- 
ing and drained it. . . . Behold, I have taken out of thine 
hand the cup of reeling, even the bowl! of the cup of My tury ;. 
thou shalt no more drink it again. And I will put it in the hand 
of them that afflict thee, which have said to thy soul, Bow down, 
that we may go over; and thou hast laid thy back as the ground, 
and as the street to them that go over (Isaiah li: 17, 22, 23). 
What a wonderful harmony in the prophetic word! Jerusalem 
has been drinking all along the cup of reeling, the cup of His 
fury, even drained the cup; but while Jerusalem is thus drinking 
divine displeasure, the nations, and with them that awful mon- 
strosity called Christendom, are getting ripe for the cup of wrath. 
A judgment is hastening rapidly, and Jerusalem will be for the 
nations the cup of reeling. We saw in the first night vision that 
the nations at ease were condemned by Jehovah. He is sore dis- 
pleased with them. They have hurt His people and His inheri- 
tance. Terrible accusation against Christendom too, which has 
always been and is now the great stumbling block to the Jew, with 
its man-made institutions, creeds and self-exaltation. The reader ~ 
will understand we do not mean the church, the one body ; this 
is not applicable to true believers. Man-made Christendom 
is the enemy of Jerusalem, and hates God’s loving thoughts 
for the peace of Jerusalem. If there is blindness in part upon 
Israel, it is equally true that blindness is upon the Gentiles. 
There is planning and scheming for expansion, world reforma- 
tion and possession in Christendom, which leaves out and 
ignores completely God’s purposes, and sets aside, as higher 
criticism does, the oracles of God. No thought in Christen- 
dom that Jehovah will ever make good His promises to the 


117 


seed of Abraham, therefore no thought of the Jew, no love for 
poor Israel ; on the other hand they are despised and hated. It 
is startling, indeed, to see how Europe, the territory of the Roman 
Empire, which will form yet the confederacy of kingdoms under 
one head, is at present boiling over with antisemitism, and the 
heart of Europe, France, is the very hotbed of it. There was 
never a time when antisemitism was so strong and so universal as 
it is now at the end of the much boasted of nineteenth century. 
What will it be when the salt of the earth, the church, is removed? 
The restraint is then taken away and the outbreak will come. 
The Jew is the thorn in the flesh of the nations ; he is hated and 
feared. However, the second and third verses of our chapter do 
not speak of the enemies of Israel, as they are away from the land 
of Israel, but the prophecies show the nations having come up 
against the city of Jerusalem. Before this can be fulfilled Jerusa- 
lem must be once more not alone inhabited by Jews, but be the 
city of the nation again as it was in the past, a partial return of 
the Jews to Palestine must have taken place, and great prosperity 
resting upon their endeavors for a time. Mighty armies are seen 
then coming up against the city and the land, and while in the 
land and in the city there will be tribulation, the reign of the false 
Messiah, outside the armies sent out by the confederacy of nations 
will be gathered. It is of this gathering of the nations before Je- 
rusalem in the tribulation the great, the twelfth chapter speaks. 
In the exegesis of the fourteenth chapter we will have occasion to 
describe this coming siege of Jerusalem. 

In speaking of these coming events it is necessary to bear in 
mind that they have nothing to do with the church. Believers 
sometimes are confused in this respect in not holding strictly to 
the coming of the Lord for His saints, and the absence of the 
_church in the earth during the tribulation, and after this—His 
coming with His saints. Because the Jews are not yet in posses- 


118 


sion of the land and Jerusalem is not yet a Jewish city, some have 
reasoned that the coming of our Lord must be a good ways off 
yet, and on account of these events not being seen now, they say 
we cannot say that the Lord can come any moment for His 
church. There is not one scripture which teaches that before the 
Lord comes for His church the Jews must have returned or Jeru- - 
salem be a national headquarter for Israel once more, etc. It is 
true a partial restoration of the Jews in unbelief has commenced, 
and there is a remarkable national awakening such as has never 
been before, but the full development of this restoration will come 
after the church has left the earth and has been joined to her Lord 
in the air. An exodus of Jews will take place, the land will be- 
come theirs, and the well laid plans and schemes of the present 
time will be all carried out. Political combinations will be their 
chief hopes as well as others for success. As Pharaoh of olden 
times did hasten after the children of Israel when they had left his 
domain, so it seems the nations will come after them and besiege 
Jerusalem. Everything is getting ready for this. Let every be- 
liever rejoice in the blessed hope that no saint will be in the earth 
when at last these sad scenes of a passing dispensation are 
enacted. 

In that day, saith Jehovah, 

I will smite every horse with astonishment, 

And his rider with madness : 

I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, 

And every horse of the peoples I will smite with blindness, 

And the chiefs of Judah shall say in their heart, 

The inhabitants of Jerusalem are my strength, 

In Jehovah of hosts their God. 

In that day I will make the chiefs of Judah 

Like a pan of fire among wood, 

And as a torch of fire among sheaves ; 


11g 


And they shall devour all the peoples round about, 

On the right hand and on the left ; 

And Jerusalem shall dwell in her own place, even in Jerusalem 
(verses 4-7). 

These verses are descriptive of the calamity which will befall 
the enemies of Israel. Jehovah will smite them. The stone fall- 
ing from heaven will smite the image at its feet and will pulverize 
it. The enemies of Israel will suffer as complete a defeat and 
destruction as Pharaoh and his army in the Red Sea, In pride 
and blindness they had rushed on, and while pursuing Israel the 
face of the Lord looked out of the cloud and confused the 
Egyptian hosts, and the returning waters swept them all away, the 
horse and the rider and the chariots. It is but a faint type of 
what it will be when Jehovah will roar out of heaven, and His 
glory will appear. The slain of the Lord will then indeed be 
many. Judah and the chiefs will be used in that judgment. They 
shall be a devouring fire. The fourteenth chapter will lead us into 
a closer investigation. 

The following two verses speak of the order how the coming of 
Jehovah will save His waiting people. 

Jehovah shall save the tents of Judah first, 

That the glory of the house of David 

And the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem 

May not lift itself up over Judah. 

In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem ; 

And the feeble one among them in that day shall be as David ; 

And the house of David shall be as God (Elohim), 

As the angel of Jehovah before them. 

And it shall come to pass in that day, 

That I will seek to destroy all the nations, 

That came against Jerusalem (verses 7-9). 

Judah will inhabit the land and many will dwell in tents, while 


120 


Jerusalem will be a strong and fortified city. The danger from 
the hostile armies will be the greatest with the dwellers in the 
tents. Accordingly, Jehovah will save the tents of Judah first. 
Jerusalem will come next. The purpose is that the house of 
David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem may not lift themselves 
up over Judah. The house of David is especially mentioned. 
We have not had David brought before the prophet in the night 
visions nor in the prophecies which followed, but here in the 
twelfth chapter the house of David is mentioned not less than five 
times, which is very significant. We have the glory of the house 
of David in verse seven, the strength of David and the supremacy 
of it in verse eight. The spirit of grace and supplication is given 
to the house of David, and the family of .the house of David will 
mourn. Jews have a tradition which states that the last 
descendant of the house of David died in Spain centuries ago. 
There are no genealogies at present to prove that the kingly house 
of David is extinct or not, but prophecies like the one we have in 
consideration, and many others which speak of the prominence 
of David and the house of David in the day when Jehovah will 
be manifested, make it very clear that among the wandering sons 
of Israel there are yet lineal descendants of the house of David. 
If they do not know it themselves, Jehovah knows it, and they 
will know it through Him. The feeble ones, literally the stum- 
blers, among His people in that day of manifestation will be like 
David. Whatahero David was! A man of war and strength 
‘conquering always and never conquered. And now the stumbler 
in Israel, the weakest one, will have strength and courage like 
David. And David shall be as God, as the angel of Jehovah be- 
fore them. © This is a startling promise. A similar word is found 
in Exodus vii: 1, And the Lord said unto Moses, See, I have 
made thee a god to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be 
thy prophet. The house of David will during the millennium be 


I21 


supreme in rweandin glory. A lineal descendant of David, a 
prince, will sit upon the throne of his father David and rule asa 
vice-regent of the Lord Jesus Christ, whose throne is then in the 
heavens over the earth. Thus in the earth the house of David 
will be as God and as the angel ‘of Jehovah before them 
(Ezek. xxxiv : 23, 24; xlvi.). 

The closing verses of the chapter claim our special attention, 
for in them we have a fundamental prophetic passage. The spirit- 
ual side of the salvation of Jerusalem is now brought out. 

And I will pour out upon the house of David, 

And upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, 

The spirit of grace and supplication ; 

And they shall look upon Me whom they pierced, 

And they shall mourn for Him as the mourning for an only son, 
And be in bitterness for Him as one in bitterness for the firstborn. 
In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, 

As the mourning of Hadad-rimmon in the valley of Megiddon. 

The mourning then is described as a universal one. All the 
families will mourn ; family by family apart, and their wives apart. 
Such a mourning and weeping has never before been seen in the 
earth nor will there be one like it again. 

But why mourning and weeping? Should there not rather be 

joy and feasting, gladness and hallelujahs? The hallelujahs will 
_core during the entire millennium, but the beginning will be 
mourning, national, by Israel. The mourning is on account of 
Him, Jehovah, who has appeared in His glory and whom they 
now behold. The long expected Messiah has at last appeared, 
and He is Jehovah. His coming for their salvation is as Daniel 
saw Him, after the last beast, the terrible one, the nondescript 
with its ten horns and the little horn between, had risen from the 
sea. I saw in the night visions, and, behold, there came with the 
_clouds of heaven, one like unto a Son of Man, and He came even 


I22 


unto the Ancient of days, and they brought Him near before Him. 
And there was given Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, 
that all the people, nations, and languages should serve Him ; 
His dominion is an everlasting dominion which shall not pass 
away, and His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed (Dan- 
iel vii: 13, 14). A cloud appears in the heaven over Jerusalem. 
It is at once recognized as no common cloud, but as the divine 
glory cloud, (the Shekinah, which had been with Israel of old 
and was always the sign of Jehovah’s presence with His people). 
We can imagine in some measure how this sign will be welcomed 
by the remnant of Israel in the hour of their extremity when there 
is and cannot be help from man. The cloud speaks as of old, 
of divine interference. Our Lord puts the whole scene before 
us when He said in His Olivet discourse, But immediately after 
the tribulation of those days the sun shall be darkened, and the 
moon shall not give her light (what an awful darkness that will 
be! well may then the rejecters of the Gospel seek death from 
the wrath which is now coming), and the stars shall fall from 
heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken : and then 
shall appear the sign of the Son of Manin heaven. Then shall 
all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of 
Man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. 
And He shall send forth His angels with a great sound of a trum- 
pet, and they shall gather together His elect (not the church) from 
the four winds, from one end of heaven unto the other 
(Matthew xxiv: 29-31). The sign of the Son of Man which is 
spoken of here will undoubtedly be the cloud of glory which will 
bring Him from heaven to the earth.. Some believers in the com- 
ing of the Lord have mentioned the sign of the Son of Man to 
be seen in the heaven as if that sign stood in relation to the 
church and would be welcomed by believers, the saved ones, as 
the sign that their redemption is now at hand. We read not long 


123 


ago in a pamphlet in which certain coming signs in constellation 
of stars, etc., were mentioned, as being foretold in prophecy, and 
teaching the church that the coming of the Lord must be at hand. 
This is a mistake. There is nowhere in prophecy a sign men- 
tioned appearing in the heaven to show the church that the Lord 
is at hand. The church, that is the one body, does not need such 
a sign. When the sign of the Son of Man appears in the heaven 
there will be no more church in the earth to see it. It will be 
‘immediately after the tribulation’of these days ;” the church will 
not be in that tribulation. The sign is for Israel. Ezekiel beheld 
that glory which is then to be seen in the heavens. I looked, and, 
behold, a stormy wind came out of the north, a great cloud with 
a fire infolding itself, and a brightness round about it, and out of 
the midst thereof as the color of amber out of the midst of the fire. 
And out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living crea- 
tures. . . . Andabove the firmament that was above their 
heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sap- 
phire stone ; and upon the likeness of the throne was a likeness 
as the appearance of a man upon it above. And I saw as the 
color of amber, as the appearance of fire within it round about, 
from the appearance of his loins and upward, and from the ap- 
pearance of his loins and downward, I saw as if it were the ap- 
pearance of fire, and there was brightness round about him. As 
the appearance of the bow that is in the cleud in the day of rain, 
so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This 
was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord 
(Ezekiel i: 5, 25, 28). This vision will actually be seen by Israel 
in the day of the manifestation of the Lord. He will return in 
like manner upon a cloud as the glorified Son of Man as He went 
up into heaven. In Actsi:11, where the promise of His return 
is given, it is likewise to be remarked that that promise does not 
present the Hope of the church, our blessed Hope, as believers. 


124 


It is very often used as speaking of that Hope which is so dear to 
every believer's heart. However, the promise given by the two 
men in white apparel, in Acts i., is a promise to Israel. _It is the 
coming in like manner as He went into heaven, that is the com- 
ing of the Lord with His saints and not for His saints. There is 
still another passage which is in close connection with the appear- 
ing of Jehovah, the pierced One, in Zechariah xii., namely, Reve- 
lation i: 7, Behold He comes with the clouds, and every eye shall 
see Him, and they which have pierced Him and all the tribes of 
the land shall wail because of Him. Yea. Amen. This passage 
corresponds with the one before us in Zechariah. The tribes in 
Revelation are the same as mentioned in Zechariah, and the wail- 
ing in Revelation stands for the mourning with which the twelfth 
chapter in Zechariah closes. What a scene that will be when at 
last Israel will look upon Him! When the signs of His coming, 
—the coming of the Redeemer—Jehovah increase, and His com- 
ing for their salvation draweth nigh, perhaps their hearts will be 
gladdened, and there will be rejoicing. They see the sign in the 
heavens and there will be the glad shout, Blessed is He that com- 
eth in the name of Jehovah, this is our God, we have waited for 
Him. And now they behold a person upon that cloud. Heisa 
Son of Man. Again they look and they see that His hands and 
His feet and His side are pierced. Who can this be with pierced 
hands, feet and side, who cometh thus in power and glory from 
the heavens to save His people? The truth so long denied by 
them flashes upon them, This is Jesus of Nazareth, the King of 
the Jews, the rejected One, the One who suffered that shameful 
death on yonder hill, whose hands and feet were pierced, and from 
whose loving side and heart the Roman spear drew forth blood 
and water. Jehovah-Jesus, the pierced One, is seen again. 
There way up in the heavens He is seen! Sun and moon 
have been darkened, as we quoted above from Matthew xxiv., but 


125 


instead of their light there flashes another light over the heavens. 
The veil is lifted. God, Jehovah, has broken the long, long si- 
lence. He speaks again. The proud nations tremble, fear and 
trembling seize hold upon all the children of men. The day of 
vengeance, the day of wrath, the day of burning and recompense 
is at hand. All eyes are turned upward to behold that startling 
vision. The cloud, and in that cloud a throne, and upon the 
throne the Lamb of God, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, Jeho- 
vah, the pierced One, the Lord Jesus Christ. Not alone are His 
eyes like a flaming fire, but according to Habakkuk’s vision 
(Habukkuk iii.), His glory covereth the heavens, brightness is. 
round about Him and rays (of glory) come out of His hands and 
His side, and there was the hiding of His power. Long, long 
ago David had by the Spirit of the Lord entered into the suffer- 
ings of his Son, whom he called Lord, and in the Psalm which 
begins with the cry of the forsaken One, My God, My God, why 
has Thou forsaken Me? he speaks of His hands and His feet 
pierced. It is true that the unbelieving Jews and all the enemies 
of a verbal inspiration of the word of God, higher critics, etc., 
with them, have tried to change the word ‘‘pierced” in the 
twenty-second Psalm, and make something else out of it. But it 
is pierced and will be so in all eternity. The One of whom David 
spoke came and was rejected, suffered, sacrificed Himself to put 
away sin, was nailed on the cross, and was pierced through. On 
the third day He was raised from the dead, and for forty days He 
showed Himself in His glorified body to His friends. In that 
body of the risen Lord the nailprints and the pierced side were 
seen. Thomas, unbelieving as he was, and as such a type of Is- 
rael abiding in unbelief still, would not believe the testimony of 
his brethren, and demanded the return of the Lord and to put his 
hands into His side and to see in His hands the prints of the 
nails. The second time the Lord appears, and Thomas is called 


126 


to His side to touch His body, to see the nailprints. Convinced 
because he sees he cries out, My Lord and my God! And when 
He took His own to the mountain where He gave them His com- 
mand and His blessing, when His loving hands were spread out 
in blessing, they all saw the marks of His passion in His hands 
and there in His side. And thus He went into heaven, and while 
you read this, dear friend, He is there in the Holy of Holiest, ap- 
pearing now in the presence of God for us, the all-sufficient One. 
Can then there be a doubt that when He does appear again, the 
second time, to build the tabernacle of David which is fallen 
down, that these marks of His suffering will not he seen? They 
will be the marks for Israel. They will know Him by the nail- 
’ prints as the One so long rejected and hated without a cause. 

The conversion of Saul of Tarsus is a little sample of what is 
yet to be with the seed of Abraham. The light which shone 
around this blinded, self-righteous Pharisee on his way to Damas- 
cus, a light brighter than the Oriental noonday sun, will then 
shine out of heaven in the Lord’s own glory. The Voice which 
spoke to him, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, will speak again 
out of that light to the prostrated nation. It does likewise remind 
us of the rejected brother who became great and a saviour after 
his rejection by his own, and who in loving words said to his 
brethren, so guilty and conscience stricken, I am Joseph your 
brother. What a wonderful event that will be when at last they 
that pierced Him shall behold Him. Suspended somewhere in 
the air will be seen the vision of the Lord in His glory, and thus 
every eye shall see Him. It will be the day when a nation is 
born. The Spirit poured out, they will look upon Him, and the 
great national mourning follows. 

This great mourning will be like the mourning in Hadad- 
rimmon in the valley Megiddon. To what events do these places 
refer? The second book of Chronicles, chapter xxxv., verses 


127 


22-27, give us the history of that great mourning. Never- 
theless, Josiah would not turn his face from him (the King of 
Egypt), but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and 
hearkened not unto the words of Neco, from the mouth of God 
(these words are found in the twenty-first verse), and came to fight 
in the valley of Megiddon. And the archers shot at King Josiah ; 
and the King said to his servants, Have me away, I am sore 
wounded. So his servants took him out of the chariot and put 
him into the second chariot that he had and brought him to Jeru- 
salem ; and he died and was buried in the sepulchres of his 
fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. 
And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing 
men and singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations 
unto this day ; and they made them an ordinance in Israel, and 
behold they are written in the Lamentations. Likewise in 
2 Kings xxiii: 29. In Josiah’s days Pharaoh-Neco, King of Egypt, 
went up against the King of Assyria to the river Euphrates, and 
King Josiah went against him; and he slew him at Megiddon 
when he had seen him. And his servants carried him in a chariot 
dead from Megiddon and brought him to Jerusalem. 

Hadad-rimmon was a village nearby in the valley of Megiddon. 
The pious King Josiah died, pierced by an arrow on account of 
the evil deeds of the nation. After his death there was a great 
mourning because he had been slain, and his death was soon fol- 
lowed by greater calamities, ending with the Babylonian captivity. 
The application to the Lord Jesus Christ and the coming national 
mourning of the nation every reader can make for himself. 

It is interesting to read the Jewish interpretations of this impor- 
tant chapter. We quote from the Babylonian Talmud: That 
mourning, what was it about? Rabbi Yose and the Rabbis differ 
on the point. The one says it is for Messiah, the Son of Joseph, 
when He is killed; and the other says, It is for the Ve/zer Horo 


128 4 

(evil desire, sin), when it is killed. All is clear in the case of 
him that says, It is for Messiah, the Son of Joseph, when He is 
killed, for then we can understand what is written, And they shall 
look upon Me whom they pierced, and they shall lament for 
Him (Zech. xii: 10). But in the case of him that says it is for 
sin when itis killed? Would it be mourning that is needed? 
Surely rejoicing would then be needed. Thus expounded, Rabbi 
Jehudah, of the Western house, in the Messianic times, the Holy 
One, blessed be He, is going to bring forth the evil desire and 
slay him in the presence of the righteous and the wicked. Unto 
the righteous the evil desire appears like a mountain, and unto the 
wicked he appears like a hair. The righteous weep ard the 
wicked weep. The righteous say, How did we ever get the better 
of this high mountain? And the wicked say, How is it that we 
did not get the better of this hair? (Yalkut on Zechariah.) 

The Jews have invented a double Messiah, one who is called 
the Son of Joseph and the other the Son of David. The Son of 
Joseph is pierced, and after He has been slain, Jehovah will send 
Messiah, Son of David. It is not denied that the Son of Joseph 
isa Messiah, an anointed One. This teaching is to solve the 
difficulties they have in explaining the suffering Messiah and the 
victorious Messiah. We have often talked with orthodox Jews for 
hours on the fact that there is only one Messiah, and He whom 
they expect as Son of David is truly the One who died and was 
pierced through for our sins. Human words cannot describe the 
great mourning when at last it is known by His appearing in the 
clouds, that Jesus, the Son of David, is the once rejected stone 
and now become the head of the corner. The first verse of the 
thirteenth chapter belongs to the twelfth. However, we will leave 
it for the next chapter. 


CHAPTER XIIL. 


The fountain against sin and uncleanness opened—LIdols and false 
prophets destroyed—The smitten Shepherd and the sheep scattered 
—The Remnant saved—Two-thirds cut off and a third part 


refined by fire. 


As mentioned in the closing sentemce of the exposition of the 
last chapter, the first verse of the 13th chapter belongs to the 12th 
chapter. The division of the Bible into chapters is very often at 
fault and helps much to obscure the real meaning. ‘‘In that 
day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness.” That 
day will be the day when they have looked upon Him, Jehovah, 
the pierced One, and the fountain which is opened is the same 
blessed fountain of which the saints now sing : 

‘¢ There is « fountain filled with blood 
Drawn from Emanuel’s veins, 


And sinners plunged beneath that flood 
Lose all their guilty stains.’’ 


The fountain was indeed in existence throughout all the long 
centuries of Israel’s dispersion. But Israel in blindness did not 
see it, only the remnant according to the election of grace did 
realize the precious blood of the Lamb of God, which has taken 
away the sins of the world. Now all is changed. Upon the in- 
habitants of Jerusalem and the house of David the Spirit is poured 
out. They have seen Him who is the first-born among many 
brethren, the second Adam, the One who is the Head of a new 
creation, and the blood of Him, the Lord Jesus Christ, is now 
cleansing them from all sin and uncleanness. Their guilt is par- 

129 


130 


doned and aii unrighteousness and impurity is completely re- 
moved. This great event is everywhere spoken of in the Old 
Testament. We had it under consideration in the third chapter, 
containing the night vision of the cleansing of Joshua, the High 
priest. In that vision the blood which cleanses was not men- 
tioned. Now, however, it is seen, that the cleansing is by the 
blood of the Lamb. It is the same precious blood which cleansed 
and washed the glorified saints. The great multitude, which no 
man can number, out of every nation and of all tribes and peoples 
and tongues; the saints arrayed in white robes with palms in 
their hands, who washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb, and 
who appear with Him. And while they sing their song of praise, 
Salvation unto our God which sitteth on the throne and unto the 
Lamb, Israel will be washed by the same blood and join into the 
song of worship heard from the glorified lips of the saints of God. 
In the 103d Psalm we have a prophetic expression of what Israel 
will rejoice in when that fountain is opened. The cleansed 
nation will break forth and sing : 


‘‘Bless Jehovah, oh my soul, 
And all that is within me bless His holy name ; 
Bless Jehovah, oh my soul, and forget not all His benefits. 
Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, 
Who healeth all thy diseases, 
Who reedeemeth thy life from destruction, 
Who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies.” 


The cleansing and healing of Israel in that day will be complete 
and final. No more going back to sin and apostasy after that. 
Now they are indeed a holy people, a kingdom of priests. Per- 
fect healing is theirs, not alone in spiritual things, but also healing 
from their diseases. Jehovah is their healer the moment He, as 
the Sun of Righteousness with healing under His wings, has risen 


131 


uponthem. ‘‘And the inhabitant shall not say I am sick; the 
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity” (Isa. 
xxxill: 24). ‘Neither will I hide My face any more from them; 
for I have poured out My Spirit upon the house of Israel, saith 
the Lord God ” (Ezekiel xxxix: 29). ‘‘And the Redeemer shall 
come out of Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in 
Jacob, saith the Lord. And as for Me, this is My covenant with 
them, saith the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and My words 
which I have put in chy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, 
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy 
seed’s seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and forever ” (Isa. 
lix; 20, 21). ‘‘For behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing and her 
people a joy, and I will rejoice in Jerusalem and joy in My 
people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her 
nor the voice of crying” (Isa. Ixv: 19). 

The cleansing of His people is followed by the cutting off of 
the names of the idols from the land of Israel. The false 
prophets who were indwelt by the spirit of uncleanness are de- 
stroyed. It is the consequence of the outpouring of the Spirit 
upon Israel. The entire paragraph beginning the 13th chapter 
speaks of this: 

‘* And it shall be in that day, saith the Lord of Hosts, 

I will cut off the names of the idols from the land, 

And they shall no more be remembered ; 

And also I wilhcause the prophets and the unclean spirits 
To pass out of the land. 

And it shall be if a man still prophesy, 

His father and his mother who begat him shall say to him, 
Thou shalt not live, 

For thou hast spoken a lie in the name of Jehovah ; 

And his father and his mother who begat him 

Shall pierce him through when he prophesieth. 


132 


And it shall be in that day the prophets shall be ashamed 
Each of his vision when he prophesies ; 

And shall no more put on a hairy mantle to lie, 

And shall say I am no prophet, I am a tiller of the ground, 
For a man has sold me from my youth. 

And one shall say to him 

What are these wounds between thine hands? 

And he shall answer, those with which I was wounded 

In the house of my lovers” (verses 2 to 6). 


We have seen before in the roth chapter that Israel will return 
to idolatry in the last days. The unclean spirit of idolatry which 
was cast out will at last return with seven others and will find the 
house empty, swept and garnished. And the evil spirit, with the 
seven others more evil than himself, wil] enter in and dwell 
there, so that the last state of Israel becometh worse than the 
first. This will happen to this evil generation. This section of the 
13th chapter makes it very clear that when the fountain is opened 
against sin and uncleanness, that idols will have been in the land, 
and false prophets prophesy there immediately before the manifes- 
tation of the Lord from heaven ; for how could the names of the 
idols be cut off from the land ifthere werenone there? Palestinemay 
well be put down now as the great centre of false worship. Greek 
and Latin crosses are seen on al] sidesin Jerusalem and other places, 
while saints, holy houses and places are worshipped and adored. 
On the spot where the Lord’s house stood, there stands to-day the 
mosque of the false prophet. All is idolatry. Of course when 
the Lord returns these false temples will be destroyed, and the 
Greek and Latin idolatries, as well as Islam, will forever pass out 
of existence. There will be a purging of the land from these 
abominations, This may be included in the prophecy here. 
Still, it is the people of Istael who are especially concerned in the 
prophecy before us. The land has often been the scene of idol | 


133 


worship, and the people engaged in that which Jehovah despises. 
It will be so again, only in a much worse form, when false prophets 
who are inspired by the unclean spirit and demons themselves 
will be their guides. 

We must look to Revelation for a key. Itis well known to all 
students of the prophetic word that all which comes after the third 
chapter in the last book of the Bible is future still. We are yet in 
the things which are present. When the Lord has taken the 
Church to Himself then the great visions, tribulations, wrath 
and judgment will be fulfilled. Aside from the scenes in heaven 
we learn from Revelation the events in the earth during the great 
tribulation which ends with the wrath from heaven. 

Now in the 9th chapter and the 20th verse of Revelation we 
read, And the rest of mankind which were not killed with these 
plagues repented not of the works of their hands that they should 
not worship demons and the idols of gold, and of silver, and of 
brass, and of stone, and of wood ; which can neither see nor hear 
nor walk, Scripture is to be explained by scripture. The Holy 
Spirit declares through Paul the very same when he writes in 
1 Timothy iv: 1, ‘‘ But the Spirit says expressly that in the latter 
- times some shall fall away from the faith, giving heed to seducing 
spirits and doctrines of devils through the hypocrisy of men that 
speak lies branded in their own conscience as with a hot iron.” 
For this cause God shall send them strong delusions that they 
should believe a lie, that they all might be damned which be- 
lieved not the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness 
{2 Thess. ii: 11, 12). 

These words have not yet been fulfilled, nor has the time come. 
Truly there are many indications around us. Doctrines of de- 
mons are seen in more than one respect. Mysterious influences 
are felt in the earth. The hindering power, the Holy Spirit, is 
still present, and He is keeping back the full manifestation of 


134 


evil (2 Thess. ii: 7). But when at last He has gone, in the re- 
moval of the body, then darkness indeed will cover the earth. 
The unclean spirits, and who can count their numbers, will be 
thrown out of heaven into the earth and take possession of man- 
kind. The voice from heaven declares, Woe for the earth and for 
the sea, because the devil is gone down unto you, having great 
wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time (Rev. xii). When 
our Lord was in the earth preaching the kingdom of heaven He 
found many persons in the possession of demons, evil spirits, who 
had complete control of them, and He cast them out. Some 
cried out in terror, demanding to know if He had come to tor- 
ment them before the time. They knew Him as the One who 
would at last send them totheir finaldoom. But when He comes 
again in His glory from heaven, conditions will be a great deal 
worse. Satan and his hosts will be in the earth, having deceived 
the inhabitants of the earth, and seducing with lying wonders and 
strong delusions those who would not believe the truth, and lead 
them back to idol worship and to the carnal abominations con- 
nected with such a worship. Spiritualism, Christian Science, 
Buddhism in the very midst of Christendom, as well as the sect of 
devil worshipers in Paris, London, and Berlin, are but faint sam- 
ples of the gross darkness which will be when the Church has 
been removed. There is no human mind which can imagine 
the condition of things during that time of tribulation, nor is there 
a pen which could describe the delusions and wickedness which 
will then flourish for a short time in this world. 

What praises, then, should be in the hearts of the Saints for 
having escaped that tribulation and the wrath to come. No, the 
Lord will never leave His Church in the earth when Satan and his 
demons have control. The presence of the Church in the earth 
makes it impossible that these days can come. But while this 
will be true in the earth generally, the land of Israel will be the 


a3) 


center of that great storm, and there the false worship, idolatry, 
will be established. It is to be remembered that a part of the 
nation will have {been restored to the land in unbelief, and will 
rebuild a temple, which is the fourth temple. Sacrifices are 
brought again, but they are an abomination, and the Lord hates 
them. The 66th chapter of Isaiah in its beginning speaks of this 
fact, We have to turn once more to the book of Revelation to 
find there a commentary. In the first quotation from the book 
we learned of the conditions in the earth in a general sense, but 
when we read the 13th chapter we find ourselves on Jewish ground, 
in Jerusalem. In that chapter we read of the worship of one who 
is termed the dragon, and this dragon gives power to a beast, who 
is likewise worshiped. And there was given him a mouth speak- 
ing great things and blasphemies; and there was given him 
authority to continue forty and two months (verse 5). . . And 
all that dwell on the earth shall worship him, everyone whose 
name hath not been written in the book of life of the Lamb that 
hath been slain from the foundation of the world . . . (8th 
verse). After this we read in the 11th verse of a second beast. 
And I saw another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had 
two horns like unto a lamb, and he spake as a dragon. And he 
exerciseth all the authority of the first beast in his sight, and he 
maketh the earth and them that dwell therein to worship the first 
beast, whose deadly wound was healed. And he doeth great 
signs, that he sh6éuld even make fire come down out of heaven 
npon the earth in sight of men, ~ An image of the beast is made. 
And he deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by reason of the 
signs which it was given him to do in the sight of the beast ; say- 
ing to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an 
image to the beast, which hath the stroke of the sword and lived. 
And it was given unt him to give breath to it, even to the image 
of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and 


136 


cause that as many as should not worship the image of the beast 
should be killed (14th and 15th verses). We see here a trinity 
revealed. The first is the dragon, the second the beast, and after 
that beast, which is called the first beast, the other, or the second 
beast. The dragon is the father of lies, the devil, the first beast 
is his son, the Antichrist, and the second beast is the evil spirit, 
which causes the dwellers in the earth to worship the beast. It is 
the trinity of evil as it is yet to be seen in the earth, and worshipped 
by those who rejected the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. 
This beast is the false Messiah. The one of whom we read 
in 2 Thess. iii The son of perdition, he that upholdeth and 
exalteth himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped, 
so that he sitteth in the temple of God, setting himself forth as 
God. Now this is the great abomination of the great tribulation. 
The 13th chapter of Revelation speaks, as we have seen, of Anti- 
christ having received a deadly wound by a sword, but he lived. 
It was a miracle that he lived. The dragon gave him power to 
overcome it. But not alone does he raise up the beast again from 
death, but he imparts life to the image of Antichrist, which is to 
be worshipped, so that it could speak, and all who refuse to wor- 
ship the image are to be killed. Antichrist is a perfect counter- 
feit of the true Christ. The devil will then place him before the 
world as a substitute of Christ. The wound of the beast was made 
perhaps by those who pretended to love him. With the light 
from Rev. xiii, Zech. xiii becomes very plain, for the false prophets 
and idols mentioned in our chapter are connected with the 
winding up of this dispensation. The sixth verse does not 
speak of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is generally taken to be a 
Messianic prophecy and often quoted assuch. The context, how- 
ever, shows beyond a doubt that the person mentioned is the false 
prophet. And one shall say to him—the false prophet—What 
then are these wounds between thy hands? And he shall say, 


137 


Those for which I was wounded in the house of my lovers. No-’ 
where is this prophecy quoted in the New Testament as being 
Messianic. Surely if it had any reference to the Lord, the Holy 
Spirit would have quoted it somewhere in the New Testament. 
We have here the description of the false shepherd, the Antichrist, 
the beast with the deadly wound. Of course there will be many 
false Messiahs in that day when Antichrist reigns, False messen- 
gers, lying prophets, with their delusions will go throughout the 
land and to the nations likewise. But when He appears whose 
right it is, Antichrist, all false prophets, and all the idols will be 
forever cut off and the land will be thoroughly cleansed of all 
these abominations. If it were possible that a man after this man- 
ifestation should still prophesy (speaking falsely, a lie in the name 
of Jehovah), his own father and mother would slay him for it. 
The true Shepherd is now seen once more in the closing of this 
chapter, and with him mention is made of the remnant. 


‘‘Awake, O sword, against My shepherd, 
And against a man, My fellow, saith Jehovah of Hosts ; 
Smite the shepherd and the sheep shall be scattered, 
And I will bring back My hand upon the little ones. 
And it shall be in all the land, saith Jehovah, 
Two parts therein shall be cut off and die, 
And the third shall be left therein. 
And I will bring the third part through the fire, 
And I will refine them as silver is refined, 
And will try them as gold is tried ; 
He shall call upon My name and I will answer ; 
I will say, It is My people, 
And he shall say, Jehovah is my God.” 


The question comes to every student of the word, why is here 
an interruption in the events which we have followed and which 


138 


are given chronologically? Why is there no continuation bring- 
ing out other phases of Israel’s salvation and the coming of the 
Lord? The change is very abrupt, and there is a going back to 
events which are the events of His first coming and His rejection. 
The solution of the difficulty would be almost impossible if we 
would interpret the sixth verse of the wounded one as referring to 
the Lord, the Messiah. But the fact that in the sixth verse we 
have the person of Antichrist answers the question which we 
have asked. The change and the interruption is made to show 
the contrast between the Good Shepherd and the false shepherd. 
The devil's masterpiece had been in the earth ; perhaps he pointed 
to his wounds in his hands and to the fact that he was dead and 
became alive again, and mockingly he spoke of Jesus of Nazareth 
and His claim of having been dead and now living. The true 
Shepherd has appeared. He too is pierced, but He was pierced 
for their sins, and to make the whole complete a new thought is 
brought out which has not been seen so far in Zechariah. It is 
the same as in Isaiah liii, the suffering One, who is a man, and 
called My fellow, the fellow of Jehovah of Hosts, Jehovah Himself, 
who speaks here, and what does He speak? The sword is to work 
against His Shepherd and against His own Fellow. The blessed 
mystery of the atonement is thus brought out. Indeed it is the 
heart of the Gospel here. For God so loved the world that He 
gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on Him 
should not perish but have life eternal. The Lord, laid on 
Him the iniquity of us all. It speaks of Him, the forsaken 
One, the Son of God, forsaken in the hour of His agony, the 
sword upon Him and against Him. Inthe New Testament we 
find the passage quoted in the Gospel of Matthew, 26th chapter 
and 13th verse: Then saith Jesus unto them, all ye shall be 
offended because of Me this night ; for it is written, I will smite 
the Shepherd and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad. 


739 


In the last verses of the 13th chapter we have once more teachings 
concerning the remnant. These verses are not alone applicable to 
the remnant and the sheep in the time when our Lord was in the 
earth and immediately after he had suffered, they are not alone ap- 
plicable to the remnant, which was in Jerusalem when the Roman 
armies came for destruction, but the application is to be made in 
connection with the people living in the land when Antichrist will 
reign, and the suffering of the remnant, the one-third, and the 
glorious privileges of that remnant are likewise future. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


The last conflict—Jerusalem surrounded by armies and besteged and 
taken—Jehovah's intervention—The escape of the remnani—Living 
waters flowing out of Jerusalemn—The enemies punished—The 
remnant of nations live as worshipers in Jerusalem—Jerusalem 

the holy city. 


The last chapter in Zechariah is a very important one. Itis a 
grand summing up and description of the events which stand at 
the close of the great tribulation, and as such it is one of the most 
striking chapters in the Old Testament. Post-millennialism surely 
fails here in trying to find some explanation for these prophecies. 
The chapter is unfulfilled throughout. Anyone who does not ac- 
knowledge this has only one other way of interpretation, and that 
is to spiritualize the whole and make out of it the development of 
the Church, the holiness of the Church, etc. ‘This, of course, is a 
failure and cannot be done. The only true way of interpretation 
is the literal one, and that will teach us that the events seen in 
this chapter are future. This ought to be seen by any reader of 
the Word of God at the first glance. There is no siege and cap- 
ture of Jerusalem in history which corresponds to the siege 
and capture which stands in the beginning of this chapter. The 
Lord never intervened in behalf of Jerusalem in the way that it is 
said here in going forth and fighting against those nations, nor did 
His feet stand upon the Mount of Olives for the purpose of com- 
pletely destroying the enemies of His people. The whole chap- 
ter is of such significance that we have to take it verse by verse 
and illustrate it by many scriptures taken from different parts of 
the prophetic word. 

140 


141 


Verse z. ‘Behold a day cometh for Jehovah when thy 
spoils shall be divided in the midst of thee.” 


The time when this prophecy will be enacted is here given. A 
day is coming for Jehovah. Now it is man’s day and God keeps 
silence, but His day, the day of Jehovah, is coming and will bea 
day of manifestation, glory, and power. ‘‘ That day is a day of 
wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and deso- 
lation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and 
thick darkness” (Zeph, i: 15). ‘‘ Blow ye the trumpet in Zion 
and sound an alarm in my holy mountain ; let all the inhabitants. 
in the land tremble, for the day of Jehovah cometh, it is nigh at 
hand” (Joel ii:i). ‘‘ There shall be a day of the Lord upon all 
that is proud and haughty ” (Isa. ii:4). The great tribulation is 
about past, and now when Jerusalem is not alone besieged but 
taken, the spoil being divided by the victors in the midst of the 
city, and when the enemy seems to have succeeded, then the day 
for Jehovah will come and He will roar out of the heavens. 


Verse 2. ‘I will gather all nations against Jerusalem 
for battle, 

And the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the 
women shall be ravished, _ 

And half of the city shall go forth into captivity, 

And the residue of the people shall not be cut off.” 


This puts before us the last scenes of the times of the Gentiles, 
the great conflict which in Daniel and other prophecies is likewise 
described. There are difficulties, especially in regard to Anti- 
christ. If he is then in Jerusalem, and sitting in the temple, wor- 
shipped as God, having complete control of Jerusalem, how can 
he be the leader of the hostile armies of the nations which come 
against Jerusalem? It is nowhere said that Antichrist is to have 
this place in the temple for any length of time. We likewise do 


142 


not know the exact time when he will thus be worshipped. He 
hears while away from the land of the appearing of the two wit- 
nesses in Jerusalem, their success in preaching, and that many 
Jews become believers in Him who is the Hope of Israel. He 
invades the land, takes the city, and slays the witnesses. The 
armies of the nations are associated with him. Daniel gives the 
history of these events. (Daniel xi.) 
The armies which gather against Jerusalem in that day are the 
armies of the eonfederation of nations, sprung out of the terri- 
tory of the old Roman Empire. It was stated not long ago 
from post-millennial sides that this in itself was beyond belief. 
How could it be possible that the progress of civilization could 
be arrested to such an extent, that the nations of Christendom 
would unite to march up against the Holy City? The Gospel 
leaven (?) was at work as never before, and it would be impos- 
sible that these nations who will become more and more thus 
leavened could be occupied with such a campaign. This indeed 
is the thought of man, but the word of God speaks in an entirely 
different language. True the leaven is at work, but truth is not 
leaven, but leaven is evil. We must not forget that Jehovah Him- 
self says, I will gather all nations against Jerusalem. 
' Much reminds us here in chapter xiv of Egypt, and we shall 
have to refer a number of times to the story of Israel’s deliver- 
ance from the house of bondage. Pharaoh, though he had wit- 
nessed the judgments of God upon his own land, tribulation and 
wrath, yet he rushed on in blindness to his doom. So it will be 
once more with the antisemitic nations. Blinded they will be, 
though they have also witnessed tribulation and wrath. Perhaps 
special commercial and financial as well as political interests are 
at stake, and will be the causes of the campaign against the land 
and the city. Joel iii speaks of this gathering of nations: ‘‘Pro- 
claim ye this among the nations ; prepare war ; stir up the mighty 


143 


men; let all the men of war draw near; let them come up. 
Beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruninghooks into 
spears ; let the weak say, I am strong. Haste ye, and come all 
ye nations round about, and gather yourselves together; thither 
cause Thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord. Let the nations 
bestir themselves, and come up to the valley of Jehosaphat, for 
there will I sit to judge all the nations round about. Put ye in 
the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come, tread ye; for the wine- 
press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great. 
Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision, for the day of 
the Lord is near in the valley of decision. The sun and the moon 
are darkened, and the stars withdraw their shining. And the Lord 
shall roar from Zion, and utter His voice from Jerusalem; and 
the heavens and the earth shall shake: but the Lord will be a 
refuge unto His people, and a stronghold to the children of 
Israel.” 

The twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew is to be considered in 
connection with the last chapter in Zechariah, for it relates 
to the same events. Some take Matthew xxiv as having 
been in part fulfilled, others as being now fulfilled. Both are in- 
correct. The chapter will be fulfilled after the church is taken 
from the earth to be with the Lord in the air. ‘‘ Ye shall hear of 
wars and rumors of wars; see that ye be not troubled, for these 
things must needs come to pass; the end is not yet. For nation 
shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there 
shall be famines and earthquakes in divers places. But all these 
things are the beginning of trouble. Then shall they deliver you 
up unto tribulation and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of all 
nations for My name’s sake.” . . . All this is predictive of 
the great tribulation. The twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew makes 
it clear that there will be a Jewish-Christian remnant—not church— 
in the land, and a testimony will be given by them. (See verse 14 


144 


and compare with Revelation xiv: 6, 7.) Neither Zechariah xiv 
nor Matthew xxiv has seen a fulfillment. Jerusalem has never 
been besieged by all nations, nor was only a part of the people 
destroyed in its last siege by Titus. 


Verse 3. ‘‘Then shall Jehovah go forth and fight against 
those nations, 
As when He fought in the day of battle.” 


The hour of their extremity has come and this brings the inter- 
vention. The great tribulation in its beginning found a good part 
of the Jewish people restored in unbelief in the land. Jerusalem 
had become again a Jewish city, and a temple stands in the city. 
The tribulation ends with Jerusulem taken, ruin once more, terrible 
slaughter and suffering, and in the midst a remnant hopeful, 
waiting for salvation from above. When there seems to be no 
escape Jehovah will appear and fight against those nations. The 
heavens will be opened and Jehovah’s glory and power manifested. 
It will be as it was in the day of battle. 

‘And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh, King of Egypt. 
and he pursued after the children of Israel; for the children of 
Israel went out with an high hand. And the Egyptians pursued 
after them, all the horses and chariots of Pharoah and his horse- 
men, and his army overtook them encamping by the sea ; 
And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord . . . And 
Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the 
salvation of the Lord, which He will work for you to-day 

The Lord shall fight for you and ye shall hold your peace. 

And it came to pass in the morning watch that the Lord 

looked forth upon the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of 
fire and of cloud, and discomfited the host of the Egyptians, 

The Lord overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the 

sea. . . . There remained not so much as one of them.” 


145 


(Exodus xiv.) ‘‘Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and thou King Jehosaphat, Thus saith the Lord unto 
you, Fear not ye, neither be ye dismayed by reason of this great 
multitude ; for the battle is not yours, but God’s. Ye shall not 
fight in this battle, set yourselves, stand still, and see the salvation 
of the Lord with you” (2 Chronicles xx: 15-17). These are only 
two samples of what Jehovah will do in His day and how He 
will save His people. In Matthew xxiv we find the intervention 
in the twenty-seventh verse, ‘‘For as the lightning cometh forth 
from the east and is seen even unto the west, so shall be the com- 
ing of the Son of Man.” 


Verse 4. ‘*And His feet shall stand in that day upon 
the Mount of Olives, 

Which is before Jerusalem on the east ; 

And the Mount of Olives shall be parted in the middle, 

Toward the east and toward the west, a great valley, 

And half of the mountain shall be removed northward 

And the other half southward.” 


The east, the place where the sun rises, is made prominent in 
this manifestation. From the east to the west the lightning 
flashes, thus shall be the coming of the Son of Man. 


‘God cometh from Teman, 

And the holy One from Paran 

His splendor covereth the heavens, 

And the earth is full of His glory ” (Habbak. iii). 


Teman is the country of the sons of the east, and Paran the 
desert region extending from the frontiers of Judah to the borders 
of Sinai. But there towards the east from Jerusalem stands a 
mountain. It overlooks the whole city, and right in front, there is 
the valley of Jehosaphat, the valley where the nations are assem- 
bled (Joel iii). What a view from this mountain top! There is 


146 


the city, and its burning ruins are seen, their are the camps of 
the nations, with their banners and cannons gathered now in fear 
and in trembling, for the heavens declare the glory of the 
Lord. Immediately after the tribulation of these days, the sun 
shall be darkened andthe moon . . ._ and then shall appear 
the sign of the Son of Man in the heavens. And now He Him- 
self has descended from the heavens. His blessed feet stand again 
upon the Mount of Olives. He stands upon the mountain, and 
perhaps on the very spot where He stood centuries, many cen- 
turies, before, after His passion and His resurrection when He 
blest His disciples and had been. removed from them with out- 
stretched arms. There stood the two heavenly visitors in that 
day with their message, ‘‘Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye here 
looking into heaven? This Jesus which was received up from 
you into heaven shall so come in like manner as ye beheld Him 
going into heaven.” A long, long time past. Has He forgotten 
His promise? No, the hour had not come. But men disbe- 
* lieved the word of promise, I will come again. ‘‘ And in the last 
days mockers came with mockery, walking after their own lusts, 
saying, Where is the promise of His coming? for from the days 
that the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from 
the beginning of the creation” (2 Peter ii: 3, 4). But now the 
Lord has come. He, the Son of Man, in His glory, is seen 
plainly from the city and from the valley, and with Him the heay- 
enly company, His saints. The moment His feet touch the 
Mount of Olives there is an earthquake which splits the moun- 
tain into two halves, and a great valley is formed between these 
two parts. ‘‘The mountains quake at Him, and the hills melt ; 
and the earth is upheaved at His presence, yea, the world and all 
that dwell therein” (Nahum i: 5). As in the day of battle when the 
Egyptian hosts were destroyed and He divided the sea, thus will 
He divide the mountain and make a way for His trusting people. 


147 


Verse 5. ‘‘And ye shall flee by the valley of My moun- 
tains, 

For the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal ; 

Ye shall flee as you fled before the earthquake, 

In the days of Uzziah, King of Judah: 

And Jehovah my God shall come, 

And all the saints with Thee !" 


The valley is the way by which the remnant will flee from the 
city. The earthquake is mentioned only in another passage in 
the prophets. Amos received the words of the Lord and the vis- 
ions two years before the earthquake. The details of the earth- 
quake are not mentioned. Perhaps the pious in the city, the 
Messiah-expecting Jews, hoped then that the Promised One 
would appear, and they fled from the city. It was during the 
reign of Uzziah (Jehovah is strength) that it happened. 

Jehovah who shall come refers us back to the fourth verse, 
where He stands upon the Mount. Here He is seen not alone in 
His manifestation, but His saints are with Him. It is an excla- 
mation of joyous surprise, All the saints with Thee! There above 
the Mount of Olives a startling picture is seen. Countless human 
beings, glorified, gathered out of all languages, nations, tribes 
and countries, great and small, in white and shining robes, are 
seen flowing down from the opened heaven. What multitudes! 
No man can count them. What light and what glory! Brighter 
than the noonday sun. And, oh! what hallelujahs, what wonder- 
ful singing in joy and praise and adoration! When the shepherds 
were on the fields near Bethlehem they heard the angels’ song, 
but when He comes again there will be singing and rejoicing 
grander still. Then it will be indeed, Glory to God in the high- 
est, Peace on earth, good will towards men. The singing of the 
redeemed will be heard. The mighty angels will not be silent in 
their praise. and all the armies of heaven will escort the King of 


148 


kings and Lord of lords upon white horses. What a scene in 
view of the places where He once suffered and died, and beheld 
by the nations and Israel ! 

And every saint will share His glory then. Oh, wonderful 
grace for redeemed sinners, which lifts them up to such glory, 
to come with the Son of Man in His glory, and to share 
His throne. Why is there now so little praise with His own, His 
redeemed ones? Why so often coldness? Perhaps if we would 
gaze more into these visions of glory it would be different, and 
there would be not only praise but in all the wilderness experi- 
ences joy and patience, the patience of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Thus He, our Lord, the Leader and Perfecter of faith, went 
through this life. ‘‘Who for the joy that was set before Him en- 
dured the cross, despising shame, and hath sat down at the right 
hand of the throne of God.” And when the Lord comes with 
His saints the remnant of Israel leaving the city will not be silent. 
Their song will be, ‘‘Lo, He is our God; we have waited for 
Him ; we will be glad and rejoice in His salvation. For in this 
mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest” (Isaiah xxv: 9). 


Verses 6 and 7. ‘‘ And it shall come to pass in that day 
That the light shall not be with brightness and with gloom, 
And the day shall be One. 

It shall be known unto Jehovah. 

Not day and not night. 

And at evening time there shall be light.” 


Many different interpretations of these two verses have been 
attempted, most of them in spiritual teachings. The details of 
the coming manifestation can hardly be now all understood. 
This seems to be clear in regard to the above that we have a pro- 
phetic description of the phenomena in nature, in the heavens in 
that day. The Septuagint translates, There shall not be light, 


149 


but cold and ice. This translation is incorrect. That day will 
be a day of darkness, gloominess, followed by twilight and end- 
ing in the bursting forth of a new light. ‘‘Woe unto you that 
desire the day of the Lord! Wherefore would you have the day 
of the Lord? It is darkness and not light” (Amosv: 18). ‘And 
it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord God, that I will 
cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in 
a clear day” (Amos viii: 9). ‘‘The sun shall be turned into 
darkness and the moon into blood before the great and terrible 
day of the Lord come” (Joel ii: 31). It is the same as in Mat- 
thew xxiv, the darkening of the sun and moon, the falling of the 
stars. It will be one day, a peculiar day, such as has never been 
before. In the hour of His agony upon the cross there prevailed 
a darkness over Jerusalem and the land; the same will be the case 
in His manifestation and will inspire terror. At evening time the 
light will shine, the Son of Righteousness, now fully risen, with 
healing under his wings. 


Verse 8. ‘‘ And it shall be in that day 

That living waters shall go out from Jerusalem, 
Half of them to the eastern sea 

And half of them to the western sea. 

In summer and in winter shall it be.” 


Living waters flowing out from Jerusalem speak of the blessings 
which the Lord will give through the city and the inhabitants 
to the nations of the earth. Jerusalem established will indeed be 
a praise in the earth. The Holy Spirit has been poured out and 
living waters flow from the place which is the center of the world. 
The living waters will never stop flowing. It will be for summer 
and winter. Whata fruitfulness there will follow. The whole 
earth will be fruitful then, not alone in nature but in spiritual 
things. ‘‘For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the gar- 


150 


den causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth, so the 
Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth be- 
fore all the nations. Out of Zion there shall go forth the law and 
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. The wilderness and the 
solitary place shall be glad, and the desert shall rejoice and blos- 
som as a rose. It shall blossom abundantly and rejoice even 
with joy and singing ; the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto ~ 
it; the excellency of Carmel and Sharon; they shall see the glory 
of the Lord, the excellency of our God” . . . (Isaiah xxxv). 
“And he brought me back unto the door of the house (the mil- 
lennial temple) ; and behold waters issued out from under the 
threshold of the house eastward, for the forefront of the house 
was toward the east ; and the waters came down from under, from 
the right side of the house, on the south of the altar. Then 
brought he me out by the way of the gate northward, and led me 
round by the way without unto the outer gate by the way of the 
gate that looketh toward the east; and behold there ran out 
waters on the right side. . . . Now when I had returned, 
behold upon the bank of the river were very many trees on the 
one side and_on the other. Then said he unto me, These waters 
issue forth toward the eastern region, and shall go down into 
Arabah, and they shall go toward the sea; into the sea shall the 
waters go which were made to issue forth, and the waters shall be 
healed” (Ezekiel xlvii). The waters flowing from the threshold 
of the house empty into the sea . ... representing the na- 
tions of the earth, and they receive healing and life. 


Verse g. ‘‘And Jehovah shall be King over all the earth. 
In that day shall Jehovah be one and His name one.” 


The true form of government is established. Jehovah is King. 
His throne is then established over the earth, and from that place 
He rules over all the nations in righteousness. The shepherd 


15 


with the rod of iron and the saints share this rule, while in the 
earth Israel governs with a Prince of the house of David at their 
head. True unity hascome. The shameful divisions of Chris- 
tendom, the work of the enemy, the harvest of the flesh ended in 
a mock union of a Fatherhood of God and brotherhood of man.- 
Man attempts now to bring about a unity of the race and unity 
in religions. He the glorified Head of His body and His blessed 
atonement is denied. True Christendom ends in a unity, under 
one head, but he is the Antichrist. In that day of His coming 
again in glory there will be His name One, and He will be known 
as the One God, and worshipped as such. Idolatry is abolished. 
The abominations connected with it have ceased. Satan, the 
seducer of the nations, is chained and seduces the nations no 
more. Confusion is forever ended. ‘‘Then will I return to the 
nations a pure language, that they may call upon the name of 
Jehovah, to serve Him with one consent (Zeph. iii : 9). 


Verse ro. ‘‘ All the land shall be changed like the nlain 
From Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem, 

And she shall be lifted up and dwell in her place, 

From Benjamin’s gate unto the gate of the first place, 

Unto the corner gate, 

And from the tower of Hananeel unto the king’s wine presses.” 


It is of little profit to understand the exact location of the places 
mentioned in this verse; there is some difficulty in doing that. 
The prophecy shows that in that day when the Lord has appeared 
there will be a great change in the surface of Palestine. Every- 
thing will become a plain. Now it is a land of mountains and 
hills. But then the hills and mountains will be lowered and be- 
come a plain. Jerusalem, however, is lifted up, and is seen shining 
in her earthly splendor and in it the magnificent temple. In the 
midst of the millennial Jerusalem in the earth will be another high 


152 


place, still higher than the city. It is the glorious Mount Zion. 
‘‘But in the latter days it shall be that the mountain of the Lord’s 
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it 
shall be exalted above the hills” (Micah iv: 1). Upon this high 
place the glory will rest. Thus it will be seen and cover the earth 
as the waters cover the deep. ‘‘And the Lord will create over 
the whole habitation of Mount Zion and over her assemblies a 
cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of the flaming fire by 
night ; for over all the glory shall be spread a canopy” (Isaiah 
iv: 5). From that high and glorious place in the earth the com- 
munications and intercourse between the heavenlies and the earth 
will perhaps take place, it will be the ladder upon which the angels 
of God ascend and descend upon the Son of Man. 


Verse zz. ‘* And they shall dwell therein, 
And there shall be no more curse, 
But Jerusalem shall dwell safely.” 


The happiness of the Jerusalem in the earth. The curse is en- 
tirely removed. While now Jerusalem is one of the most miser- 
able places in the earth, desolate and forsaken, and during the 
tribulation it will be the place of misery, sin, and curse, it will 
become the most blessed place in the Millennium. The Lord 
will show forth there His great lovingkindness, and all the bless- 
ings we have reviewed in the visions of Zechariah will all be ful- 
filled. ‘‘There shall be no more thence an infant of days nor an 
old man that hath not filled his days; for the child shall die an 
hundred years old, and the sinner being an hundred years old 
shall be accursed. And they shall build houses and inhabit them, 
and they shall plant vineyards and eat the fruit thereof. They 
shall not build and another inhabit ; they shall not plant and an. 
other eat ; for as the days ofa tree shall be the days of My people, 
and My chosen people shall long enjoy the work of their hands, 


153 


They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for calamity ; for 
they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord and their offspring 
with them. And it shall come to pass that before they call I will 
answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear. The wolf 
and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like 
the ox, and dust shall be the serpent’s meat. They shall not hurt 
nor destroy in all My holy mountain, saith the Lord (Isaiah Ixv). 
But that wonderful city in the earth, the city of Jerusalem, in all 
her blessing, joy, peace, prosperity, praise, and worship, is but a 
faint type of that still more glorious Jerusalem which is then above. 
The new Jerusalem, our glorious home, dear reader (if you are 
in Christ), is then in the air, and at the end of the thousand years 
it will come down and find its eternal resting-place in the new 
earth. 

Verses 12-15. ‘‘And this shall be the plague 

With which Jehovah will smite all the nations 

That have warred against Jerusalem : 

His flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, 

And their eyes shall consume away in their sockets, 

And their tongue shall consume away in their mouth. 

And it shall be in that day 

There shall be a great confusion among them from Jehovah, 

And they shall lay hold everyone on his neighbor’s hand, 

And his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbor, 

And Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem, 

And the wealth of all the nations round about shall be ga- 

thered, 

Gold, and silver and apparel in great abundance. 

And so shall be the plague of the horse, 

Of the mule, of the camel, and of the ass, 

And of all the beasts that shall be in those camps as this 

plague. 


154 


This is the description of the dreadful punishment which will} 
befall the enemies in that day. It is to be read in connection 
with the third verse, the Lord fighting against those nations, and the 
punishment will be upon them when He appears. Thus it is seen 
in Revelation xix. He appears, and after His appearing there is 
the scene of punishment of the enemies. ‘‘And I saw an angel stand- 
ing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice to all the birds 
that fly in mid heaven, Come and be gathered together unto the 
great supper of God ; that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the 
flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of 
horses and them that sit thereon, and the flesh of all men, both 
free and bond and small and great (Rev. xix: 17, 18). What an 
awful judgment it will be! In Ezekiel we have likewise a de- 
scription of it. It is however to be remarked that the vision of 
Ezekiel xxxviii and xxxix speaks of the judgment which will fall 
upon the rebels of the last revolt at the end of the thousand years, 
Still that second punishment is foreshadowed in the first. ‘‘And 
thou, Son of man, thus saith the Lord God, Speak unto the birds 
of every sort, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves, 
and come; gather yourselves upon every side to my sacrifice that 
I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains 
of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood. Ye shall eat 
the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the princes of the 
earth, . . . And ye shall be filled at my table with horses 
and chariots, with mighty men and all men of war, saith the Lord 
God” (Ezek. xxxix : 17-23). 

‘And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the 
men that have transgressed against me ; for their worm shall not 
die, neither shall their fire be quenched ; and they shall be an ab- 
horring unto all flesh ” (Isa. Ixvi : 24). 

How wonderful the prophetic Word is! What a harmony! 
How dare men who call themselves Christians deny its divinity 


555 


and infallibility? The wealth of the nations belongs then again 
to Israel. The nations spoiled them, and now all the riches of 
the Gentiles become theirs. Even so it is now during their dis- 
persion. The-nations who persecuted and robbed the Jews dur- 
ing the middle ages have become the most miserable and impov- 
erished, while the Lord has given greater riches to the Jews, and 
often drawn from the very countries who stole their goods. From 
Egypt of old they came forth laden with silver and gold. It will 
find a repetition, only on a grander scale, in the day of their res- 
toration. Now in unbelief and in dispersion they are the richest 
of all nations. Oh! that the nations would now understand it— 
the nations called Christendom—that ‘‘they are laboring for the 
fire, and wearing themselves with vanity” (Habak. ii: 12), and 
that the wealth and glory accumulated by them will fall a prey to 
the Jews. ‘‘ Ye shall eat the wealth of the nations, and to their . 
glory shall ye succeed ” (Isa. Ixi : 6). 


Verse 16. And it shall come to pass 

All that is left of the nations which came against Jerusalem. 
Shail go up from year to year 

To worship the King, Jehovah of Hosts, 

And to keep the feast of Tabernacles. 


Nations will be left after the tribulation and the wrath—this is 
clear from many passages of the Word. In the New Testament 
we have the statement made at the first council in Jerusalem, 
‘‘Brethren, hearken unto me; Simeon hath rehearsed how God 
at first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for His 
name. And to this agree the words of the prophets ; as it is writ- 
ten, After these things I will return, and I will build again the 
tabernacle of David, which is fallen; and I will build again the 
ruins thereof, and I will set it up; that the residue of men may 


156 


seek after the Lord , and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name 
is called,” etc. (Acts xv: 15-18). Number one is the visitation 
of the Gentiles, a calling out of a people for His name, and we are 
still living in number one. Number two is His return, the build- 
ing again and setting up of the tabernacle of David, which can 
only come after the calling out of a people is accomplished the 
fullness of the Gentiles come in ; and number two and the events 
connected with it we have learned from the studies in Zechariah. 
Then follows number three, the residue of men seeking after the 
Lord. In verse 16, they that are left of the nations corre- 
spond with the residue of men in Acts xv. The temple will then 
stand in Jerusalem as the house of glory and a house of prayer for 
all nations. There will be a perfect worship, grand and glorious, 
and it will not be confined to Israel, but the nations will join in 
it. We may learn perhaps from this verse that the Lord will leave 
every year once His place on His throne over the earth and come 
down to Jerusalem and show Himself in His glory before the wor- 
shipping multitudes in the earth, as He is seen in the New Jerusa- 
salem above. ‘The occasion is the feast of Tabernacles. Itis the 
millennial feast. It is a feast kept in remembrance of Israel’s 
through the wilderness for forty years and all their subsequent 
wanderings. It stands also for the ingathering of the full harvest 

A feast of joy, praise, and thanksgiving. The Jews keep it to the 
present day, though few know the full meaning of it. Every year 
when it comes again they read this 14th chapter of Zechariah. It 
is strange indeed. What a glorious feast that will be, kept there 
in Jerusalem, when the fullness at last has come! The fullness 
of the Gentiles has been gathered in, and is in the New Jerusalem; 
the fullness of Israel has come in the earth, and their receiving has 
been life from the dead, and the Gentiles know the glory of the 
Lord. Some find a difficulty here in the fact that it is stated that 


157 


the nations, the residue of men, are to come up to Jerusalem, and 
the difficulty is that it will be impossible for all of them to do that. 
It is not at all necessary that every individual must go up to Jeru- 
salem once in a year. Perhaps every nation will send representa- 
tives to the feast of Tabernacles, and they come in the name of 
the different nations and bring their presents, This seems to be 
indicated in the visit of the wise men from the East, who came to 
Bethlehem to worship the new-born King (Matthew ii). They 
brought gold, frankincense, and myrrh. In Isaiah lx : 6 we read 
of the coming of the Gentiles to Jerusalem when the Lord has 
come again. They shall come from Sheba; they shall bring gold 
. and frankincense (the myrrh is left out here, for it speaks of suf- 
fering), and shall proclaim the praises of the Lord. As the wise 
men who came to Bethlehem were representatives of nations, so 
during the Millennium the nations will send delegations to the 
feast of Tabernacles. What a scene that must be! How crowd- 
ed Jerusalem will be by those from Greenland and from the inte- 
rior of Africa, from India and the islands of the sea, as well as 
from the nations which composed the Roman empire. The ends 
of the earth have seen the salvation of God, and now their praise 
is heard in the city and mingling with the psalms sung by His 
own redeemed people. 

Verses 17-29. And it shall be that whoso of all the fam- 

ilies of the earth 

Shall not go ‘up to Jerusalem 

To worship the King, Jehovah of Hosts, 

Upon them there shall be no rain. 

And if the family of Egypt go not up and come not, 

Upon them shall be none. 

There shall be the plague 

Wherewith Jehovah will smite the nations 

Which go not up to keep the feast of Tabernacles. 


158 


This shall be the sin of Egypt, 
And the sin of all the nations 
Which go not up to keep tne feast of Tabernacles. 


This is the other side. All those who refuse will be punished, 
and the punishment will be very swift. From this and other 
prophecies it is seen that not everything will go so smoothly as it 
is generally believed during the Millennium. God’s messengers 
in that day will be the Jews going forth to proclaim the truth of 
God, and what preachers they will make! Still some will 
be forced to submit. The end of the thousand years brings 
a revolt from the side of the nations, which is not a small matter. 
‘‘And when the thousand years are finished, Satan shall be loosed 
out of his prison, and shall come forth to deceive the nations 
which are in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to 
gather them together to the war; the number of whom is as the 
sand of the sea” (Rev. xx: 7, 8). 

From this we see that many of the nations, Gog and Magog, 
are only too willing to side once more with the enemy, and to 
shake off, if it were possible, the yoke of the rule of Jehovah’s 
earthly people. 

The last two verses we have to consider make the whole proph- 
ecy perfect. It is the declaration that Jerusalem will be holy. 

In that day there shall be on the bells of the horses 
Holiness to Jehovah, 

And the pots in the house of Jehovah 

Shall be as the bowls before the altar. 

Every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah 

Shall be holy unto Jehovah of Hosts, 

And all they that sacrifice shall come 

And take of them and sacrifice therein, 

And there shall be no more Canaanite 

In the house of Jehovah of Hosts in that day. 


159 


The most holy person in Israel, the high-priest, carried the in- 
scription, ‘‘ Holiness to Jehovah ” around his mitre, but now even 
the little bells of the horses bear that inscription. In that temple 
which stands during the Millennium sacrifices will be brought, 
but there will be no difference in the vessels, which are used in 
Jerusalem, the meanest and smallest will be holy. In one word 
all will be holy, all will be consecrated to Jehovah. What a per- 
fect service that will be of the people which are then, in truth, a 
holy people. Application can be made of this to believers now. 
Surely everything the saint has, and his whole life, must be thus 
consecrated to Jehovah, to the Lord. No Canaanite will be there, 
nothing unclean. The Vulgate translates the word Canaanite 
with merchant. It stands, however, with everything that is un- 
clean and an abomination. The city will be completely purged 
from it. 

And of the new Jerusalem it is written, ‘‘ There shall in no wise 
enter into it any thing unclean, or he that maketh an abomination 
and a lie; but only they that are written in the Lamb’s book of 
life. . . . Without are the dogs, and the sorcerers, and the 
fornicators, and the murderers, and the idolaters, and every one 
that loveth and maketh a lie (Rev. xxi: 27 and xxii: 15. 





We have reached the end of the visions and burdens of Zecha- 
riah, the son of Iddo, the prophet, who, indeed, may be termed 
the Prophet of Glory. We praise our Lord for what He has 
taught us in these studies, and for His Spirit, who guides His 
children into all truth and shows us things to come, May heuse 
this volume for the edification of the saints and for a better under- 
standing of the words of prophecy. We are living on the very 
threshold of the fulfillment of all these visionsand words. Soon 
He will come for His saints, and even now the Spirit groans within 
us. Even so, come, Lord Jesus. Amen, 


THEOL. ok ARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
CALIFORNIA 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
CLAREMONT, CALIF. 


OUR HOPE: 


A CHRISTIAN MONTHLY 
DEVOTED TO THE 





STUDY OF PROPHECY. 





monial Subscription, . . .. « $100 
Poehoreion Countries; . .° .. «. 1.25 


Hm 


LIBERAL COMMISSION TO AGENTS. 


‘“The Lord Jesus Christ which is our Hope.” 


(1 Timothy 1 : 1.) 


All communications, business or editorial, to be addressed to 


A. C., GAEBELEIN, | 


80 SECOND STREET, NEW YORK CITY. 


The Bible Scholar. 


A QUARTERLY MAGAZINE 
DEVOTED TO BIBLE STUDY 
AND EXPOSITION. 











om 
‘The entrance of Thy words giveth light.’’—PsALM CxIx. 


5 Pd 


Annual Subscription, Twenty-Five Cents, 
Post-Paid. 


FRANCIS’ E. FITCH Publisher 
47 BROAD STREET, NEW YORK. 


Scripture Readings. 


FLEXIBLE CLOTH. Pages, Cents, 
ores ON -Upliestans, .. + . “212” 60 
a Revelation, :.. . 200 60 


ce 


a9 


TEMPLE COURT 





By MALACHI TAYLOR. 





The Acts of the ies 250 60 
The Gospel of John, . 240 60 


TLOMIANS, 22. Vs ~ ba 184 60 
Philippians, . 
Colossians, ¢ .. 163 60 


First Epistle of John 


By Post. 
Cents. 


70 
70 
70 
70 
70 


70 


FRANCIS E. FITCH, Publisher, 


47 BROAD STREET, NEW YORK, N. Y. 


Bible Study... 
Correspondence 


Course. . « 


Blige BIBLE the only Text-book. No reference 

book required. Each student a personal 
pupil. Students may begin at any time. Course 
covers the entire Bible. Conducted by 


Dr. C. I. SCOFIELD, 


of East Northfield, Mass., author of ‘“‘ Rightly 
Dividing the Word of Truth.” 





Send for Free Prospectus, giving full particulars, with 
Commendations of Eminent Teachers. 


$5.00 


FOR ENTIRE COURSE. 


aces FRANCIS E. FITCH, 


47 BROAD STREET, NEW YORK, 





Che Epistle to the Hebrews. 


AN EXPOSITION 


BY 


ADOLPH SAPHIR. 


A rare book for the Bible Student. ‘‘ With brimming 
eyes did he listen to the wonderful expositions of Hebrews 
by Adolph Saphir.’’ Extract from the biography of A, J. 
Gordon. Cloth, 890 pages. Price, delivered, $2.50. 


Peal 


Notes on Daniel. 


THE BEST EXPOSITION 


BY WILLIAM KELLY. EXTANT ON THE BOOK 
OF DANIEL. : 


Intensely interesting and most helpful to a knowledge 
of Daniel’s prophecies. Cloth, 240 pages. 50 cents, 
delivered. 


FRANCIS E. FITCH, 


47 Broad Street, NEW YORK. 


That Marvelous Exposition of Revelation, 


“Lectures ov m= 
Apocalypse.” 


NONE 
TO BE COMPARED WITH IT FOR 


JOSEPH A. SHISS, DD. COMPLETENESS, CLEARNESS, 


AND BEAUTY OF EXPRESSION. 

















Dr. C. |. SCOFIELD, East Northfield, Mass., writes: 


“‘T have read with much care more than fifty books on The 
Revelation. Of these but two have commended themselves to my 
judgment as. Biblical, sound and spiritual. Of these two, the best 
is SEISS’.” 





Three volumes, cloth, 12mo, 1,417 pages, with Index 
and Chart of the Course of Time. Former price (at which 
many have been sold), $5 per set, but having purchased the 
plates, and thus controlling the publication of this valuable 
work, we offer the present edition at $2.50 per set, 
delivered. Sent on receipt of price by the publisher, 


CHARLES C. COOK, 47 Broad St., New York. 
For Saie by 
FRANCIS E. FITCH, 47 Broad St., New York. 





= 





ary, 


. | 


’ aes ue Vil «+ 


‘ 
‘geome 
e~ 


_ ve 
ae 
ct ad 
<3) er 


7 ‘ i] i‘ 
eon tt 
ab 


= 





¥ MV 
4) 


S ‘3 
NIN 
VSN 

Ny An . 





$166 | 
, Arno Clemens, 1861-1945. 


& 
lein 


studies in Zechariah. 


a LS Wa 
eV ree 
A il 


Y ONY 
Sag 


Th) 


5A) 
=ay Lot es 


Ly 


'e 
Ns 
eT 


BES 


AA 
EIN A er be 


N 
SNEWS SARK Lee SS 


BS Gaebelein, Arno Clemens, 1861-1945. 
1665 Studies in Zechariah. New York, F.E. 
G3 Fitch C190-] 

157p- 20cm. 


1. Bible. 0.1. Zechariah--Criticism, 


interpretation, etc. 


Pe ee engl al 





a ¥ 

ND 
NNR 
W/, i 
EE RNS Nay 
BOING, 
(Sie, g 

« use > 
T TEN Witwnkn 
LAS 7 D5 

Se 
CAKE 


VE Ne NE 


=~ 
eT 


VLA Elegy ar Ire 


ch 


\ 


eo = 





