
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/ 





466.6 
Darby 








iOn^ 




,-,,,. y ^. <^ 



V 



I 



STUDIES 



THE BOOE OF DAOTEL: 



A COURSE OF LECTURES 



J. N. DARBY. 



TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH, AND REVISED BT THE AUTHOR. 



aftirfc Virion, 



LONDON: 
JOHN B. BATEtfAN, 22, PATERNOSTER WTO* ^£»« 



/ BOSTON, 1KA&&-. 



F. Q. BROWN, 3, TBENLO^t ^O^ 



7L tf'y 



J. B. BATEMAN, PRINTER, 

I, IVY LANE, 

P4TBRN0STER ROW, E.G. 



PREFACE. 



To the Christian Reader. 

The meditations herewith offered to 
Christians pretend in no way to give a complete 
explanation of the Book of Daniel. The following 
is the account of them. They were delivered 
before a small company, whose minds had been 
already occupied about prophecy, and who had 
desired to have some help to this book. The 
author imparted to them, in a course of Lectures, 
the light which he possessed. Notes were taken 
at the time, and the manuscript having fallen 
into the hands of a third person, he, supposing 
that the notes would be valuable to others, began 
to print them. The author offered no hindrance, 
except the doubt whether they were worth the 
trouble, and in yielding, he did what was needful 
for the publication, though at some distance from 
the place where it was undertaken. It will be seen 
that a certain basis of interpretation is supposed, 
as being already recognised in the mmd. <& "Sxsa 



IV 



reader. In the study of the prophecies especially, 

f we must expect to go through a certain exercise of 

1 mind. But if it is not worth while to take thus 

much pains, neither is it to read these Lectures 

nor the book they treat of. 

The author's confidence is in God, who, if He 
approves this feeble effort to help the weak ones, 
will extend His all-powerful aid in giving them 
understanding, for wisdom comes from God. It 
is to Him and to His grace, dear reader, that the 
author recommends you, in asking your prayers 
for him, in case you get the least profit from this 
little book, 



STUDIES 

ON 

THE BOOK OF DANIEL. 



FIRST LECTURE. 

Chap. I, II. 

The book of £>aniel has reference to the time during 
which Israel, the people of God, are under subjection 
to the Gentiles. At its opening we discover an 
accomplishment of the threat made to Hezekiah. (Is. 
xxxix, 6, 7.) The throne of God has been taken 
from Jerusalem; the power and the kingdom have 
been transferred to the Gentiles ; and Israel, as to its 
actual state, being, by the judgment of God, no longer 
His people, is kept in captivity. But God does not 
abandon them: only He administers His blessings 
according to their actual necessity. The things most 
needful for them to know, under their existing trials, 
were the history of this dominion of the Gentiles, to 
which they were subjected, and, also, the effect of 
these changes upon the promises which belonged 
to them. And as the glory of God was to be 
considered in this great transference of power, it was 
important to know how the Gentiles would. \>afc.S^«* 
what their conduct would \>e, tnYl^Y^x \aro*x^ ^s^% 



or themselves (the Jews), under this responsibility 
conferred on them. 

The book, then, embraces two principal subjects: 
First, the character and conduct of the four monar- 
chies, which occupy the period called "the times of the 
Gentiles," (Luke xxi, 24,) namely, from the time that 
God had retired from Jerusalem (His throne being no 
longer there), and had transferred imperial power over 
the world to the Gentiles, until the time of the 
re-establishment of His throne. And, secondly, the 
relationship of these nations with Israel His people, 
during the period in which the supremacy that had 
been confided to them was in exercise. 

And all this is of practical importance. For the 
Christian is informed of the result of the politics of 
this world, and being " warned of things not seen as 
yet," he separates himself, whether in heart or in 
action, from ail that of which the denouement will be 
so sad. Besides, an acquaintance beforehand with all 
that is to take place keeps him tranquil and composed ; 
there is no need that he should give his heart to the 
world which surrounds him, for he knows, by the 
written revelation of God, both its course and its end. 
But further, such prophetic intimation is precious to 
us, not alone because it refers to Christ, and to the 
people beloved of God, but also, because, in every 
communication which God makes to us, there is a 
sensible joy in the very fact that He speaks to us. 
Are not our souls happy in communion with Him? 
Now this is the case in the prophecies, as in every 
other part of the "Word ; — we feel our nearness to 
Him, and His goodness to us ; thus our faith in Him 
is strengthened, and the sanctification of our souls 
increased and established. 

This book, accordingly, is divided into two parts, 
sufficiently distinct, according to the two great subjects 
which it contains: six chapters occupy the first, and 



six others the second part. The first six contain, not 
the communications made to Daniel, except to interpret 
them, but the dreams of Nebuchadnezzar, or the things 
which befell the heads of the empire. We have the 
great general principles of the Gentile monarchies 
given to us, or their *. public history in the world 
announced to their rulers, or manifested in their con- 
duct. The last six chapters are communications made 
to the prophet himself, and reveal, not only the history 
of these empires, but what they are in the eyes of 
God : they also furnish details of their (the Gentiles') 
relationship with the Jews, and of the worship still 
maintained by the Jewish people. This last was 
important to Daniel, who, as a prophet, had the people 
and glory of God at heart, as well as the general history 
of these empires. 

It is instructive to mark the character of the man 
who became the depositary of the intentions of God, 
in this time of distress and captivity of his people. 
First, he refuses to defile his soul in partaking of the 
delicate food of this world. God, who prepares and 
orders every thing for the well-being of those who 
walk faithfully, in whatever circumstances they are 
placed, had disposed the heart of the chief of the 
eunuchs in favour of Daniel and his three companions: 
this eunuch, under whose charge they were, conceived 
a great regard for them. Moreover, God answers the 
prayers of Daniel, who "became fairer and fatter in 
flesh" than any of those who had given themselves 
over to the ways and nourishment of this world. In a 
word, Daniel is faithful in all that constitutes a com- 
plete separation from the world, according to the Jewish 
rites, in refusing to eat of meats from the table of a 
pagan monarch ; and this conduct of faith, which was 
in appearance blameable, meets the approval of God. 
The personal behaviour of Daniel is th& tas&& *& *s^ 
introduction to the revelations o£ \kfc N*\\<&fc 'WSV- ""W^ 



8 

the same with us. Separation from the world — a decided 
refusal to have our portion in that which it furnishes, — 
puts us into a position to receive those communications 
from God, which, whilst their fulness is contained in the 
written word, we never receive but through the direct 
teaching of God (that is, for ft to be the teaching of 
faith), whatever be the instrument which God may 
make use of to impart such communications to us. 

God soon finds an occasion in which Daniel is to 
serve Him as a witness, after having, through His 
grace, disposed him for the undertaking. He often 
acts by ways which leave the world completely at 
fault. He permits Nebuchadnezzar's memory to fail 
him, in order to force him into dependance upon the 
prophet whom God had ohosen to show forth His 
divine wisdom. 

Notwithstanding, at the actual moment, Daniel 
knew no more than others how to resolve the difficulty. 
God made him feel his dependance ; but he had faith, 
and faith and dependance are identified. At the 
instance of Daniel, he and his companions seek the 
God of Heaven, in prayer (a) ; — God answers them, 
making use of all the difficulties of the case to iden- 
tify Himself with the poor remnant of His people. 

Hereupon, Daniel's first act is not to hasten to the 
king to inform him of the discovery of the secret, and 
to rejoice in the deliverance, but he turns with thanks- 
giving to the God who had heard him. He attributes 
to Him all that could give comfort to the remnant 
during the supremacy of these ungodly and rebellious 
Gentile powers, (ii, 21.) So it ever is with a soul that 
walks with God. 

Daniel, when introduced into the presence of the 
king, is not elated ; he conceals himself, so to speak, 

(a) It is under this character of God of Heaven that Daniel 
knew Him. He will be found, hereafter, God of the earth in 
fact, as Be is always in right. 



behind the glory of God. It is when we understand 
how to humble ourselves thoroughly, that we are truly 
exalted. If Daniel disappears, God Himself is mani- 
fested in him. Oh ! that we might have wisdom and 
spiritual power to hide ourselves thus behind Jesus, 
in order that He might be put into the foreground ! 
Every such act is a great and precious triumph. 

As to the interpretation of the dream, a few words 
will suffice, as the light upon this is almost universal. 
All acknowledge the dream to speak of the four great 
monarchies, viz., the Babylonian, Persian, Greek, and 
Roman. In the 37th and 38th verses, dominion is 
given to Nebuchadnezzar by the God of heaven — an 
universal dominion, — absolute in its character over 
the earth, though not over the seas. There is no 
information given how far this dominion has been 
realized, but the gift was bestowed ; and it is the first 
monarchy which, it appears, possessed this power in 
the most pure and absolute way. It was set up directly 
by God. It was in the person of its chief, " the head 
of gold." The fourth was to break everything in 
pieces by its power; but at the end it was to be 
divided, and in this condition it was to be both strong 
and weak ; a result of the union of the empire and of 
the original principle of its existence with heteroge- 
neous elements, that is, in my judgment, of barbarians 
with that which was, properly speaking, Roman. 

At the end, the God of heaven will establish the 
kingdom of Christ who will put aside all these 
monarchies by an act of judgment. We must beair 
in mind that the kingdom of Christ, in this place, is 
His kingdom established in power in the world, and 
not the • blessed influence of the gospel of His grace. 
The first act of the little stone, before it grows and 
becomes a great mountain which fills the whole earth, 
is to fall upon the statue, so that •becac&e& *& ^^ 
chaff of the summer threshing Hoot. Thfe *VsfcA ^»» 






10 

not become a mountain until after that ; in other words 
when Christ shall have' executed a judgment which 
shall break in pieces and destroy the power of the 
Gentiles, then His kingdom, an earthly kingdom, and 
one still of judgment, shall fill the earth. In this 
second chapter, the moral history of these monarchies 
is not touched upon, nor their conduct signalized. 
These will have their place in the four following 
chapters. I shall only here point out the marks 
which are given to us as characterizing them, as we- 
shall return to them in another lecture. 

The first is Idolatry, or the civil power endeavour- 
ing to make the people submit to a law of unity in 
worship, the object being a statue set up by the civil 
power. 

The second is, that the heads of the empire became 
Beasts ; that is, they lose the consciousness of being 
set in relationship with God ; and instead of being in 
dependahce upon Him, according to the light given 
from above, which is the only and true glory of man, 
they, having lost this light, descend to the rank of 
Beasts. 

The third is Impiety, seen in the conduct of the 
imperial power towards the Jews, and the God of the 
Jews, whose name, and all that had reference to His 
worship, it dishonours. 

The fourth is Self-exaltation. The head of the 
empire makes himself God, and forbids prayer to be 
addressed to any other than himself. ' 

In all these events, the history ends by the exaltation 
of the true God. In the first, the Gentile acknowledges 
the God of those who had preferred the fiery furnace 
to idolatry. 

In the second, it is the Gentiles themselves who 
confess the God of Heaven, who humbled them when 
they walked in ifde — a pride of which Babylon was 
the centre. 



11 

In the third, it is judgment executed against the 
" wicked king." 

In the fourth, it is not alone the God of heaven 
who is proclaimed, but His power is established with 
authority, and His kingdom is acknowledged as that 
which shall endure for ever. 



SECOND LECTURE. 

Chap. III.— VI. 

You will remember that the second chapter gave a 
general history of the period taken up by the whole of 
Daniel. This was revealed in a dream which Daniel 
recalled to Nebuchadnezzar, and of which he gave the 
interpretation. It is the history of the times of the 
Gentiles. The four monarchies are brought before us, 
and their' final dispersion by the judgment which the 
little stone (the kingdom of Christ— Christ Himself) 
will execute against the whole power of the Gentiles. 

I would press again upon your attention, that after 
having destroyed the image, and not until then, the 
little stone became a great mountain, which filled the 
whole earth. 

We stated that the four following chapters, that is, 
down to the end of the sixth, gave the character and 
conduct of these empires ; and that instead of existing 
in dependance upon God, they are found in rebellion 
against Him, persecute His people, and exalt them- 
selves against Him. The consequence is judgment. 

In the third chapter, we observe the first and prin- 
cipal sin, namely, idolatry, as marking Gentile power, 
or the power which reigns during the times of the 
Gentiles. In the succeeding chapter we observe that 
these empires, instead of being subject to God, became 
beasts, that is, they lose their proper understanding, 
and act as beasts — as wild beasts, who cease to be in 
subjection (all men, in their true place, acknowledging 
their subjection to God), and who lose their under- 
jBtanding. 



13 

In the fifth chapter, there is open impiety ; and in 
the sixth, the head of the empire exalts himself as 
God : then follow details and circumstances of these 
empires, and their special relationship with the people 
of God. 

The principles are given us in the first six chapters, 
and the details in the remaining six. 

The first thing which the civil power sets up is 
Idolatry, with the object of establishing a Religious 
Unity, but always in separating the people from the 
true God, and in putting something in His place. 
This circumstance serves as an occasion for trying the 
faithfulness of God's people, and the manner of it. 
Nebuchadnezzar commands the people, yea, even all the 
nations (for there were many under his dominion), to 
worship a statue. This is Idolatry. (Consult Dan. iii, 
4 — 7, for the words of the proclamation.) This is not 
an unusual way with Satan : he excites in the civil 
power the desire of unity, and there is no more 
powerful motive for the mass, than the influence of 
religion (b). Satan impels the civil powers to establish 
unity, in order that everything under their authority 
should be well ordered and regulated. It was thus 
with Nebuchadnezzar ; he sets up this image in the 
province of Babylon, and demands the assent of all 
the governors to its reception and worship. 

I repeat, that such a religious act is a powerful 
means of influencing the mass, and of holding them 
in submission, united in one community, and bound to 
the civil power, which is the centre of such religion, 
or at all events supports it, and is identified with it. 
But whenever this is the case, there must be persecu- 
tion — it may be more or less violent — but persecution 
there will be. 

(b) I am not speaking of the truth which allies the conscience 
to God Himself, and therefore gives Him His uro^o* tw^gs*- 
macy. • 

B 



14 

We see it in the present case. Nebuchadnezzar's alter- 
native is, " Whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, 
shall be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace." 

But there is yet another important consequence, as 
characteristic of Gentile power ; I mean Impiety. 
Impiety not only refuses to respect the conscience, 
but what is worse, disallows the rights of God. 
Respect for the conscience is necessary enough, but 
the rights of God are infinitely more so. Observe the 
words of the king: "Who is that God that shall 
deliver you out of my hand?" ver. 15. This ia 
impiety — that principle of blasphemy which charac- 
terises the beast under all times and circumstances. 
His thought is of the power which he (the beast) 
possesses and holds : — may we remember that it is 
God who has given it, and who overrules it. (Com* 
pare Habakkuk i, 11, 15 — 17). Impiety, in forgetting 
the source of power, would arrogate to itself all it* 
rights, in spite of God Himself. Now if unity be 
maintained, when God's own rights are set aside, it 
immediately becomes idolatry ; for we fall into the 
hands of the enemy when we are at a distance from 
the true God. And when the civil power endeavours- 
to establish this unity, it puts aside not only the rights- 
of conscience, but the rights of God Himself. This 
applies in an especial manner to the word of God. 

It is not only that man has a right to the word of 
God, as between him and his neighbour, but there is a 
more sacred right which is interfered with, if we de- 
prive him of it ; it is that God has the right to address 
what He will to the souls of men, and having addressed 
the Word to them, those who would deprive men of it, 
derogate from the rights and despise the authority of 
God, who has seen good to send it to them. Suppose 
that I have servants — dependants to whom I send 
orders. Evidently, if any one hinders the servants 
from receiving these orders, he interferes, not only with 



15 

their rights, but with mine ; and this is the great ques- 
tion : God no doubt will make inquisition for all this. 
It is bad enough to violate the conscience of another 
man to satisfy one's own wickedness. But here Nebu- 
chadnezzar entirely set aside the prerogative of the true 
God. And this is the principle of blasphemy which 
attaches to the Gentiles from the beginning. This was 
the first act of the head of gold, — and such is the com- 
mencement of the power of the Gentiles, as presented 
to us in this chapter. 

Upon the other hand, we have a touching picture in 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. They are not 
at all in alarm or disquietude. " We are not careful 
to answer thee in this matter," ver. 16, is their answer 
to the king. Does this confidence issue in their escape 
from the threatened penalty ? by no means ; they do 
not escape. God allows them to be put to the proof : 
He does not manifest Himself beforehand, but permits 
Nebuchadnezzar to fulfil his threats. They are cast 
into the furnace of fire, as Daniel was afterwards into 
the den of lions. Whilst they would not obey the 
will of Nebuchadnezzar in violating their conscience, 
they offered no resistance to the persecution, but as to 
their bodies, they submit entirely to his commands ; 
and what is the consequence ? They are loosed by the 
fire, and nothing is burnt but the chains with which 
the world had bound them ; moreover, they have the 
Son of God as their companion in the furnace. The 
consequence of this interference of God in behalf of 
His poor servants, was that a confession was forced 
from the civil power that their God was a God who 
delivered His people, and who condescended to attach 
His name to theirs. " Blessed," said the king, " be 
the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, who 
who hath sent his angel, and delivered his servants 
that trusted in him." This is the position of a believer \ 
he yields up his body to death, m o*fe^.\s> *&w&>wa> 



16 

other than the true God. And more than this, dear 
friends, these men quit the furnace as witnesses to the 
power of God, — their God, — in the sight of all the 
world. It will be the same with the faithful Jews at 
the end ; they will be in a furnace of fire, but, at the 
same time, God will manifest Himself as their God. 
Christians have a higher hope, even if we are left to 
suffer death. Our hope is the hope of the glory of 
Him who hath saved us, which we shall enjoy with 
Him, in the place where He is. But as to the Jews, 
they will be delivered from death by the power of God, 
and the true God will be acknowledged as their God. 

Chap. IV. 

The dream of the king, concerning that great tree 
which overshadowed all the earth, is related in this 
chapter. These are his words, ver. 10; — "Thus were 
the visions of mine head in my bed: I saw, and 
behold, a tree in the midst of the earth, and the height 
thereof was great." A great tree is always the symbol 
of a vast power on the earth : one tree, in this instance, 
sufficed, because, in fact, Nebuchadnezzar ruled over 
all the civilized or prophetic earth. There was, as it 
were, only one tree, — *' The beasts of the field had 
shelter under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in 
the boughs thereof." 

But what becomes of this delegated power? It is 
used as an occasion of self-exaltation. God had con* 
fided this power to Nebuchadnezzar ; He had blessed 
the king beyond measure in temporal things. As a 
consequence, pride takes possession of him, and that 
in spite of the warning given in the interpretation of 
the dream, and the express prediction of what was to 
come ; for the heart gets blinded by the things which 
it sees. Here then we have not unity in religious 
externals, and a deliverance ]bj the hand of God, but 
another character of Gentile power. It is this, that 



17 

if God in His providence elevates man, as a con- 
Bequence, man elevates himself. All is then lost. 
The case is this* The throne of God had been taken 
from the Jews, and God puts the Gentiles into the 

Elace of power, in the person of Nebuchadnezzar; 
nt man being guilty, and thus unable to observe any 
law, power cannot be committed to him, without his 
lifting himself up against God who gave it. " Is not 
this great Babylon which I have built." He makes 
himself the centre, instead of God. He becomes a 
beast, and loses his reason entirely. A beast may be 
powerful, large, stronger than man, shew much 
sagacity in his ways, but its look is downward ; there 
is no exercise of conscience, and, as an inference, no 
real relationship to God. 

The only ennobling principle in man is submission 
—that is, submission to God : it supposes a capacity to 
understand the will of God ; man bows to this will, 
and does homage to God, as to One who is superior to 
himself. From the moment that he says "I have 
built," he loses his moral relationship to God. All 
true elevation is lost, and he becomes, in this, like one 
of the brute creation ; for, I repeat it, a capacity to 
maintain a relationship with God is man's true 
superiority ; but in this God must be God, and man 
must be in submission. Whenever this connection is 
lost, we descend to objects below ourselves, to which 
our affections attach themselves. Nebuchadnezzar 
became the companion of beasts — he had lost his 
proper understanding. The effect of all this is given 
at the close of the chapter ; for when he finds himself 
out, he uses such language as is ever heard in such 
a case. "At the same time my reason returned 
unto me," &c, ver. 36, 37. Behold the effect of 
God's judgments upon Gentile power. It is now 
no longer His interposition in behalf of a poor remnaxvt 
of His people, as in the case of €&&£&*.<&.» %«. „»\sox 



18 

He brings down the pride of earthly power.*" Man 
exalts himself against God, but exactly where his 
greatest strength is put forth, the Lord is above him 
(Ex. xviii, 11). 

The great principle then, of chapter iv, is the evil 
conduct of Gentile power. It exalts itself against 
God, becomes brutish in its understanding, and is 
judged, (c.) Seven times pass over it, and at last it 
confesses God. In other words, the sovereign power 
of the Gentiles is deprived of all real understanding, 
during the entire period of its imperial existence ; 
after which it confesses God. 

Chap. V. 

In this chapter we have further detail. King 
Belshazzar makes a feast, and commands "to bring 
the golden and silver vessels, which his father had 
taken out of the temple at Jerusalem, that the King 
and his princes, his wives and his concubines, might 
drink therein." — ver. 2. Here is a fresh aspect of 
Gentile failure. It is thorough impiety, and provokes 
the immediate destruction of the Babylonian power. 
This third form of impiety is still in connection with 
the Jews ; for God, in relation to them, is always the 
God of the earth, who is seen exercising a govern- 
ment below. It is not a question of the heavenly 
hopes of the Church God has delivered the Jews as 
captives into Gentile hands ; He has delivered His 
altar, — His sanctuary (Lam. ii, 7), all the exterior 
signs of His presence and glory, into the hands of the 
Gentiles. 

The head of the Gentiles vaunts himself, and 
because God has thus delivered up the Jews, he 
glorifies his false gods, exalts them, and dishonours 

(c.) Compare Habakkuk, whose prophecy is a kind of com- 
mentary on these two chapters. 



19 

God, It will be the same with the king of Babylon at 
the end — Open blasphemy. It will not be the principle 
of Idolatry only ; neither will it be alone that pride of 
heart which says, " I have built," — these things will 
assuredly characterise him, for he is man : but it will 
be an immediate outrageous act which will dishonour 
the true God, — that God who delivers His people into 
the hands of the wicked for their chastisement. It 
will be an act against the God of the Jews. The 
instant he does this, there •• came forth fingers of a 
man's hand, and wrote over against the candlestick 
upon the plaister of the wall," these words, " Mene, 
Mene, Tekel, Upharsin :" the king seeing the part of 
the hand which wrote, and his countenance being 

changed, "Then Daniel answered and said 

before the king, O thou king, the most High 

God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and 

majesty, and glory, and honour, And thou 

his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, 
though thouknewest all this; but hast lifted up thyself 
against the Lord of heaven ; and they have brought 
the vessels of His house before thee," <fcc. 

Judgment falls on Belshazzar, and his kingdom is 
destroyed. Ver. 30 : *• In that night was Belshazzar 
king of the Chaldeans slain, and Darius the Median 
took the kingdom." 

Chap. VI. 

In this chapter we find the fourth principle of evil 
which existed among the Gentiles, and which com- 
pletes the whole. It is not only an impiety which 
dishonours God, but it is man who exalts himself ; — 
be puts himself in the place of God Himself. The 
satraps go to the king and say, (ver. 6, 7,) " King 
Darius, live for ever. All the presidents of the king- 
dom, the governors and the princes, fofc^Vw^ w&s>\&u*k> 



20 

together, to establish a royal statute, and to make a 
firm decree, that whosoever," <fcc» 

It is proposed, in short, that no one should be con* 
fessed as God, and no request made to any, but to 
Darius himself* It will be thus with the Wicked one, 
" who opposeth and exalteth himself against all that 
is called God or is worshipped ; so that he, as God, 
sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he 
is God" (2 Thess. ii, 4). Again, it is said of him, 
Dan» xi, 36, 37, " The king shall do according to his 
will ; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself 
above every God, and shall speak marvellous things 
against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the 
indignation be accomplished: for that that is determined 
shall be done. Neither shall he regard the God of his 
fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god : 
for he shall magnify himself above all." 

It is then that he is destroyed. This is the utmost 
limit of wickedness : an exalting of himself against 
God — a desire to supplant Him on the earth. Notwith- 
standing, in every case, where the faithful have been 
put to the proof, (whether by Nebuchadnezzar or 
Darius,) the result has been the humiliation of the 
power of the Gentiles, which having beforetime 
opposed, now confesses God. 

It is thus with Darius, ver. 26, "I make a decree, 
that in every dominion of my kingdom, men tremble 
and fear before the God of. Daniel ; for He is the 
living God, and stedfast for ever ; and His kingdom 
that which shal] not be destroyed, and His dominion 
shall be even unto the end." There is a difference of 
expression to be noticed here. The confession of 
Nebuchadnezzar is to this effect, that the God of 
Heaven is the God of the Jews ; that is, of Shadrach, &c; 
and that no God can deliver like Him. Here also we 
have the God of Daniel, and, therefore, of the Jews ; 
but He is also " the living God, and stedfast for ever ; 



21 

and His kingdom that which shall not he destroyed, 
and His dominion shall be even unto the end :" — all 
of which will be ushered in* at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ, and the establishment of His kingdom, which 
will have no end. 

Again, Darius says, " He delivereth and rescueth, 
and He worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in 
earth, who hath' delivered Daniel from the power of 
the lions." 

It is the deliverance of the Jews, that is, of a 
remnant, which is the public manifestation on the 
earth, and which gives occasion to the confession of 
the Gentiles, that God is the true God. They will 
say, as Jethro said to Moses, " Now I know that the 
Lord is greater than all gods'* (Ex. xviii, 11). 

The true God is, then,* acknowledged by the judg- 
ments which He executes on those who exalt them- 
selves against Him ; and by the deliverance of His 
people the Jews. The first of these judgments, for it 
is one, is that the chief of the Gentiles loses all under- 
standing as to the ways of God ; and the second is 
the entire destruction of this king of Babylon, on the 
very night in which he dishonours God. This Gentile 
history is sad, though glorious in its results, by the 
manifestation of God for His people. In chapter iii, 
we see idolatry, — the establishment of unity in idolatry 
by the arm of the civil power, which is mistress to all 
appearance, whilst really she is the slave of Satan. 
Chapter iv is the history of man's exaltation of him- 
self. Chapter v, open impiety against the Eternal : 
and, finally, chapter vi, the head of the Gentiles 
putting himself in the place of God. 

In all these cases we find the people of God entirely 
submissive to the temporal power of these kings ; for 
their power came from God. This is the principle of 
a Christian — he submits. The use which these 
established powers make of the fc\s\W\\^ ^\*r^ ^sfc. 



22 

has given them, does not alter the source of this power. 
Jesus acknowledged that the power of Pontius Pilate, 
by which that governor condemned Him, came from 
God : when His hour was come, He submitted Him- 
self to that which the authority, ordained of God, 
commanded. 

It is evident, from the use which the Gentiles make 
of their power, in turning it against God, that they 
are under the direction of Satan : while holding their 
power from the One, they make use of it for the 
other. 

What course does the child of God pursue? He 
does not maintain himself by leaning upon the civil 
power ; he acts according to his conscience, and seeks 
only the will of God ; at the same time he submits ; 
and in so doing yields up his body ; for his conscience 
is submissive to no one but the Lord : he cannot serve 
two masters. Shadrach and his friends undergo their 
punishment ; but they refuse to do what the king, in 
the exercise of his power, wishes them to do. They 
do not seek to turn away the king from his plans; 
they are threatened and punished by Nebuchadnezzar ; 
but they are faithful to their God, and He delivers 
them. They leave their case with Him, "He will 
deliver us out of thine hand, O king : but if not, be 
it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy 
gods." iii, 17, 18. There is yet another remark ; it is 
that even when man is unfaithful, (as were the Jews,) 
God never loses His rights. He may confer power on 
the Gentiles for a time ; but He never loses His rights; 
and, as a consequence, He never abandons His people ; 
as He said unto Pharaoh, " Let my people go." The 
people of Israel were a subject of controversy between 
Pharaoh and God. Christians have other hopes ; but 
the principle is always true. Daniel, who had faith, 
spoke as faith always does ; for it sees as God sees. It 
is true that God had said, "It is no longer my people;" 



23 

but Daniel speaks always of Israel as of the people of 
God ; because faith confesses all the rights of God. 
If a Jew had faith in the heart, God recognized him, 
in spite of his circumstances; and this is very 
precious. 

It is impossible, in spite of all Satan can do in the 
Church of God, that he could put us into a position 
where God cannot recognize faith ; otherwise God 
would lose His rights. 

In the ensuing lecture, it will be needful to enter 
into details. An acquaintance with the leading features 
of Gentile power, from Nebuchadnezzar to the end, is 
of the utmost importance for understanding the things 
of God. For, although we, as Christians, have 
another hope, even a heavenly ; yet we are in the 
times of the Gentiles ; and the nearer we approach the 
end, the more Israel will come into prominence ; and 
it is easy to see, by their present condition, that 
events are leading rapidly to a termination ; and the 
more Israel becomes important, the more it behoves us 
to understand the thoughts of God concerning that 
people. 

We have seen now, in its general traits, the history 
of the Gentile power from Nebuchadnezzar ; that is, 
from the ruin of Jerusalem, till the time the Lord 
shall come and destroy the impious and apostate 
power ; for what we have read shews us the establish- 
ment of the kingdom of God on the ruins of the 
folly and impiety of man. 

In the next lecture, dear friends, we shall have 
nothing more of the dreams of Nebuchadnezzar, &c; 
but we shall be occupied with the revelations made to 
Daniel himself. It is he who represented the faithful 
remnant of the Jews, and it is he who interprets 
that which others received, and to whom are confided 
the details of those things which relate to the peo^la 
of God. 



24 

There is yet another remark to make before con- 
cluding this preface : it is, that these communications 
from God should have the effect of separating us 
entirely from this world, in making us understand, 
that, as to this world, God sees none else, so to speak, 
than Jews or these apostate Gentiles. I am not 
speaking of Christians, (He sees them after another 
manner,) but of external power. When it is a question 
of Christians, then the circumstances are beyond this 
world. Jesus Christ says, " Ye are not of the world, 
even as I am not of the world." It should be thus in 
the purposes of daily Christian activity into which the 
energy of love leads us. As to those within, we train 
each other, not for Jewish hopes, but for the place 
which Jesus occupies, and for those mansions in His 
Father's house which He went to prepare for us. As 
for our hopes, — the end which we propose to ourselves, 
until God shall execute His judgments, — it is not a 
hope that the world can be improved ; for we see, 
from the Word, that until this judgment falls, the 
course of the world runs on in impiety and exaltation 
of man, which very wickedness brings down the 
judgment of God. 

Such is the world in which we live, according to 
God's description of it ; but He has revealed to us 
also the things of heaven. He has revealed to us 
Him whom the world rejected, and who is gone into 
heaven ; so that we have an object and motives, which 
ought to govern us entirely and direct our walk ; in 
order that by these motives presented to the heart, 
and with which the new man occupies himself, we 
should live and walk by the Spirit, in a world to 
ourselves — the heavenly things into which Christ is 
entered, the things which are above, where He sits; 
as regards the earth it is " the world to come whereof 
we speak :" whilst, on the other hand, by the warnings 
which God has given us here, by the details with 



25 

which He has furnished us, He would detach us, and 
that with an enlightened mind, from the world in 
which we sojourn as pilgrims and strangers. It is sad 
with what ease the world attaches itself to our hearts; 
I do not say that our hearts attach themselves to the 
world now, although that may follow soon as a con- 
sequence, but that the world attaches itself to our 
hearts. 

Dear friends, if a man is covetous, this is the world. 
If a man is over diligent in affairs, he is occupied with 
the world — he lives in it, so to speak. It is extremely 
difficult for us to keep clear of the general principles 
of the world. It varies in its forms: in one it is 
avarice; in another it is a good position in society ; in 
another it is an active mind, which engages itself in 
politics. But this world below, dear friends, is not 
our world ; we have another of which Christ will be 
the chief, the centre, and the joy ; our conversation is 
in heaven. And may God grant that in all the details 
of life, in our every day circumstances, this separa- 
tion may be realized and manifested, and that we may 
be able to say, " Our life is hid with Christ in God." 
The treasure, the life, and the joy of all those souls 
who have understood what happiness it is to be with 
Him, is there where He is. 



THIRD LECTUKE. 

Chap. VII. 

In this second part of the book, we have no longer 
the interpretation of dreams made to Nebuchadnezzar, 
&c, but the communications made to Daniel himself. 
You remember also, that the subject of which the 
book of Daniel treats, is the Jews. God's ancient 
people were in captivity ; and had been replaced, as to 
the throne of the world, at least as to the rights of 
this throne, by the Gentiles. God had had, until 
lately, His throne at Jerusalem. He was no longer 
there, as He had once literally been there. Before 
the captivity, God had placed His glory in the temple. 
He exercised the functions of government, punishing 
the wicked, at times, by instant judgments. He was in 
immediate relationship with the people. It was a pure 
theocracy, though connected with the monarchy of the 
house of David at the close. But all that was entirely 
gone. The Jews, instead of conducting themselves as 
those under the government of God ought to do, had 
become thoroughly unfaithful ; they had made their 
children pass through the fire to Moloch, and had 
worshipped idols. The consequence of such conduct 
was, that God could no longer identify Himself with 
the nation : He rejected them, took away His throne 
from Jerusalem, and confided the dominion and empire 
of the world to the Gentiles. (See chap, ii, 38.) 
Upon this Nebuchadnezzar takes Jerusalem, and the 
times of the Gentiles begin. 

There are two aspects to this part of the subject : 
on one side the responsibility of the Gentiles ; and on 
the other the circumstances of the Jews in those times, < 
and in particular of the faithful remnant — the special 
object of God's care. 



27 

We have already seen the general characters of the 
Gentile kings. 

But now we come to more intimate details of these 
beasts, in their relationship with the Jewish people 
and with the remnant who had their expectation from 
God. These beasts, as we have seen, had lost their 
knowledge of God, and had persecuted His people ; 
and thus, in order to bring out more perfectly the 
circumstances of the Jews, we are given a more 
minute history of some of these beasts, together with 
some account of the remnant under their power ; and 
also many circumstances, as we shall presently see, 
which will have their accomplishment in the Holy people. 

We must note a feature in this book, as also in the 
prophetic part of the Apocalypse — that there is 
nothing addressed to the people of God. In the other 
prophets, for instance Isaiah and Jeremiah, there are 
many particulars concerning these same things ; but 
the prophet always addressed the people of God, because 
they were still acknowledged. But when this is no 
longer the case, God may give to a prophet, to Daniel, 
to a remnant, revelations having reference to the people*; 
but the prophet no longer addresses himself to the people. 
Thus Daniel is full of joy at these communications ; 
but he does not say a word of them to the Jews 
directly. God was with the remnant, even Daniel 
(d). He had nothing more to do with His people in 
the government of the world ; but He had a remnant, 
and He communicated to the faithful whom He had 
chosen His intention concerning this remnant, and the 
events which were to take place. It is thus in the 
Apocalypse in its prophetic part. Certain things are 
told to John : it is not John speaking to Christians. 

Such prophecies are a kind of depot of certain 

(d) Daniel is, in many ways, a type of Christ, as having the 
Spirit of Christ in His sympathies with the remnant* &&&^& 
being thenvrepresentative before God. 



28 

truths, which is for the blessing of the Church at all 
times, and for the Jews whenever they believe. As 
to the people of God not being acknowledged, I believe 
this ought to have its weight in studying the Apoca- 
lypse, and you will do well to consider it. 

We are now going to enter into the second part of 
the book, wherein the conduct of the beasts, and of the 
different powers of the Gentiles, is given in detail ; as 
well as the circumstances of the saints, during their 
(the Gentile) dominion, and the judgment of God 
which comes down at the end. 

Chap, vii is an introduction, and contains three 
visions. 

There is the first general fact that there would be 
these four beasts, but the fourth was of the most 
importance ; for although the others had been wicked 
enough, whether in acting against God or His people, 
it was under the fourth that the open revolt was to 
take place, whether of Jews or of Christianity, against 
God ; a revolt which should result in the entire 
destruction of the beast, because of it lifting itself up 
against the authority and glory of God. 

The first vision gives the description, however, only 
of the three earlier beasts, whose dominion was suc- 
cessively taken from them, but whose lives were 
prolonged, that is, they were not entirely destroyed. 

The second vision (ver. 7) is the circumstantial 
history of the fourth beast previously mentioned. 

The third vision (ver. 13) is the opposite of all this; 
viz., the dominion given to the Son of Man. The 
explanation follows. 

First Vision. 

Verse % " Daniel spake and said, I saw in my 
vision by night, and behold, the four winds of heaven 
strove upon the great sea." The great sea, in prophetic 



29 

language, constantly signifies masses of people ; thus 
Babylon (Rev. xvii, 1, 15 ; Jer. li) is described as 
dwelling (ver. 13) "upon many waters;" that is, peo- 
ple not yet, at the time of the vision, formed into 
kingdoms, empires, and as such acknowledged by God 
as prophetic objects. These last are rather called the 
earth. 

Verse 3, " And four great beasts came up from the 
sea, diverse one from another." You will find the 
distinction between the sea and the earth in chap, xiii 
of the Apocalypse, where the first beast comes out of 
the sea, whereas the second comes from the earth, 
because the first beast was the empire which rose 
amidst the confusion of nations, whilst the second 
beast appears when the first was already upon the 
earth, and his empire established. 

Verse 4, " The first was like a lion, and had eagle's 
wings : I beheld till the wings thereof were plucked, 
and it was lifted up from the earth, and made stand 
upon the feet as a man, and a man's heart was given 
to it." This was the Babylonian monarchy, the first 
which carried every thing before it. Pharaoh desired 
to do so, but his fate was sealed at Carchemish, near 
the Euphrates. (Jer. xlvi.) This lion with wings was 
Nebuchadnezzar; his empire lasted only seventy years; 
Darius the Mede took the kingdom, and Babylon 
remained a great city after its dominion was taken 
away: there was a subsequent judgment upon it; for 
it was besieged and taken a second timB, and then it 
stood upon its feet as a man, submissive, and no more 
ravaging the nations : it became a province, and was 
no longer mistress of the world. 

Second Beast, Ver. 5. 

" And behold, another beast, a second^ like to ^ Wwr^ 
and it raised up itself on one, avte, «j^\\,V^^s5^ 



30 

ribs in the mouth of it between the teeth of it : and 
they said thus unto it, Arise, devour much flesh." 
This is the Persian empire. I will not discuss this, 
because all who have studied the prophecies are agreed 
about it. 

Third Beast, Ver. 6. 

" After this, I beheld and lo, another, like a leopard, 
which had upon the back of it four wings of a fowl ; 
the beast had also four heads ; and dominion was given 
to it." 

This is without doubt the empire of Alexander. 
The beast is described more under the features which 
it took after the death of that prince, when his empire 
was divided into four parts, than under those which it 
had when united under his power. This is important, 
because, in fact, two of the parts into which it was 
divided, have had much more to do with the Jews, 
than the empire had in the time of Alexander himself. 
Of these, two are afterwards called (chap, xi) the king 
of the north and the king of the south. 

Daniel said, in a general manner, that there were 
four beasts, but the fourth is reserved for a special 
vision. 

Verse 7. "After this, I saw in the night visions, 
and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and terrible, and 
strong exceedingly ; and it had great iron teeth : it 
devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue 
with the feet of it : and it was diverse from all the 
beasts that were before it : and it had ten horns." 
That which particularly marks this beast, was that it 
had ten horns (ten kings). Verse 8. " I considered 
the horns, and, behold, there came up among them 
another little horn, before whom there were three of 
the first horns plucked up by the roots : and, behold, 
in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a 
mouth speaking great things/' 



31 

This description is not only that of a power hurried 
into action under the influence of his passions, or of a 
conqueror who goes about ravaging everywhere ; but 
there was something more in the ways of this little 
horn, viz., exceeding arrogance, intelligence, design, 
counsel, reflection, &c. : he had eyes as the eyes of a 
man. It is said of the Lamb, in the Apocalypse, that 
it had seven eyes ; an expression for the perfection of 
foresight and understanding. Here it is not perfection, 
but at least intelligence, reflection, and design; all 
these are represented by the eyes ; " and a mouth 
speaking great things :" namely, prodigious boasting ; 
and this characterises particularly this horn. It is on 
account of the words which this horn spoke, that the 
beast was destroyed. He is the one who causes the 
judgment of the fourth beast. The little horn is he 
who morally influences and characterises the beast. 
Verse 9. "I beheld till the thrones were cast down 
(placed) (e), and the Ancient of Days did sit, whose 
garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like 

the pure wool the judgment was set and 

the books were opened." 

This is an assize. The thrones are not overthrown, 
but placed. The Ancient of Days sits in Judgment; 
myriads and myriads are there before Him. The 
books are opened. But as yet the Son of Man does 
not appear ; but only the Ancient of Days. In 
another sense, Christ is Himself the Ancient of Days, 
but here, a little further on in the chapter. He is pre- 
sented to Him (the Ancient of Days) as the Son of 
Man. 

In the Apocalypse, when John sees (chapter i,) the 
Son of Man, it is with all the attributes of the Ancient 
of Days. But here the Ancient of Days is seen Him- 
self apart in vision, because Christ, in this book, is 

(e) There is no doubt, I believe, that placed, or set N U *fcs& 
true, the only true sense. 



32 

always considered as the Messiah, or as the Son of 
Man, in His own separate and proper character as 
such (f)\ as the Anointed One, (and thus also as 
man,) because it was under this character that He was 
known to the Jews, or as Inheriting the rights of man, 
on the part of God, in this world. 

Herein we have the distinction in the expressions, 
Messiah, and Son of Man, and this difference may be 
particularly traced in the Gospel by Matthew, and 
Luke. 

In His quality of the Anointed One, He appeared 
as king down here. When He came thus as Messiah, 
He was rejected : the Messiah, we are told, was cut 
off, and had nothing (Daniel ix, 26, margin). But 
when God at a future period shall set up His throne, 
(we are not speaking of His heavenly glory, for that 
is, in Him, already accomplished,) it will not be only 
as the Messiah. It is not the way of God to re- 
establish that which has been spoiled : such a pro- 
cedure would be unworthy of God : if Satan spoils 
His work, He is not satisfied with simply mending it. 
Whenever the folly of man, and the malice of Satan, 
have perverted any passing blessing which God has 
given to man, God establishes something infinitely 
superior. We have a striking instance of this in 
Jesus Christ Himself. Man was placed in innocence 
upon the earth. This state of things was soon altered 
by the folly of man, tempted by the Devil. Does 
God re-establish again an innocent man on the earth ? 
No. He sits up His own Son, a glorified man in 
heaven and earth. Thus God, in allowing the things 
which He has presented or confided to man, to be 
corrupted, afterwards Himself establishes something 
infinitely superior, according to His own purpose. 

(/) Verse 22 of this chapter is an exception, claiming the 
character of Ancient of Days for Christ Himself; and 
identifies the Ancient of Days, Jehovah, with Christ as coming. 



33 

In this manner the Messiah was offered as king of 
the Jews. Faith, indeed, confessed Him as the Son 
of God ; but as the Son of David, if He had been 
received, He would have possessed the throne of 
David. 

Man, being a sinner, would not receive Him ; but 
when He returns, it will not be as Messiah, nor as the 
Son of David, only. He is gone to receive a kingdom 
from the hands of His Father, an inheritance over all 
things, not only as Messiah, but as the Son of Man ; 
for God has decreed that " all things shall be subjected 
unto him" (1 Cor. xv). It is for this reason that He 
is seen coming with the clouds of heaven as Son of 
Man. 

When Christ presented Himself to the Jews as 
Messiah, and even to the Gentiles under Pontius Pilate, 
He was rejected ; after which God does not establish 
Him as Messiah alone, but as heir of all things. Is 
this done by the will of man ? By no means. Christ 
has been presented to the good will of man ; but He 
was received with hatred and disdain. They crucified 
Him. He will be established by the decree of God. 

Now when this little horn speaks great things, — 
when all its insolent pride is manifested, — when it 
has come to its height ; then the thrones are placed, 
and God begins to exercise His power. When power, 
as confided to man, is turned into rebellion against 
God, it is time for God to act, and for the thrones of 
judgment to be placed, — for the books to be opened, — 
and for man to give account to God. 

The result of this judgment on the part of the 
Ancient of Days, is to give the kingdom to the Son of 
Man. It is a question here of this power, — these 
rights of the Ancient of Days : it is the demonstration 
that He who had possessed the rights from the begin- 
ning to the end, although He had been concealed N w«a 
He who gave the power to the one voA \x> ^aa ^awt. 



34 

God had been hidden, so to speak, during the time of 
the other beasts ; nevertheless His providence acted. 
— The Babylonians were replaced by the Persians, and 
these last by the Greeks. All this was done, as things 
are done even now, by the arrangement of that Provi- 
dence which govern the world ; because the Ancient of 
Days, (whose rights, notwithstanding, cannot be 
annihilated,) was not yet sitting to execute judgment 
on account of the acts which had been committed 
against Him. But it will not be thus at the end. As 
yet the open revolt had not taken place. The fourth 
beast had not yet said (Isa. xlvii, 8), " I am and none 
else beside me." As was said to the Prince of Tyre 
(Ezek. xxviii, 9), " Wilt thou yet say before him that 
slayeth thee, I am God?" The judgment of this 
fourth beast will be as against man, in a state of open 
rebellion against God. 

Now the attention of Daniel, ver. 11, is entirely 
taken up with the little horn. "I beheld then, because 
of the voice of the great words which the horn spake ; 
I beheld, even till the beast was slain ; and his body 
destroyed and given to the burning flame." He is 
amazed to hear there, in the very presence of God, 
this horn speaking blasphemous things. He wondered 
that God should permit it; but he saw the beast slain. 
This was the result. Then he says, " as concerning 
the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken 
away; that is, after the dominion had been taken from 
Babylon, it continued to subsist for some time, as did 
the Persians likewise; but the destruction of the 
fourth beast shall be entire. To the others, a prolon- 
gation of life had been granted after the fall of the 
empire ; but here, the judgment and the destruction 
go together. 

Consequent upon all this is a third vision. Verses 
13, 14. It is the Son of Man presented to the Ancient 
of Days. "Behold one like the Son of Man came 



35 

with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of 
Days, and they brought him near before him." And, 
verse 14, "there was given him dominion, and glory, 

that all people should serve him : his 

dominion is an everlasting dominion," &c, &c. This 
is the kingdom which will be confided to Him, and 
which He will administer for the subjection of all 
things to God Himself. 

Now we come to the explanation given to the pro- 
phet, ver. 15 — 17. "The visions of my head," says 
Daniel, " troubled me. I came near unto one of them 
that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this. So 
he told me," &c. " These great beasts, which are 
% four, are four kings, which shall arise out of the 
earth." But he adds a fact, not before mentioned, 
ver. 18, " The saints of the most High shall take the 
kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever." It is not 
alone the history of something which takes place by 
the interposition of Providence, or by the judgment 
of God; but the interpretation is occupied with the 
people of God — the saints of the most High. We 
always find, whether in prophecy or in parable, that 
the explanation goes beyond that which the original 
statement itself contains. There is always some new 
fact. So here, the truth is added, that the saints of 
the most High are to obtain and to keep the kingdom. 
The general thesis of the chapter is, that four beasts 
would rise on the earth and be finally judged by God. 
The truth added in the explanation is, that the saints 
of the most High would receive the kingdom, the 
beasts being set aside. 

Verse 19. " Then I would know the truth of the 
fourth beast, .... which brake in pieces and stamped 
the residue with his feet." This violence and cruelty 
has always marked the conduct of the fourth beast ; it 
is Europe, at all events, in the west. 

Verse 20. " And of the ten horaa ti&\» ^«t^\a.\^a» 



36 

head, and of the other which came up, even of 

that horn that had eyes . . . . " The horn had intel- 
ligence and designs. Three of the horns (kingdoms) 
fell before this horn, which, little at the beginning, 
becomes, in appearance, more stout than his fellows, 
and at last, rules in the midst of the horns. And you 
will see, as we proceed, that this horn usurps all the 
power of the beast, or at least, stamps the whole with 
its character. The horn gets the power. As it is the 
conduct of this little horn, which determines that of the 
beast, so also is the horn the cause of the beast's 
destruction. 

Verse 21. "I beheld, and the same horn made war 
with the saints, and prevailed against them," ver. 22, 
"until the Ancient of Days came, and judgment was 
given to the saints of the most High ; and the time came 
that the saints possessed the kingdom.'* Afterwards 
the explanation is given, ver. 23 — 25, and the little 
horn is more fully mentioned. 

This horn is not to be an ordinary kingdom, but a 
special power which raises itself up in the midst of the 
others. 

The fourth beast is to do three things; — first, it 
speaks great thjngs against the God who is on high, 
ruler of heaven and earth : secondly, it wears out the 
saints of the most High ; those, namely, who own 
God in the high (heavenly) places ; also, it makes war 
with the faithful Jews who have returned to their 
land. Thirdly, it not only destroys the saints, but it 
thinks to change the times, (that is, solemn days, — 
certain days which return from year to year, and which 
mark certain epochs among the Jews, as Pentecost, 
the feast of Tabernacles, &c.,) and the law itself. 

They shall be delivered into his hands, that is, these 
times and the Law, until a certain period ; it will not 
be for ever. The beast, then, apostatizes against God, 
makes war against the saints who confess Him, and 



37 

lastly, completely sets aside the Jewish ordinances. 
This is the final character which the beast takes. 

We shall still have to consider this beast, and con- 
sequently, we must follow with care this part of the 
book, because of the important place which the little 
horn occupies in the revelations of God ; meanwhile, 
let us remember, that whilst the prophetic part of this 
chapter, as contrasted with the explanatory part, 
treats of the beast being destroyed and delivered to 
the fire, in the latter part, the Spirit of God is almost 
entirely occupied with the actings of the little horn. 
The judgment is to sit, and its dominion to be taken 
away, (that is of the little horn,) ver. 26. We shall 
see that the ten horns give their power to the beast ; 
but this little horn rules the beast, morally speaking, 
and so all the others, by its intelligence and influence ; 
so that the Spirit of God can speak of the little horn 
as being everything. 

Notwithstanding it was still the beast, for the little 
horn possessed all the power of the beast, and its (the 
little horn's) conduct characterised the beast ; for as it 
was the horn which blasphemed, persecuted, and 
changed the law, so is its dominion which is taken 
away. 

At the same time bear in mind, that although the 
little horn was principally before the eyes of the 
prophet, the others had not ceased to exist. There 
yet remained seven horns after three had been swal- 
lowed up, so that we do not see in the little horn all 
the empire of the fourth beast, considered geographi- 
cally. The little horn is morally, but not geographi- 
cally, the beast. Seven of the horns which existed 
previously will still subsist. The features of the 
beast, then, are, that we have one particular horn 
which is very different from the others, small in 
appearance when it rose, but whose looks and vi^^ 
were stouter than the others, t\its» q>1 mCWscv ^^ 



38 

before it. It is the horn that persecutes and changes 
the times, and represents completely the beast before 
God as to the judgment ; but at the same time, as to 
physical and material power, there are seven other 
horns in other places, but within the limits of the 
Roman empire ; and who are thus the instruments of 
the moral evil of the little horn. One horn is the 
great worker of evil, whilst the mass of the empire, 
divided into seven parts, gives the power to that one. 

Napoleon may serve to give us an idea of this state 
of things. Spain, Belgium, Westphalia, &c, followed 
him ; they were his auxiliaries ; but he personally 
stamped his character on the whole course of events. 
And so with these seven : their authority may exist 
within their own limits, but their power will be given 
to him who will exalt himself against God and His 
saints. 

The xiiith and xviith chapters of the Apocalypse, 
also bring this beast before us. In chapter xiii, he is 
shewn as seated upon the throne, and wielding the 
power of Satan, by means of another beast who 
helped to glorify the first on the throne. In chapter 
xvii, he is shewn more in his relationships with 
Babylon ; whilst here, in Dan. vii, he is represented 
to us as making war against God Himself — in his 
relationship also with the saints of the most High, 
and with the Jews. In the east, — in the Jewish or 
glorious land, is the special place where the evil will be 
finally concentrated. In Isaiah xiv, and Zechariah xi, 
we have details which I shall not now examine. 

In 2 Thessalonians ii, the power of evil is seen in 
another aspect; viz., in connection with apostate 
Christendom ; just as in Daniel xi, it is considered 
with respect to the evil conduct of the king in Pales- 
tine; whilst here, it is seen rising from among the 
Gentiles, acting against the saints of the most High, 
and the faithful Jews. I do not make any allusion, in 



39 

this place, to chap, viii, because it is my conviction 
that the little horn of that chapter is not the same as 
this one. Some who have studied the subject are not 
of this opinion, but for myself, it is my belief that it 
is another power which will be found there, in special 
connection with the Jews, invading those eastern 
countries, but which is not the little horn of chapter vii. 

There is still another passage to be referred to in 
regard to the little horn. It is the latter part of 
Dan. ix, in connection with the desolation of Jerusalem. 
I mention it only that the chain of passages may be 
complete. 

In examining this book, I have no pretention to 
give a complete exposition ; but only to notice some 
leading points which may assist you, and myself also, 
in further inquiry. One of the most remarkable facts 
in this chapter is the open revolt of man against God: 
it is that which so astonished Daniel. In the end, 
man will arrogate to himself power, as if it was found 
in himself, instead of derived from God ; just as it 
was the religion of man among the Jews, which dared 
to reject and crucify the Messiah. 

But this power of man, in complete apostacy, given 
up to Satan, is the instrument of the war which Satan 
wages against God and His anointed. It is not 
iniquity alone, and the commission of sin, but the open 
revolt of sin as a principle. Under whatever form 
man is found in connection with God, this beast will 
give himself the trouble, so to speak, to unite in himself 
all these characters in opposition to God. Is it a 
question of God Himself ? he derides Him, and sets 
himself up against Him. Is it a question of the 
saints? he persecutes and destroys them. His object 
is to overturn everything for the setting up of himself. 
He speaks great words against the most High. Satan 
gives him his throne, after he has been driven out of 
heaven, three years and a half befoxti \kfe "ya&^rciRSfck ~ 



40 

when, having but a short time, he acts in great wrath, 
establishing, thus, the wicked one upon his throne on 
earth; inspiring man, and putting him forward, as the 
head of everything here below, and destroying all 
relationship with God. In 2 Thess. ii, we learn this 
solemn truth, that the rebellion against God,as known 
in Christianity, is based upon the apostacy of those who 
bore its name ; and then the Man of Sin rises and 
shews himself as God in the temple of God : all those 
who have not received the truth in the love of it, 
having been deceived by the lying wonders of the 
power of the enemy. 

And then the events of Kevelation xiii, will be 
realised, viz., that Satan gives the beast his throne ; 
and at that time, I judge, the horrible character of 
open revolt, in all its bearings, will be publicly mani- 
fested. The evil works beforehand in principles — in 
mysteries ; but when the throne of Satan is set up 
down here, after he has been driven from heaven, (at 
least three years and a half before the end,) and in 
consequence is no longer able to deceive, after a 
religious sort, in making himself God on High ; and 
the saints, as a result, having no combat to sustain in 
the heavenly places, — then he gives his throne to the 
beast ; and open rebellion will follow — rebellion 
against God; the wicked one in speciality as such will 
be revealed : " that wicked one shall be revealed, 
whom the Lord shall destroy." Then the throne will 
be given to the Son of Man. 

It is very important, through God's grace, to see 
where the course of this world will end ; and be 
assured that it is not necessary that man should be 
outwardly degraded in habits, in order to serve Satan, 
or that these events should take place ; for the little 
horn had the eyes of a man, all the intelligence of 
man, — his capacity, — clear-sightedness. These faculties 
distinguish him. Nevertheless, he will reject God; 



41 

his conscience will not be in exercise ; lie will have no 
sense of responsibility towards Him ; whilst the desire 
of self- elevation and aggrandizement, will choke every 
trace of love : just as Adam, in wishing to be like God, 
put God aside. But the judgment will come in, and 
Christ will be manifested in all His glory ; and it is 
this for which we wait, as regards the improvement of 
things here below. But thanks be to God, we have, 
as Christians, a better portion, even a heavenly, which 
consists in being like Christ, and with Him for ever.* 



* The reader will remark that Eev. xiii shews us there will 
be a double agency in this manifestation of evil. The throne 
of the first blasphemous beast given to him by Satan and the 
active diabolical machinations of the second, or false prophet, 
who had horns like a lamb. 



FOURTH LECTURE. 

Chap. VIII. 

I reserve some further remarks on chapter vii, till we 
come to the end of chapter ix, and 1 proceed to chap- 
ter viii. In it the Spirit of God takes two empires, 
namely, the second and third of the four beasts 
previously seen, to give a more detailed history of 
them. 

Verse 1, "In the third year of the reign of king 

Belshazzar a vision appeared unto me," ver. 2, 

" And I saw in a vision ; and it came to pass, when I 
saw, that I was at Shushan, in the palace, which is in 
the province of Elam." 

This land of Elam, or Persia, was the body of the 
second beast. The bear of chapter vii, is now the ram. 
"The ram which thou sawest having two horns are 
the kings of Media and Persia." Ver. 20. These two 
kingdoms were united into one. In chapter vii, this 
kingdom is told to "Arise and devour much flesh," 
whilst here the ram is said " to push westward, and 
northward, and southward." The he-goat of ver. 5, 
who attacks the ram, is the empire of the Greeks, 
which commenced under Alexander. This "notable 
horn," having united the Greeks, led them into Asia 
against the empire of the Persians. In three years he 
overthrew it ; it crumbled into nothing before his 
energy, which earned foe bim, among men, the name 



43 

of Great. We know from history, that he died, 
whilst yet young, of a fever, the consequence of his 
excesses. 

Verse 8, "When he [the he-goat] was strong, the 
great horn was broken ; and for it came up four 
notable ones toward the four winds of heaven." 
Alexander traversed the greater part of Asia, and 
penetrated as far as India, proving his capacity, not 
only as a general, but as the founder of a solid empire. 
But God laid His hand upon him ; and u for it came 
up four notable ones." The same truth is presented, 
chap, vii, 6, under the figure of a leopard with four 
wings and four heads. After Alexander's death, his 
kingdom was divided into four distinct monarchies, 
with two of which, we have, principally, to do, because 
two of them came into connection with the Jews ; just 
as, lately, the Turks and Egyptians were at war about 
this same Holy Land. 

We must remember, if we would understand this 
prophecy, that even the geography of Scripture is 
always considered according to the position of the 
Holy Land. If we have a king of the south, it is a 
king to the south of Palestine ; for Palestine is the 
centre of all God's thoughts, as to the government of 
this world. Jerusalem is His chosen city. " For the 
Lord hath chosen Zion," it is said, " He hath desired it 
for His habitation. This is my rest for ever." Psalm 
cxxxii, 13, 14. From one of the kingdoms designed 
under the four horns (it is not said from which, but 
distinctively from one), comes a little horn, whose acts 
form the important part of this chapter. 

Verse 9, "And out of one of them came forth a 
little horn, which waxed exceeding great, toward the 
south, and toward the east, and toward the pleasant 
land," viz., the Holy Land. 

In considering Scripture, it is needful to place 
oueself, so to speak, in the point of view tesi^Vv^ 



44 

God looks. He says, in Deut. xi, 12, and 1 Kings ix, 
3, that He will never take His eyes off Palestine. 
Now the activity of faith always hangs upon this 
regard of God. And this knowledge of God's thoughts 
is the power of service in the Church. God keeps 
His sheep always, that is to say, He always loves 
them. If I see one of these sheep wander, it is very 
sorrowful; and looking at it with man's judgment 
only, one might be inclined to abandon it ; but remem- 
bering that it is a sheep, I act towards it as God thinks 
of it ; that is, faith takes up the thoughts of God, as 
to the object of His love. 

As far as the world is concerned, Jerusalem is 
nothing. It is a city trodden down, with neither com- 
merce nor riches. Superstition is established there 
upon the sepulchre of the Lord. It is true, indeed, 
that the kings of the earth are beginning to look that 
way, because Providence is leading in that train ; but 
as for God, He ever thinks of it : it is always His 
house— His city. His eyes and His heart are there 
continually. Now faith understands this. 

And what was Daniel's position ? He was a captive 
among the Chaldeans at Babylon ; but Palestine was 
for him the pleasant land. His captivity takes off 
nothing from its interest It was a very small province 
of an immense empire, almost unknown in the empire^ 
so small was it in comparison. But to God it was 
everything. His purposes were ever towards it. 

" The little horn waxed exceeding great towards .... 
the pleasant land." We shall never understand the 
Old Testament prophecies, if we do not see two things : 
First, that the thoughts of God are upon the glory of 
Christ, who, on His reappearance, will reign over the 
earth. If this thought be not kept in view, whilst 
considering the details and events of scripture, nothing 
will be understood ; for God will and does make all 
the events of the world work together to that end. 



45 

ndly, we shall equally fail in understanding pro- 
y, if we forget that the Jews are the habitual 
its of the thoughts of God ; for although He cannot 
£nize them for the moment, as being under His 
;ening hand, they are nevertheless still His people ; 
1 the gifts and calling of God are without repen- 
5," Rom. xi, 29 : and, however we may apply this 
tion to the Church — for it is true of every one 

is possessor of a divine life — yet the context 
s that the Jews are meant, who, although sup- 
:ed during their judicial blindness by the Church 
arth (the Gentile dispensation), yet will by and 
De re-established in all their privileges, 
hen we have once laid hold on these two thoughts, 
Christ is the aim and the end of all the counsels 
od, and that the Jews are the object of His coun- 
here below, there are a multitude of expressions 

become easy of apprehension. For example, 

pleasant land ;" it is the land of the Jews : 
ing ennobles before God, but His gifts and voca- 
And who are the people and land which He has 
jn ? No other than the land and the people which 
•romised to Abraham (Gen. xv), and which Christ, 
le seed of Abraham, will inherit, together with 
1, who are the people whom God hath chosen. 
Tse 10, "And it [the little horn] waxed great, 

to the host of heaven ; and it cast down some of 
lost and of the stars to the ground, and stamped 

them, 
lere is an alteration in the next verse, to which I 

here draw your attention, as it relates to a matter 
3 little importance, viz., the complete destruction 
le worship of God at Jerusalem. If we were 
tating on doctrines connected with salvation, I 
d not trouble you with questions of criticism ; but 
lture to do so here, as we are occupied with the 
igence of Scripture ; and much is> in tk\% vofitax*^ 



46 

dependant on a just translation of the 1 1th verse, the 
main correction of which is afforded by the margin of 
the English translation. I give what I believe to be 
correct. And he (h) magnified himself even to the 
prince of the host, and from him (the prince of the 
host) the daily sacrifice was taken away, and the 
place (0 of his sanctuary was cast down, and a certain 
time (j) of distress was appointed to the daily sacrifice 
by reason of transgression." All this I should, more- 
over, put in parenthesis. The material change is, that 
the taking away the daily sacrifice is not attributed to 
this little horn. The actings of the little horn are 
resumed after the word "transgression." "And it 
cast down the truth to the ground, &c." 

In the actings, then, of the little horn, it is not a 
question of uttering blasphemy and exalting it6elf 
against God ; but of something very definite and pre- 
cise ; " it waxed great, even to the host of heaven.'* 
It attacks those who, in those days, are there — the 
Jews who have a place around their chief; that is y 
those who in the moral heaven surround the throne of 
God : I judge it to mean the priests and heads among 
the Jews at Jerusalem, or such as God owns there. 
Observe God's estimate of things. He attaches more 
importance to the priests and governors among this 
poor people, than to anything else which the beast has 
been doing in the world. He lifted himself up " even 
to the host of heaven." It is infinitely more dangerous 

(h) The change from "it" to "he" is to be noted here. It 
does not agree immediately with the little horn. 

(t) This word in the original gives the idea of something 
solid, permanent, established; and comes from the word to 
establish. 

(j) Where in verse 12 it is said " an host was given him," I 
take the word in the sense in which it is used m Job vii, 1, 
xiv, 14, and perhaps x, 17 : — an appointed time of distress ; a 
miserable condition which is ordamed to any one. 



47 

to meddle with things that belong to God, and things 
upon which God looks, — to endeavour to efface His 
glory, all tarnished though it may be in our hands,— 
than to overturn or to found empires, or to achieve the 
greatest victories ; although God in His providence 
may superintend these events. 

The little horn might overthrow nations ; but to say 
there should be no worship of God was an event far 
more serious: it was to destroy the only link which 
permitted God to recognize the state of things on the 
earth. 

Such, then, is the special conduct of this little horn. 
It magnifies itself even to the host of heaven, and 
casts down a part of the host and of the stars to the 
ground, and stamps on them. At the end, he who fills 
the anti-typical place of this little horn, exalts himself 
even so as to rise up against the prince of the host. 
He aims even at Him who is the true head of all 
things. Those who were at Jerusalem in such a place, 
represented God, whilst Christ will soon be manifested 
as the true prince of the host. God further permits 
that the daily sacrifice should be taken away from this 
prince. We see, therefore, who is this prince. 
It is the Lord. The sacrifice is taken away from 
Him, and the place of His sanctuary cast down, in 
this time of terror. 

God calls His house at Jerusalem the place of His 
sanctuary, — the sanctuary of Christ. He was and is 
always the God of the Jews. It is not a simple 
treading down of the people by the permission of God, 
as chastisement on account of their sins ; but that it 
should be so, the temple is allowed to be cast down, 
as indeed it was at the time of the captivity of 
Babylon ; and this must be the case, in order that 
God may show that He has completely abandoned His 
people to the fruit of their ways. While He ow** 
His honour there, He must stand \x^ Va \>aKa ^sSskk** 



48 

hough He chastise ; but if that be destroyed, and their 
sity prostrate, then He leaves them indeed to the 
matured fruit of their sins, though He may still have 
the intention of bringing them back. 

One might have supposed it impossible that His 
fixed habitation should be cast down ; but the Spirit 
of God puts these facts in contrast, that we may see 
that the things which God Himself had established 
and preserved for centuries, He abandons, whilst still 
calling them His own ; " The gifts and calling of God 
are without repentance ;" but He overturns everything 
that He has set as a witness, in the place which He 
has chosen for His dwelling, and breaks His bonds 
with the people, whilst still saying (Lam. ii, 6, 7), that 
they are "His tabernacle, His places of assembly, 
His altar, and His sanctuary." Because of the 
unfaithfulness of the people, God no longer allows the 
worship which should have been offered to Him ; and, 
by permitting the daily sacrifice to be taken away, the 
visible and exterior link between Himself and the 
people is broken, and all that manifests His favour in 
the world — His house and worship — is set aside. 

Verse 13. " Then I heard one saint speaking, and 
another saint said to that certain saint, which spake, 
how long shall be the vision concerning the dailj 
sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to giv 
both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden unde 
foot ?" The question is about the length of the time < 
affliction. The thoughts of the inquirer are not upc 
he exploits of the little horn, but about the desolatif 
of the Jewish worship and temple. This distincti 
is important. I do not say that such desolations 
not announce the last days ; only, these two thi? 
are distinct, viz., the conduct of the little horn, ; 
the desolation of the temple. In the explanation gi 
in the course of the chapter, concerning the en< 
the indignation, there is nothing on the subjec 



49 

worship; it refers only to circumstances concerning 
the king of fierce countenance, understanding dark 
sentences, without speaking of the temple. And lastly, 
there is not a word said that it is this little horn, who 
takes away the daily sacrifice. 

This answer precedes, and is distinct from, the inter- 
pretation given to Daniel of the little horn. It is 
possible that, in the history, the little horn may have 
done all these things (allowing Antiochus Epiphanes 
to have been the type) ; but the Holy Spirit does not 
use them all (k) when He speaks of what is to fill up 
the picture at the end. 

Verse 14. "And he said unto me, two thou- 
sand and three hundred days, then shall the sanctuary 
be cleansed.*' We shall be helped in the consideration 
of these verses by recurring to verse 10. "It waxed 

great . . . , it cast down some of the host, &c and 

stamped upon them :" and in verse 12, we again find 
the expression, "it cast down the truth to the ground." 
Now between these two expressions all is in paren- 
thesis, that is, the whole of the 1 1 th, and a part of the 
12th verse. "It cast down the truth to the ground," 
is the conduct of this horn in the last days, of which 
we have an explanation at the end. Verse 17. " So 
he (Gabriel), came near where I stood." .... 
Verse 19, "And he said, behold, I will make thee 
know what shall be in the last end of the indignation : 
for at the time appointed the end shall be." The 
word indignation is often found in the prophecies, and 
is particularly mentioned in Isaiah x. Iniquity had 
ripened, and its chastisement had begun in the days of 
the faithless successor of David, Ahaz. It went on 
increasing. The Jews would not repent, and the hand 

(k) I would remark here in passing, that we must not con- 
clude that all the circumstances connected with the occasion of 
a prophecy, apply to the events which acsotft\\kV^\k^ , &^ ,e ^ 
of the age. 



50 

of the Lord was heavier upon them ; and will continue 
(see Isaiah x, 5, 8, then 12, 17, 21, 25) until the 
people shall return to Him who smote them. 

It began, comparatively lightly, with the attacks 
of the Syrians, and the loss of provinces ; to these 
succeeded the conquests of the Babylonians; after 
that, the captivity ; but the Jews would not repent at 
these judgments. Afterwards, God sent them His 
Son ; you know how they treated Him. When they 
shall be again in their land, they will give themselves 
over to idolatry, and will receive Antichrist instead of 
Christ. At last, the abomination of desolation will 
be set up, until Christ Himself shall destroy the 
enemies of the people, and then the indignation will 
be accomplished. This time of indignation consists in 
the people being abandoned by God to the power of 
their enemies, more or less ; but that which is specially 
called the indignation, is the attacks to which the Jews, 
on account of their sins, are subjected in the last 
days — the days of Antichrist. I do not say that 
Antichrist is the indignation ; but the Jews are 
delivered to the instruments of the indignation of 
God, on account of their relationship with Him. God 
has determined its duration beforehand. (Compare 
Isaiah x, 5 — 25.) 

Dan viii, 20 — 23. " And in the latter time of their 
kingdom, when the transgressors are come to the full, 
a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark 
sentences, shall stand up." 

I have no doubt, dear friends, that the type was the 
king of the Syrians, — the king of the race of the 
Seleucidae ; but it is quite certain that this was not 
the end of the indignation; and in the explanation 
which Daniel gives, he confines himself to what the 
antitype will do at the time of the end (ver. 17) — the 
end of the indignation against the Jews (ver. 19). 
We must put the Church altogether on one side in 



51 

this case: it is a question of the Jews in the latter 
days, at the end of the indignation. 

"In the latter time (ver., 23) of their kingdom 
[namely, of the kings who divided the Greek empire], 
.... a king of fierce countenance, and understanding 
dark sentences, shall stand up.** These kingdoms, 
then, must be re-established ; there will again be the 
king of the south and the king of the north. Turkey 
in Asia, at this moment, embraces the territory of the 
king of the north, and Egypt that of the king of the 
south. They must reappear as two kingdoms. We 
must apply this prophecy to that which is called " the 
end,'* " the time of the end ;" that is, the end of the 
ways of God towards the Jews — "the end of the age," 
as a general term. Egypt will then be on the scene, 
but particularly the king of the north, whoever may 
then possess that dignity. 

An important fact in the accomplishment of pro- 
phecy in the latter day is, not only the return of the 
Jews to their land ; but that, being found there, their 
wickedness will still increase. Those words of the 
Saviour will be accomplished in them, "If another 
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive." John 
v, 43. And again, " when the unclean spirit is gone 
out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking 
rest, and findeth none. Then he saith, I will return 
into my house from whence I came out ; and when 
he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. 
Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other 
spirits, more wicked than himself, and they enter 
in and dwell there: and the last state of that man 
is worse than the first. Even so shall it be also 
unto this wicked generation." Matt, xii, 43—45. 
That is, the Jews having returned to their land, the 
wicked spirit, the spirit of idolatry, which had left 
them (for there was no idolatry at the time of Jesua 
Christ) enters into his house em^^w^X wA ^- 



52 

pared, and brings with him seven other impure spirits, 
and the last state of the nation shall be infinitely 
worse than the first. This may be true of others, but 
the Saviour applies the passage to the Jews : " Even 
so shall it be also unto this wicked generation." Thus 
" the transgressors will have come to the full,"— the 
transgression of the Jews against Jehovah will be at 
its height. It will be, speaking generally, the end of 
the age, and particularly the end of those four monar- 
chies of the divided empire of Alexander ; the Jews 
having become absolutely apostate, and in rebellion 
against God, — not only as seen in their present con- 
dition, but much worse, having also returned to their 
land. And this scene will be in Palestine, and with a 
king out of one of the Greek monarchies, of whom 
the king of Syria, Antiochus Epiphanes, has certainly 
been a type. 

Verse 23. "And .... a king of fierce countenance, 
and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up." 
He will not only have force of arms, but also a spirit 
of wisdom, so as to be able to explain or interpret 
enigmas, — a sort of prophet (though not, of course, 
in a good sense), who expounds profound and mysterious 
things. He acts by a deceitful and penetrating spirit, 
and in this way, upon the Jewish nation, as much as 
by his arms. 

Verse 24. " His power shall be mighty, but not by 
his own power." He will be a king in dependance 
upon some other potentate, — strong, but not entirely 
by his own force. " And he shall destroy the mighty 
and the holy people. Notwithstanding their state of 
perfidy and rebellion collectively, the Jews are, to the 
prophet, the holy people (/). 

x Verse 25. " And through his policy also he shall 
cause craft to prosper in his hand ; and he shall mag- 
nify himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy 

(I) Or people of the samta. Com^x^ m, 17. 



53 

any." That is, it will not be by force of arms, 
it he will deal with the Jews in the way of peace ; 
id by penetration and subtilty, as a kind of Rabbi, 
3 will exercise much influence over the Jewish 
ition. 
Finally " He shall also stand up against the Prince 

princes; but he shall be broken without hand." 
brist is the Prince of princes — "the prince of the 
>8t" This king, then, will not only overthrow many 
;ws ; but, at the same time, will obtain immense 
fluence over the nation ; and setting himself against 
e Prince of princes, he will be destroyed without 
ind. 

You will observe, that, in this explanation of the 
•nduct of the little horn, the daily sacrifice is not 
entioned, — its taking away is not attributed to him ; 
id thus we perceive the importance of the correction 
' ver. 11. He oppresses the Jews, and triumphs 
r er them by the subtilty of his spirit ; he will destroy 
any by peace and prosperity. This is the account of 
power which emanates from the Greek monarchy in 
e east, and who will act in the midst of the Jewish 
sople, and who will be destroyed because he exalts 
mself against Christ at the end. So much for his 
cality, his conduct, and his end. The only mention 
at Daniel makes of the daily sacrifice and of the 
nctuary, is in the two last verses. " And the vision 

the evening and the morning which was told is 
ue." 

A single remark will suffice concerning the calcu- 
bions of dates that have been made : I have made 
em myself, and I have taken all possible pains to 
solve that of the two thousand three hundred days 
er. 14); so that I do not mean it as condemning 
hers, when I avow that I do not think they can be 
unted as years, and I am inclined to believe th»& 
ese days were accomplished oi d&. ^mV> \x^ «s^ 



54 

fcase, if dates are to be assigned, we must re- 
member that the subject is the Jews and Jerusalem, 
and these dates must therefore be applied to the 
Jews and Jerusalem, and not to the affairs of 
Christendom. 

There may be analogous circumstances in Christen- 
dom, because the mystery of iniquity has already set 
in ; for although the wicked one has not yet been 
revealed, his principles and his pride are found in its 
developments, &c. ; but if we are to speak with 
exactness, and to ask if these things have been precisely 
accomplished, then we must apply these passages to 
Jerusalem and the Jews, namely, to what is to occur 
at the end of the indignation. Now, certainly, the 
end of the indignation has not yet happened. 

In conclusion, the subject of this lecture is one with 
which we may appear to have but little concern. The 
other little horn has more connection with us, because 
it belongs to the last beast ; and we have to do with 
it, as living in those countries which will come under 
its dominion, — as France, England, &c. (which formed 
a part of the Roman Empire) ; and also, as being 
where Christianity has been developed, during the 
existence of this last beast ; whereas we are not in the 
territory of the little horn spoken of in this lecture. 
But if it is important, on the one hand, to avoid the 
evil which is about to appear in the west, — in the very 
midst of the circumstances in which we are placed ; 
on the other hand, the necessity of doing so, tends to 
pervert our judgment; for we are liable to attach a 
great importance to ourselves, and to suppose we 
possess the whole scope of Scripture, whereas God, as 
far as regards the possession and promises of this 
world, has given the Jew a much larger place than 
ourselves. Nevertheless, we perceive at the close 
that our history again enters into what so much 
interests us, namely, the covmseVa o( God as to His 



55 

Christ ; for the last thing which we see in the great 
events which are to take place, is this little horn 
lifting up himself against the Lord of lords ; and 
before this world can be blessed, it is necessary that 
the Lord should break this little horn, in order that, 
under His own rule, the blessings of peace may come 
upon all. 



FIFTH LECTURE. 
Chap. IX. 



In chap, vii, we trace the history of the four beasts in 
general, specially of the little horn who spoke great 
things, who blasphemed against God, who was the 
enemy of the saints, — who represented the beast, — 
that is, who acted as he chose, according to the power 
of this beast ; and in chapter viii, we have the history 
of the horn who will be raised up from one of the four 
Greek monarchies, and who at the end will lift him- 
self up against the Lord of lords, and will be destroyed 
without hand. The prophet now directs his thoughts 
and heart towards a subject, different from that in the 
midst of which he stood ; namely, to the desolations of 
Jerusalem. Such is the theme of this chapter. And 
how was he led into this train of thought ? Simply 
because those words were on his heart, "How long, O 
Lord !" It is a mark of faith thus to cry, when 
judgments are weighing heavily upon the people of 
God : for faith views the people according to the 
promises which God has made to them. A people 
who has laid hold of the mind of God, whose faith is 
in exercise, and whose heart responds, however 
imperfectly, to the heart of God, must desire that they 
should enjoy their proper blessings; — the blessed con- 
sequences of their relationship with God : as it is said, 
" Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation." 
Isa. xxxiii, 20. 



51 

Thus, when affliction weighs heavily upon the peo- 
ple of God, and they are not enjoying all the 
privileges which faith realises as belonging to them, 
faith says, " How long, O Lord !" On the one hand, 
such an one cannot rest satisfied with the misfortunes 
under which the people of God are labouring ; and 
upon the other, he knows that it is impossible for God 
to abandon His people. Faith says, this state of 
suffering will have an end ; the wicked, it is true, will 
not be relieved, but the people of God must be. Hence 
the frequency of such expressions, in the Psalms and 
Prophets, as, "How long, O Lord!" and " There is none 
to say, How long !" — there is no one who knows how 
to count on the faithfulness of God. "When, under 
chastening, there is no faith to use this expression, 
a worse one is used, "I have loved strangers, and after 
them will 1 go ;" and the people abandon themselves 
to wickedness. Jer. ii, 25. 

Now Daniel is here acting in faith. He had, more- 
over, .the consolation of knowing that when God pro- 
nounced the judgment of captivity upon His people, 
' He had also declared its limit. Jeremiah had 
predicted that it should last seventy years, and that 
afterwards God would judge Babylon by the hand of 
Cyrus. Hereupon, wrapped up in the interests of the 
people of God, his thoughts are occupied with this 
promised deliverance. 

But the faith which comprehends the goodness of 
God, and sighs for the time when the people shall 
enjoy their privileges, always confesses the sin which 
has obliged God to deprive His people for a time of 
these privileges. Faith never becomes discouraged, as. 
if God were unfaithful; on the contrary, it insists 
upon the blame being with the people, and that God 
has only acted faithfully in thus dealing with them* 
Our chapter begins in this way. The interest which 
Daniel felt in his people, led him to \k& ^&ss&s5e*&ssfe. 



58 

of the prophet Jeremiah ; and then he entreats the 
Lord to confirm this blessing which He had promised 
by Jeremiah, that is, that He would accomplish the 
deliverance of His people from captivity. 

Another important fact which we remark here, and 
which was manifested in the Lord Jesus in perfection, 
is, that faith always thoroughly identifies itself with 
the affliction in which the people are found ; and more, 
even with all the sins of the people of God. This is 
the distinguishing mark of the Spirit of Christ. Christ, 
indeed, went much further, inasmuch as He was able 
to make atonement for those sins, with w&ich He 
identified Himself; but faith, according to its measure, 
always does so. The faith may be very feeble, but if 
there be any sense of the privileges of the people of 
God, and of the glory of God in His people, faith 
must have reference to this glory. But if it considers 
the glory, it considers also the sins which have been 
the occasion of the chastisement. Faith identifies 
itself with the state of the people, and in placing 
itself in their condition, perceives the cause of the 
judgment ; for faith identifies the glory of God with 
His people, and itself with both ; and the state of the 
people before God becomes the principle which 
animates the heart; and the more faith there is, 
according to the measure of its intelligence, the more 
does it enter into the depths into which the offenders 
have fallen, — pass their sins in review, and confess 
them in identification with them ; and if faith did not 
do this, there could be no presenting of these sins in 
confession, in order to their being pardoned. The 
Spirit which is in us, (and yet more fully than the 
spirit of prophecy,) (m) necessarily looks at the thing 

(to) When I speak of this spirit of prophecy, I mean not a 
revelation, but the intelligence of the thoughts of God as to 
His people, and interest of heart in their blessing, as in God's 
behalf. The heart being the depositary of these interests. 
This spirit is in the body. Compare, too, Gen. xx, 7. 



59 

morally. My distress at the condition of the saints is 
in every sense incomplete, unless the cause of that 
condition in God's sight is taken notice of; — just as 
the high priest confessed all the sins of the people upon 
the scape goat. 

It is fully admitted, that there may be imperfection* 
in the act ; but according to the principles of faith, 
there must be identification, — a full confession before 
God. If I thought to get remission of sins (in the 
sense of removing chastenings) by partial confession, 
or without having felt their enormity, it is evident I 
should be mocking the just government of God ; so* 
that it is absolutely necessary, if I wish to suffer with 
Christ, for His Church (and the case of the Jews 
serves morally for us) — if I am led by His Spirit in 
love and care for His sheep, — that I should humble 
myself, recognising the fallen condition of the saints, 
and confess all their sins. Just this did Daniel. 

Verses 2 — 4. " In the first year of his [Darius's] 
reign, I Daniel understood by books the number of 
the years, whereof the word of the Lord came to 
Jeremiah the prophet, that he would accomplish seventy 
years in the desolations of Jerusalem. And I set my 

face unto the Lord God, and I prayed unto % 

the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said, 
O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the 
covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to 
them that keep his commandments." 

Daniel has the prophecy of Jeremiah present before 
his mind. When I speak of the spirit of prophecy, I 
do not speak of a revelation made to the prophet, — it 
is not a question of the answer which God makes to 
a prophet, when he presents the wants of His people. 
Daniel was a prophet ; but there is, in this instance, 
no special revelation made to him. Hence we are told, 
that he had understood by books. He was simply one 
of the faithful studying .prophecy. Q^*&*amo&aK 



60 

gives him a direct revelation : but, in the present 
instance, faith alone was acting, and he was only made 
to understand what God had already spoken about His 
people. All is revealed in the Bible ; and, in searching 
it, we can, like Daniel, know and understand what God 
%as already written about His people. 

There are many questions which we cannot resolve, 
because we are not spiritual enough. The teaching of 
God is as necessary for the understanding, as for the 
revelation of His thoughts. It is interesting to 
remark this. Daniel had understood by books that 
the captivity was to last seventy years. As a faithful 
man he interests himself in the people of God, and 
searches by the spiritual intelligence which is given to 
those who walk with God, what are His thoughts 
and ways. 

I do not say that we have the same faith and 
intelligence, but we are upon the same ground. 
Daniel represents the faithful remnant, who have their 
hearts full of desires for His grace towards His people, 
and who, to this end, study the word of God. As a 
consequence, the Spirit of God leads him into supplica- 
tions ; for whatever be the intentions of God, there 
p is always in His acts of government a recognition of 
the moral road which He has ever traced out for His 
people,— certain moral principles by which He leads 
them. " I will yet for this be enquired of by the 
house of Israel, to do it for them ; I will increase 
them with men like a flock." Ezek. xxxvi, 37. Faith 
does not lead us into mere speculative knowledge,— 
the head may be full of dates, &c. — things, in a certain 
degree, useful, — but when the Spirit of God really 
acts, we turn to the Lord with prayer and supplication, 
and with humbleness of soul, recognising the actual 
condition of His people. It was thus with Daniel. 
" I set my face," says he, " unto the Lord." 

Daniel had been led captive when very young, and 



61 

he had taken no part in the actual iniquity of Israel. 
There was, therefore, no ground for self- accusation. 
But the fact is, there is no such thing as a Christian 
separated from the interests of his brethren. This 
could not be. The Spirit of Christ, which, in a 
certain sense, is more powerful in us than among the 
faithful in the time of Daniel, is nothing else than the 
Spirit of Christ in Christ; that is to say, the principle 
by which He acts. Christ has done, He alone, that 
which no other cquld have done ; we know this well. 
But the tendency, the feelings, the affections of the 
Spirit of Christ in us, cannot be other than the Spirit 
of Christ in Christ. If then, Christ identifies Himself 
with all that the people have done from the beginning, 
Daniel also can say, " We have sinned," ver. o — 7. 
He identifies himself with all, in the unity of the 
same people, though he had not been partaker of any of 
these sins, (ver. 8,) " O Lord, to us belongeth confu- 
sion of face ; to our kings," &c. These kings were 
no longer in existence, but he saw the whole thing 
together ; " we have not hearkened to the voice of thy 
servants the prophets." The prophets had not pro- 
phesied to him, and had a deaf ear turned to their 
words. Behold, then, the whole mass of Israel in this 
confusion of face, — behold the justice which belongs 
to^God. But there is another thing which the Spirit 
of Christ confesses : u To the Lord our God belong 
mercies and forgiveness, though we have rebelled 
against him." (ver. 9.) This is a singular reason; but 
he had such a conviction of the goodness of God, that 
he says, It is not only the justice which punishes, that 
is found in God, but though we have sinned, there is 
mercy ; as David says, " O Lord my God, pardon my 
iniquity, for it is great." As if to say, nothing will 
do for me, or meet my case, but mercy ; — I cannot 
offer sacrifices like the Jews, I must have recourse t<* 
Thee. — I must have mercy and \&xdati. *\>&& ^rcwgos** 



62 

draws this as a consequence, — there is sin ; well then, 
this can be met by mercy alone. 

All have transgressed the law. It does not do to 
say, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, have not 
done so; — Josiah had done much that was good; 
David was a man after God's own heart : but this or 
that instance is lost in the idea of a broken law. If 
the people of God are no longer in the enjoyment of 
their privileges, it is because they have sinned, and 
that sin is punished. Certain alterations for the 
better may have retarded the judgment, but judgment 
having once come in, the way of the Spirit is to say, 
that all have sinned. Besides all this, there is a 
government in detail, as we see in the case of Hezekiah, 
where chastisement was announced, and afterwards 
postponed. They were to go to Babylon, but not in 
his time. As to further matter of detail of govern- 
ment, consult the case of Josiah ; he fell by the hand 
of Pharaoh-Necho, although it was said, 2 Kings xxii, 
20, " Thou shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace." 
But he was taken from the evil to come. The circum- 
stances were afflicting, for it would appear that he 
should have listened to Pharaoh. Josiah was chastened 
individually ; but he did not see, like Daniel, all that 
came upon Jerusalem : — what a sparing from sorrow 

was that ! " The righteous man dieth, and 

none considereth that the righteous is taken away 
from the judgment to come." 

Verse 11. "Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy 

law," (ver. 13.) yet made we not our prayer 

before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our 
iniquities, and understand the truth ;" that is, not 
only have we transgressed, but when the chastening 
came, we did not turn to the Lord with a true heart, 
to turn us from our iniquities. Here sin reached its 
height. 

Verse 14. " Therefore hath the Lord watched upon 



63 

the evil and brought it upon us," — as He watched upon 
the good to bless. How terrible, when the govern- 
ment of God watches upon the evil to make it come 
upon His people ! 

Verse 15. " And now, O Lord our God, that hast 
brought thy people forth out of the land of Egypt 
with a mighty hand, and hast gotten thee renown, 
as at this day ; we have sinned, we have done 
wickedly." Ver. 16. " O Lord, according to all thy 
righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger and thy 
fury be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy 
mountain." The words of Daniel are quite touching. 
He deeply felt that it was the sin of the people that 
had brought down all the evil. Nevertheless, he 
reiterates, It is a question of Thy name; he says 
nothing about the name of the people. He had truly 
felt their wretchedness and sin; moreover, he was 
humbled for it ; but he insists upon this point, that 
Jerusalem is the city of God, and so he says, " let 
thine anger be turned away from thy city Jerusalem." 
In confessing the sins of his fathers, he could not bear 
the idea of the city of God being in desolation ; but 
these sins being the cause, they must be forgiven 
before the city can be restored. It was called by 
God's name, and in the eyes of Daniel, his people were, 
so to speak, the name of God in the earth, as it is said, 
Ps. xxiv, 6, " This is the generation of them that seek 
him, that seek thy face, O Jacob." 

This, then, was the pleading of Daniel : he confesses 
all the sins of Israel. Thus, ver. 16, " for our sins, 
and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy 
people are become a reproach," &c, &c Ver. 18, 
" O my God, incline thine ear and hear ; .... for we 
do not present our supplications before thee for our 
righteousness, but for thy great mercies." Ver. 19. 
" Defer not, for thine own sake, O my God, for thy 
city and thy people are called \yj toj TOaaaT ^sA. 



64 

Himself is made the motive. Tbat faith which per- 
ceives the sins of the people, by reason of the glory 
of God -which identifies itself with such people, can 
claim deliverance from the results of these sins; 
because this very glory necessitates the forgiveness, — 
God having identified Himself in goodness with the 
people : and so much the more, inasmuch as it is this 
glory upon which faith feeds and is preoccupied, and 
which, as before said, causes the extent of sin and 
failure to be felt. But if God is to act for His name, 
He must deliver Jerusalem, for there was no other 
place on the earth which bore His name. 

If the same spirit animated us, as Christians, we 
should be saying, 1 It is for the sins of the Church that 
we are suffering, and that we are held in contempt by 
all the world. 

Something remains to be said, dear friends, as to 
the place which Daniel takes prophetically. It has 
struck me in reading the chapter, that he does not take 
the position, in which the promises made to Abraham 
would have placed him. The full blessing of the Jews 
will be grounded on another truth than that which 
Daniel pleads here. 

The blessings of the Jews, such as they are yet to 
enjoy, are based upon the promises made to Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob, without condition. These are not 
touched upon here by Daniel. They have never 
possessed the land under the law, .properly speaking ; 
but they have had it according to the promises made 
to Moses, in favour of the people, at the time of his 
mediation at Sinai. The land has never been possessed 
on the principle of obedience to the law ; for imme- 
diately after it was given, the apostacy of the golden calf 
came in. Moreover, they have never yet enjoyed the 
land in quality of Messiah's people. In order to enjoy 
the land according to the promises, they must enjoy it 
according to the new covenant : but as yet, neither 



65 

the Messiah nor the new covenant have introduced the 
people into it. 

The new covenant is not yet established with the 
Jews. The promises cannot yet have been accom- 
plished ; because Chiist is the true seed of Abraham. 
The Jews have been rejected, and the accomplishment 
has never yet taken place. These, viz., the Messiah 
and the new covenant, are two great elements of the 
future blessing of this people. 

The fact is, that God, after the idolatry of the 
golden calf, placed His people Israel (consult Exodus 
xxxii, xxxiii, xxxiv,) under a government, founded, 
half upon law, and half upon grace ; for when Moses 
ascended the mount of Sinai, God declared His name 
(Ex. xxxiv, 6) as " the Lord God, merciful and gracious, 
longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth." 
This was grace, — whilst, at the same time, He gave 
him the law of the ten commandments ; so that the 
people were placed under a condition of obedience. 
This was the condition underwhich Israel wasplacedfrom 
the time that Moses ascended Sinai the second time. 
Although he had previously confessed the sins of Israel, 
and, by his intercession, obtained the pardon, through 
grace, of the people, yet God, notwithstanding, 
replaces them under a condition of obedience to the law. 

In all that, there was no question of Jerusalem, but 
only of the great principles which were the groundwork 
of the relationship between God and His people. 
Later, as in Lev. xxvi, we have the threats made to 
the people should they fail in their conduct. It is a 
long chapter, where blessings are promised in the event 
of obedience ; He engages even to place His tabernacle 
in their midst, and every earthly blessing was promised 
them, ver. 3 — 13; "but (ver. J 4) if ye will not 
hearken, to me," they are menaced with the heaviest 
judgments, and at last are to be cast out of their land, 
ver . 31 — 39. This was precisely what befell ^ksxx^ 



66 

when they were carried captive to Babylon (compare 
2 Chron. xxxvi, 21, with Lev. xxvi, 34), and the land 
enjoyed her Sabbaths during the time of the desolation 
of Jerusalem. Once every seven years there was to 
be a year of rest ; but the people had not faith in God 
to observe it, and the consequence of their not believing 
God, in not allowing the sabbatic years, was, that God 
found this means of enforcing obedience to His law. 
A promise succeeds this threat, ver. 40, 42, " If they 

shall confess their iniquity." &c " then I will 

remember my covenant with Jacob," &c, &c, that is, 
they would be brought back. 

The same principle is presented in Deut. xxviii, 
xxix. We have conditional blessings and cursings, 
and subsequently (chap, xxx), promises ; that is, grace 
for those who repent in the land whither they have 
been carried captive. 

It was this special case that Daniel had to do with 
— the case, namely, foreseen in the threatenings. I 
would call your attention also to 1 Kings ix, for there 
God shews, in answer to Solomon, what He would do 
in case of infidelity ; and He identifies His name with 
the city of Jerusalem, and particularly with the temple. 
(1 Kings viii, 29.) In his prayer, he does not ask for 
the accomplishment of the promises made to Abraham, 
but only of those made to Moses, which place the 
people under the condition of obedience when in their 
land (ver. 56). It was this prayer which was answered. 

We have seen what passed with Moses. And when 
Solomon dedicates the temple to God, he asks Him to 
acknowledge it always according to His principles of 
government as revealed to Moses. Now the people 
having sinned, Jeremiah had prophesied that there 
should be a special chastisement for seventy years, 
and Daniel takes this up. He does not go back to the 
promises made to Abraham, but no further than 
the words of Solomon and Moses. (Dan. ix, 11.) 



67 

Verse 16. "Let thine anger and thy fury be turned 
away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain*" 
God had, according to Solomon's prayer, chosen 
Jerusalem. We will not now enter into the answer 
which God gives, except to say, that He declares all 
that should happen to Jerusalem ; but in taking, as His 
occasion, the return to that city of the captives, He 
goes on much further, even to the circumstances of 
that city to the very end. He does it, as it were, 
under a Mosaic point of view, and not in revealing its 
final state of blessedness, as being an answer to the 
prayer respecting the judgments which had befallen 
the Holy City, on account of the violation of the law 
of Moses ; the result of which was, that the city 
was placed under the judgments which Moses had 
threatened. 

It may be well to point to two or three passages, as 
to this choice of Jerusalem ; for instance, Ps. lxxviii, 
68 ; lxxxvii, and cxxxii. This last opens with a 
description of finding and bringing back the Ark, and 
giving it a place. Then Jehovah speaks, ver. 12 — 14, 
" If thy children will keep my covenant, .... For the 
Lord hath chosen Zion ; he hath desired it for his 
habitation. This is my rest for ever : here will I 
dwell ; for I have desired it." Nothing can be more 
striking than the goodness of God throughout this 
Psalm. God goes beyond all that is asked of Him. 
The prayer is, ver. 9, "Let thy priests be clothed 
with righteousness ; and let thy saints shout for joy." 
But the answer, ver. 16, is, "I will also clothe her 
priests with salvation ; and her saints shall shout aloud 
for joy." Again, ver. 8 — 10, the prayer had been, 
" Arise, O Lord, into thy rest, thou and the ark of thy 
strength :" and the reply is, as we have seen, " The 
Lord hath chosen Zion : this is my rest for ever ;" &c. 
Again, the prayer is, ver. 10, "For thy servant David's 
sake, turn not away the face of thine w^v^W^ \r> 



68 

which God answers, " There will I make the horn of 
David to bud." In every case the answer largely 
surpasses the request. There is yet a passage in 
Zechariah ii, 12, which shews the exceeding joy which 
Christ will feel over Jerusalem in the last days. "And 
many nations shall be joined to the Lord in those days, 
and shall be my people : and I will dwell in the midst 
of thee ; and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts 
hath sent me unto thee. And the Lord shall inherit 
Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose 
Jerusalem again." («) These blessings follow upon 
all the trying and humbling circumstances of 'which 
Daniel treats, for it must be remembered, that in 
Zechariah it is " after the glory,", (ver. 8) that is, 
beyond the period included in Daniel's prophecy. 
Again, in Zech. xii, 2, "Behold I will make Jerusalem 
a cup of trembling to all the people round about." It 
is an elect city, just as Israel is an elect people, or the 
Church an elect bride. 

Let it be again observed, that whilst Daniel is 
personally concerned with the return of Israel from 
Babylon, under the circumstances predicted by Moses, 
the Spirit of God uses this thought to continue the 
history of the people, or rather of the city (introducing 
the chief events of the first coming of Christ), as far, 
but only as far, as the point where final blessing com- 
mences ; for the matter of Zechariah and the Psalms, 
but now touched upon, is not entered into. The 
essential point, however, is the spirit in which Daniel 
identifies himself with the people of God, confessing 
all their sin as his own, before God. 

(n) See also Zephaniah iii, 17. 



SIXTH LECTURE. 

Chap. IX, 20—27. 

These verses relate the answer to the confession and 
prayer of Daniel. The faithfulness of God is in full 
action, exactly as promised in Leviticus, Deuteronomy, 
and in the answer to the prayer of Solomon. He had 
promised, that if they were led into captivity, and 
should, in the midst of their enemies, turn to Him 
with all their heart (He never said, if they kept the 
law to the letter, for this would not have been possible 
to them), He would bring them back. 

Verse 21. " Whiles I was speaking in prayer, even 
the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at 
the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me 
about the time of the evening oblation. He repeats 
twice, " whiles I was speaking ;" he had not finished, 
before Gabriel appeared and arrested it by the delivery 
of the prophecy following. 

It is not, we may say in passing, always so. On 
another occasion, Daniel spent three weeks in fasting 
and prayer, for God was trying his faith. The angel 
was to accomplish the purpose of God before com- 
municating it ; the Lord permitted that the prince of 
Persia should hinder its accomplishment for three 
weeks. It was a question of deciding something aw 
the court of Persia; and those there, who were oppose'd 
to an edict for favouring the Jews, could put obstacles 
to its promulgation. When the angel of God had 
prevailed in these counsels, he cama &xA«&\\^ft. 'Was* 



70 

is very instructive to us ; for God always governs the 
world. Whilst the throne of God was at Jerusalem, 
He governed the world immediately ; not only Israel, 
but the world, and this according to the good or bad 
conduct of Israel ; whilst after that, although He did 
not cease to govern everywhere, already, even in this 
book (Israel being in captivity), He is seen acting by 
the secret springs of His providence, and not by the 
immediate action of the revealed rule of His law, as 
in the midst of His people, (o) 

Although the child of God is able to confide entirely 
in Him, for •• the very hairs of our head are num- 
bered," it is happy to see the government of God 
manifested openly in the world. It will be the case 
in the Millennium ; the government will be immediate 
and direct, so that the justice of God will be seen by 
men, whilst now all goes on secretly. His ways are 
often a labyrinth to us now ; for our normal position, 
as being saints, is quite different. God is perfecting 
us for heaven, and has no object in manifesting in us 
His righteousness upon earth. The heavenly thing is 
much better and more precious. He makes us pass 
through all kinds of earthly trial, with this object in 
view. A christian is often astonished at what he 
suffers individually for righteousness* sake, — it is a 
general case. But for the Jews, God will appear, 
according to His promise, the moment they turn with 
humility and confession to Him. Thus does He 
answer Daniel. 

We have already observed, that faith never forgets 
that Jerusalem is the city of God's holiness, and that 

(o) The book of Esther is a striking instance of the secret 
government of God, at a time when He could not recognize 
His people publicly; and I judge this to be the reason why 
God does not permit His name to appear throughout the book. 
If He had been named, He would not, so to speak, have 
permitted Esther to remain the wife of Ahasuerus. 



71 

His eyes are there continually. When even the 
Israelites have failed, and that God is obliged to 
abandon them for the time, it ceases not, to faith, to 
be the holy city of God. 

Verse 21. " About the time of the evening oblation." 
This expression makes us feel the Jewish atmosphere 
we are in ; for of course there was no evening sacri- 
fice at Babylon. Jerusalem was burnt, but faith 
remained. It was the time of the evening sacrifice, — 
the Jewish scene fills his thoughts. 

Verse 22. " And he informed me, and talked with 
me, and said, O.Daniel, I am now come forth to give 
thee skill and understanding . . . ." ver. 23, 24, " for 
thou art greatly beloved : therefore understand the 
matter and consider the vision. Seventy weeks are 
determined upon ,thy people and upon thy holy city." 
Observe how the angel accredits the faith of Daniel, 
making him the representative both of Jerusalem and 
the people : — " to finish the transgression, and to make 
an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity 
(p), and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to 
seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the 
holy of holies." 

Many Christians find great difficulty in this entire 
passage, from their not seeing that, whilst it has 
already had an accomplishment, as far as is needed for 
the establishment of its truth, on the other hand, it 
has not been fulfilled at all. If we do not see this, it 
is impossible to understand the events that are still 
future. All that was necessary on the part of God, 
in order that the events, announced in the verse we 

(p) The author translates "to make reconciliation for 
iniquity," by " to cover iniquity," to which expression he an- 
nexes this note.— *Psalm xxxii. 1. I prefer employing the word 
*' to cover," than to explain it ; it is employed for expiation or 
for pardon, that is, either for an expiation, or its application, 
viz., pardon.— Translator. 



72 

have been reading, should take place, has been accom- 
plished, and even proposed to the Jewish people ; but 
still nothing has taken place as to the actual accomplish- 
ment to them ; the train of circumstances having been 
interrupted, and the Church (the heavenly people) 
having been introduced in the interval, until the time 
decreed of God, when these events shall be taken 
up again with the Jewish people, when the due time 
comes, whether by the apostacy which exists in Chris- 
tendom, or by the ripe state of the Jewish people, in 
a bad sense and in a good one. 

Let us consider, for example, the new covenant ; it 
will be established with Israel and Judah. Jer. xxxi. 
This is not yet accomplished. The Jews are dispersed 
towards the four winds of heaven. Now a covenant 
must be established by the blood of a victim ; and so 
the blood of the new covenant has been shed ; and, 
therefore, all that is necessary for the bringing in of 
this covenant with the Jews, has been done on the 
part of God. But actually nothing, as to this nation 
receiving it, has taken place ; for they rejected the 
Messiah, both personally and under the preaching 
of the Apostles. Meanwhile, the counsels of God as 
to the Church have occupied and do occupy the inter- 
val ; this heavenly people having nothing in common, 
as to their position, with that which God did, and will 
do for the Jews. 

This point being ascertained, beloved friends, the 
verse becomes comparatively easy ; indeed, we may 
say, that the special difficulty disappears, for we per" 
ceive that, as to the foundation on His part, God has 
completed everything. He has sent the Messiah, He 
has presented Him to the people, the blood of the 
covenant has been shed, and propitiation made. But 
if it be asked, whether these blessings have been 
efficacious with regard to the Jews as a nation, it must 
be answered, that nothing has been done ; and this is 



73 

our present question. We must not here, then, consider 
a satisfaction apart from its application ; but rather, its 
efficacy as regards the Jewish nation ; and thus we 
shall be led to consider whether the nation is in those 
circumstances which should precede the time when the 
application of this blood shall be made to them. " He 
(Christ) died not for that nation only, but that he 
should gather together in one the children of God 
that are scattered abroad." John xi, 51, 52. Now in 
Daniel we have to consider the application of this 
blood to the Jewish people; and in the explanation of 
all the prophecies, we must take this fact into con- 
sideration. It is clear that the death of the Messiah 
is, in a certain sense, a fulfilment of this prophecy ; 
for His death is a propitiation made for sin. But 
what is here said of it, taking into account the object 
of the passage, is in no wise accomplished. Having 
prefaced with these remarks, let us examine what is 
the result of all this for the people. 

" Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people." 
There is no reference here to us Christians ; the verse 
refers to the people of Daniel, and to the holy city of 
Daniel. The seventy weeks are only applicable to 
them. There may be, in this portion, many events 
which will also affect us ; the Antichrist for example ; 
for both Jews and Gentiles, though not the church, 
have to do with that wicked one, and still more, have 
they had to do with the cutting off of the Messiah ; 
but the aim of the prophecy is " thy people and thy 
holy city ;" that is, the Jews and Jerusalem. Once 
put aside this people and city as objects of the thoughts 
of God here below, and there is no longer applicability 
in the prophecy ; so that we must set aside Christianity 
for the moment, as not being the object here. And 
why ? because Christianity has, in its position before 
God, nothing to do with either Jew or Gentile, Lon- 
don has as much to do with Chriatiaxta^ «& "&wass$SRK&~ 



74 

Jerusalem is to a Christian, no more holy than any 
other city. There may be deeply interesting associa- 
tions connected with it, but it is, in no sense whatever, 
our " holy city." " Seventy weeks," then, " are 
determined upon thy (Daniel's) people/' 

Now for the details. Verse 25. " Know therefore 
and understand, that from the going forth of the 
commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto 
the Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and 
threescore and two weeks." In the first period, the 
space of seven weeks, Jerusalem was to be rebuilt, 
and that, in troublous times. This has been accom- 
plished, as we find from Ezra and Nehemiah. 

Verse 26. " And after threescore and two weeks 
shall Messiah be cut off, and shall have nothing."^) We 
know that this has likewise been accomplished. 

As the head of the Jewish people, He has been on 
earth, and been rejected. As to His inheritance, — as 
to the Holy City, particularly as Messiah, He has had 
nothing at all. He was cut off ; He has had nothing 
as the Messiah, except spittings and death. And as 
the Son of David, He has had absolutely nothing. He is 
now at the right hand of the Father ; but in His title, of 
Kingof the Jews, He has not yet been owned. He entered 
Jerusalem as king, riding upon an ass, and was rejected. 

Verse 26. "And the people of the prince that 
shall come." This is some new person ; — not the 
Messiah, otherwise how could it be said of this person, 
" he shall come .?" According to this prophecy, Mes- 
siah had already come, and had been cut off ; besides, 
it is not the people of Christ, who is cut off, that 
"shall destroy the city and the sanctuary." This 
happened according to the saying of the Chief Priests 
and Pharisees, John xi, 48, " The Romans will come 
and take away both our place and nation." 

(q) " And shall have nothing," i.e., shall have nothing of His 
dominion as Messiah. This is the undoubted force of the pas- 
sage, not : «* bnt not for Himself." 



Neither is it the prince himself who thus acts. It 
is the people of the future prince who do this — of the 
prince that shall come — the little horn, the chief of the 
empire (Roman) of the last beast. The fourth mon- 
archy, viz., the Roman, destroyed the city and the 
sanctuary, as it is the body of which the little horn, 
as prince, will be the head. 

Verse 26. " And the end thereof shall be with a 
flood, and unto the end of the war desolations are 
determined." Verse 27. " And he shall confirm the 
(a margitf) covenant." If it had been said the covenant, 
one might suppose it of some covenant already existing, 
whereas there is no such thought in the expression ; 
" he shall eon firm covenant" — that is, establish it, not 
with many, but with the many, or the mass. As Christ 
had but a very small remnant, whilst the mass of the 
Jews rejected Him, the prince, who shall come, shall 
establish a covenant with the mass. A remnant will 
undoubtedly escape, but the covenant which this prince 
shall confirm, will be with the mass of the people. 

" And he shall confirm a covenant with the many 
(r) for one week.*' This is the week which still 
remains ; for Christ was cut of£ it is said, after the 
sixty-nine weeks* After this period, we are told of 
"the people of the prince" (the Romans under Titus), 
who destroy the city ; and then we have the prince 
himself confirming a covenant for one week, which is 
the last, or seventieth week. 

We are to leave off counting from the time the 
Messiah was cut off, viz., at the end of the sixty-nine 
weeks. After this period, time, so to speak, does not 
go on, — God does not take count of it ; it is indefinite. 
But the seventieth week still remains to be fulfilled. 

"And (ver. 27) in the midst of the week, he shall 
cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease." It is 
evident, that, at this time, the Jews are re- established; 
with their sacrifices and oblations. T\\s> " ^ly^rr, ^ca^ 

(r) The Hebrew has the article* 



76 

shall come" will establish an alliance with the Jews 
during one week : but at the expiration of the half, he 
will completely change his conduct, and will cause 
their sacrifices to cease: he thinks, as before explained, 
to change the times (Jewish festal days) and the law ; 
they are delivered into his hands and he effaces them. 
This is the history as far as facts go. (s) 

We, as believers, comprehend that the Lord Jesus 
made the sacrifice (Jewish) cease to those who believed 
on Him ; just as to them, that is, to faith, John the 
Baptist was Elias, according to those words, "If you 
can receive it, this is Elias which wa6 to come." In like 
manner, to faith, Christ was the Messiah, — the Son of 
Man to His disciples, looked at as believing Jews. 
Nevertheless He adds, "ye shall not have gone 
through the cities of Israel, before the Son of Man 
shall come." (t) But as to the Jewish people itself, 
the Spirit omits entirely all that we Christians enjoy, 
because in fact they rejected Jesus. 

If interpreters insist that Jesus Himself laboured 
during the first half of the seventieth week, and that 
account is taken of it (the half week) for those who 
believed (w), but that, as to the nation, this half week 
has been lost, on account of their unbelief, and that 
they will receive the Antichrist, who will present 
himself in a like manner, I am far from objecting. 

(s) Properly speaking, Matthew xxiv and Mark xiii, only 
take account of the last half of this week ; for the first haft 
belongs to the period of the beginning of sorrows, and of 
testimony in general, and of the labours mentioned previously 
to Matthew xxiv, 14. 

(t) He supposes the continuation of tbeir testimony, omit- 
ting the whole period and the testimony, properly called 
Christian. 

(t«) For an able exposition of the seventy weeks of this 
prophecy, the reader would do well to consult two prophetic 
charts by Sir Edward Denny, published by Nisbet and Co.* 
Bernera Street, Oxford Street.— Translator. 



77 

He certainly did establish divine relationships with the 
little remnant of His disciples, whether one hundred 
and twenty or five hundred, and in consequence, as to 
their labours, He speaks but of the last half of the 
seventieth, or last week. At the beginning of this 
last half their labours are interrupted ; the other half 
is lost in the general history of their previous labours. 
For the Jews the whole week is yet to come, because 
they have not received Christ at all. All that can be 
said as concerning them is, that the Messiah has been 
cut off, and has had nothing. For (whatever computa- 
tion we may incline to, as to the disciples) it is said, 
there shall be sixty and two weeks (besides the 
previous seven) unto the Messiah the prince, and after 
sixty-two weeks Messiah shall be cut off. The Holy 
Spirit leaves the matter in the shade, because He 
counts with reference 1 to the nation, for whom the last 
week has been null and void, and it is the false prince 
in whom the thread of the narrative is resumed, as if 
it were at the end of the sixty-ninth week ; although, 
as we know, the Church, the heavenly people, have, 
meanwhile been introduced and already occupied a 
period, considered as to earth, of more than eighteen 
hundred years. Thus a place is left for faith, whilst 
as to the history, it is one of unbelief. (Compare 
Isa. lxi, 1 — 3 ; Luke iv, 19.) Christ the Prince has 
never yet been Prince, nevertheless He was so to faith 
in His disciples. A question for the consideration of 
those who examine this most interesting detail of pro- 
phecy, is, whether the Lord presented Himself 
officially to the Jews as prince or king, before His 
entry into Jerusalem, according to Zechariah ix, 9 ? 
Upon that, we know, He was cut off. 

The seventieth week is still to have its accomplish- 
ment under Antichrist ; the Jews at first, with fair 
appearances before them, acknowledge him aa tkafct 
chief ; as Jesus Christ said, 3q\xh^ ^"\^ ^asSasst 



78 

shall come in his own name, him ye will receive." 
Thus Antichrist offers himself, and the Jews receive 
him. For the first half of the week (v) all goes on well, 
but then the prince turns in anger against them, 
destroys their system, and exalts himself against 
God. 

That which Jesus did on the part of God, Antichrist 
counterfeits, according to the word just quoted, "lam 
come in my father's name, and ye receive me not, if 
another shall come," <fcc. ; therefore I allow, in a 
certain sense, that to faith, this cessation of sacrifice 
(alluded to previously, " he shall cause the sacrifice to 
cease") has taken place. For the little remnant did 
own Christ to be there ; but for the entire nation there 
has been as yet no accomplishment of any part of the 
week. 

Scripture is not silent concerning this covenant of 
the Jews with Antichrist, and their consequent judg- 
ment. In Isaiah xxviii, 14, we read, "Wherefore 
hear ye the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that 

rule this people which is in Jerusalem, * 

Ver. 18. " Your covenant with death shall be dis- 
annulled, and your agreement with hell shall not 
stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass 
through, then ye shall be trodden down by it." These 
are the threats, as to the moral position in which they 
shall be found in that day. 

It is the last half of the week, which occupies the 
mind of the Spirit of God, as to these terrible events at 
the end. Thus the little horn is to continue " a time, 
times, and half a time ;" viz., three years and a half, 
or the half of a week. Power is given to him for this 
time. So in the Apocalypse, xiii, 5, "There was 

^ (v) You will find this same date of 1260 days repeated several 
times : as with regard to the little horn, chap, vii, also to the 
beast of the Apocalypse, Rev. xiii, and in Daniel xii, with 
thirty days added, as to the abomination of desolation. 



79 

given unto him a mouth speaking great things, and 
blasphemies, and power was given unto him to con- 
tinue forty and two months." 

I have said, that the sacrifice and oblation would be 
restored. This is noticed in prophecy, although at the 
same time their re-establishment will be utterly 
rejected by God. It is written in the last chapter of 
Isaiah, "Thus saith the Lord, the heaven is my throne, 
and the earth is my footstool, where is the house that 
ye build unto me ? and where is the place of my rest ? 
For all these things hath mine hand made ;" — an 
intimation of the restoration of the temple, but then, 
— " to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, 
and of a contrite spirit, and tremble th at my word :" 
viz., the remnant. 

The sacrifices are offered but rejected : read Isaiah 
lxvi, 3—6. Again, Dan. xi, 31, "And (tbey) shall 
take away the daily sacrifice," &c. Again in Dan. xii, 
" And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be 
taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate 
set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and 
ninety days." This is thirty days over. It will take 
thirty days more for purification, and yet forty-five 
more for complete peace ; ver. 12, "Blessed is he that 
waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred 
and fi\e and thirty days." This latter half week is 
still referred to, in which the daily sacrifice being 
taken away, Antichrist will be there, and the abomina- 
tion of desolation set up in the holy place. Compare 
viii, 11. 

In Matthew xxiv, we find this same circumstance 
exactly. The Lord, having alluded to wars and 
rumours of wars, becomes more precise. He had 
spoken until verse 14, in quite a general way, and, 
like Daniel, declared that the city and temple should 
be destroyed, and also the people. But as He goes on 
to speak of the labours of His disciples,* He, <ye&<xs> 



80 

more fully into the general history. " Many shall be 
offended," &c. ; and He counsels His disciples as to 
their conduct, as witnesses of the truth, and tells them 
that before the end came, "this gospel of the kingdom 
shall be preached in all the world for a witness." 

All this was to happen, not at a given time during 
the seventy weeks, but, generally speaking, before the 
end, but of course after the discourse and departure 
(death) of Jesus. Afterwards He says, (ver. 15) 
"When ye therefore shall see the abomination of 
desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in 
the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand :)" 
here is the abomination of desolation placed at Jerusa- 
lem ; the previous testimony is over, and the disciples 
have only to fly ; w then let them which be in Judea flee 
into the mountains." Jerusalem is then delivered 
over to the judgment which awaits it. 

There is yet another important and interesting 
circumstance, as to this last half week. We find it in 
Rev. xii. We shall see that this date of the abomina- 
tion fits in exactly with the time of Satan being 
driven out of heaven. The woman flees into the 
wilderness, (ver. 6) where she is fed one thousand two 
hundred and sixty days. Ver. 7. " There was war in 
heaven, Michael and his angels fought against the 
dragon;" read to the end of verse 12, "knowing that 
he (Satan) hath but a short time." Now it is exactly 
during this half week that the abomination of desola- 
tion is set up in the holy place. This is given more in 
detail in chapter xi. 

Further, Dan. ix, 27, " He shall cause the sacrifice 
and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of 
abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the 
consummation, and that determined shall be poured 
upon the desolate." (w) That is, by means, or on 

(w) Rendered in the French, " He shall cause the sacrifice 
and the oblation to cease, then by means of the abominable 



81 

account of the abominable wings, or literally, "on 
account of the wing of abominations." The word 
abomination is always in the Old Testament simply anidoL 
For example : the abomination of the Moabites was 
the idol of the Moabites. Solomon put the abomina- 
tion of the Ammonites upon the mount of Olives, that 
is, the idol. The word wing always gives the idea of 
protection. "Under his wings shalt thou trust." 
Ps. xci, 4. 

" On account of the wing of abominations," that is, 
as it appears to me, on account of the protection of 
idols. They take refuge in idolatry for a protection ; 
and this is the finishing stroke of their wickedness, 
and the consequence is, the desolation which descends 
upon the desolated one, until the end of these seventy 
weeks, — a desolation of fearful judgment not now 
merely the destruction of the city, as by the people 
of the prince to come : Antichrist had deceived the 
people, the little horn has made a covenant with them, 
and, as it were, holds them in his gripe. God is set 
aside — denied ; — Antichrist even makes himself 
God ;-— the sanctuary, if not destroyed, is at least 
profaned, and degraded in every way. The abomina- 
tion is put into the holy place, and idolatry is 
introduced. At last Antichrist sits there as God, he 
allows or confesses nothing at all but himself, until 
God is no longer able to endure him, or those who are 
subject to him, and destruction and desolation fall on 
the people. 

There is no account of this in our present chapter, 
but there is in Dan. vii ; and in the New Testament 
the Lord thus speaks of the Jewish generation ; when 
the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh 
through dry places," &c, &c. Matt, xii, 43. Consult 

wings which shall cause desolation, even until a consumption 
determined, the desolation shall fall upon the desolate one 
( Jerusalem)." — Translator. 



82 

the whole passage. They enter in and dwell there: and the 
last state of that man is worse than the first. " Even 
so shall it be also with this wicked generation." This 
is the history of the Jews. I do not say there may not be 
other applications of the passage. What was this 
wicked spirit ? It was idolatry. After the Babylonish 
captivity there had been no more idol worship ; the 
unclean spirit had gone out, and the house was empty 
though there was every kind of profession. Then the 
spirit of idolatry, which found no rest, returns to the 
house at the end. It will be the case with the Jews, 
and then there will be an open rebellion against God ; 
they will be joined with Antichrist, and join in the 
war made upon their Messiah. And it will be then 
on account of the protection of these abominations, 
that, "the desolation shall be poured out upon the 
desolate one." 

Compare Dan. x, xi, xii. In the last chapter, we 
have the complete deliverance, and he adds in this last, 
thirty days, and forty-five days to the half week. 
Then all will be happy and blessed. There will be a 
certain time necessary after the destruction of Anti- 
christ, to re-establish everything in order. The whole 
of this chapter is in affinity with the end of Dan. vii, 
and with the xiiith and xviith of Revelation. We shall 
have to consider it again in connection with chap. xi. 



SEVENTH LECTURE. 
Chap. X. 

I shall take a few verses of this chapter to mark 
the position of Daniel, when he received this answer, 
and the circumstances by which this reply was intro- 
duced. 

We shall find, dear friends, some instructive circum • 
stances at the commencement, in the position of Daniel, 
and in the state of his soul. God also notices this, 
for the man clothed in linen says to him, ver. 12, 
" Fear not, Daniel," &c. The position of Daniel was 
that of affliction in the presence of his God. 

The date of the third year of Cyrus, ver. 1 — 3, is 
important, because the Jews (the remnant at least) 
had returned to their land, from the first year of the 
reign of this prince ; so that it could not be the cap- 
tivity of Babylon, which occupied Daniel's heart at 
the moment. He had remained at Babylon after the 
departure of a great number of these Jews for the 
land of Canaan ; but the people were not at all in the 
state which the prophetical spirit of Daniel could 
recognize as the fulfilment of blessings ; and the con- 
sequence of this is, that the prophetical Spirit of Christ 
in Daniel is still occupied with the state of this people, 
and can in no wise content itself, even although there 
was a certain degree of blessing with them. Cyrus 
had done much, as we may learn from 2 Chron. xxxvi, 
22, and Ezra i. The decree to rebuild had already 
been given in the first year of his rei^n. Bvkt *Sba 



84 

Spirit of God had caused Daniel to range over the 
whole period of tie Gentiles, and he well understood, 
though there had been a kind of deliverance, — some 
relief through the goodness of God, — a little refresh- 
ment from above, — that nothing was really accomplished 
of the divine promises. It was impossible that the 
prophetic Spirit of Christ in Daniel's person, should 
remain tranquil, while awaiting the accomplishment of 
the intentions of God's love to His people^ so that 
Daniel was then, as if the captivity were not over, 
bowing down His soul before Him. 

There had been, on the occasion of rebuilding the 
temple, features of sorrow in another quarter, Ezra iii. 
The elders of the people, who had seen the old temple, 
wept, and at the same time, the younger, who had not 
known it, uttered cries of joy. And this sorrow is often 
felt in like circumstance by those who have apprehended 
the divine counsels, either as to what God had set up 
at the beginning, or what He will yet set up. Like 
Daniel, they weep in the midst of the blessings in 
which consists the joy of those who only think of the 
present moment. The cries of joy prevailed without, 
for it is said, these cries were heard afar off; but 
amongst the people present, they knew not which to 
distinguish. But at Jerusalem, as well as at Babylon, 
he who had a sense, however imperfect, of what the 
state of the people of God ought to be, would not fail 
to recognize their wretched condition in the midst of 
these joyful exclamations. Neh. ix, 36, " Behold, we 
are servants this day and for the land . . . behold we 
are servants in it." Ver. 37, " And it yieldeth much 
increase unto the kings whom thou hast set over us," 
&c. And yet these Persian kings to whom Nehemiah 
alludes were altogether favourable. It is true there 
was cause of anguish ; at one time the counsels of God 
prevailed, and at another, those of Satan, in hindering 
the rebuilding ; but generally speaking, the kings of 



85 

Persia were favourable to the Jews. But so long as 
the Gentiles were holding dominion over the people of 
God, it was impossible that the Spirit of God in the 
prophet could allow that the designs of God, regarding 
His people, had been accomplished. He could bless 
Him for all the good that existed, but even when the 
decree had gone forth, the elders wept ; Nehemiah said, 
" we are servants," &c. ; and Daniel continued to afflict 
his soul before God. 

We often find in Scripture some apparently little 
circumstance, which is an index to us of the thoughts 
of the Spirit of God. Thus the date of the third of 
Cyrus opens a field of interesting thought ; for the 
position in which Daniel was found enabled God, so 
to speak, to continue to reveal to him His intentions 
about the people. Evidently God had separated Daniel 
from the things which were doing for the momentary 
resettling of the people, that He might lead His heart 
still onward to the "end of the indignation," which 
really still subsisted. 

There is also another subject of instruction here, 
which I would not omit. I allude to the actings of 
God by means of angels, and how there were demons 
who sought to hinder the ministry of the providence 
of God, as to His people. Ver. 12. "Fear not," says 
the angel to Daniel, " for from the first day that thou 
didst set thine heart to understand, and to chasten 
thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, and I 
am come for thy words." Nevertheless, the answer of 
God, by the angel, did not arrive until three weeks 
after. Then the angel relates to Daniel how this hap- 
pened, and the difficulties he had to encounter at the 
court of Persia, by the opposition of the prince of the 
kingdom against the Jews, and that Michael, one of 
the chief princes, had come to help him. Daniel had 
known nothing of all this. God, in this way, exercises 
the obedience of His angels, and> at ti\a «&seba *ca&& % 



86 

puts the faith of His servants to the test. Thus, t 
is Daniel preoccupied with his people, and with 
glory of God in their midst ; he cannot content hir 
with anything short of the accomplishment of the 
mises, and therefore he humbles and identifies hir 
with the misery and affliction of the people, accor 
to the Spirit of Him who said, " In all their affli< 
He was afflicted." Then God, who has given 
servant grace thus to behave, acts from on hig 
reveal ail His purpose to him, putting, at the i 
time, his patience to the proof, whilst the angel is < 
bating at the court of Persia. I have no doubt 
the same for us ; God also puts our faith to the 
It is not that He does not hear and answer (He ki 
perfectly beforehand what the end will be), but 
will see if faith goes to the end of the difficulty, 
then He answers. Faith, which is much more pre< 
than gold which perisheth, is thus put througl 
trial, and " found unto praise ... at the appearii 
Jesus Christ." In another view we see the exerci 
the angels in the government of God. 

Ver. 14. "Now I am come to make thee under* 
what shall befall thy people in the latter days." 
is the answer to the affliction of Daniel, but an an 
not yet to be accomplished. There are two wa 
judging of the thoughts of God as to His people, 
first is, to consider the condition in which God 
placed them in the beginning, — how He had fo 
and fashioned them of old : the second, is to con 
(in what state the Church will be found, or to ex 
it in reference to the case of Daniel) in what cone 
the people of God will be found at the end, when 
shall have accomplished His counsels concerning t 
when the Lord comes. 

Thus, when Daniel considered the actual cone 
of his people, they might be found to possess i 
blessings from God, and chastisements also ; bu 



87 

thoughts of the prophet, or spiritual man, would be 
either towards the state in which God had placed them, 
in the beginning, or towards that in which they will be 
found at the end. The same may be said of man in 
the abstract. If I think of my actual condition, I 
may advert back either to Adam without sin, or I may 
look forward to the resurrection state, in which 1 shall 
be hereafter, and realise in spirit either the one or the 
other 5 and compare my present state with the state of 
Adam in innocence, or of Christ in glory. So with 
the Church and the Jew. If I consider the latter, 
when first established in his privileges, or at the end, 
in the glory of the Messiah, both the one and the other 
evidences the state of imperfection which existed at 
the time of their return from the Babylonish captivity. 
Again, if I consider the Church at the beginning, I see 
the effect of the power of the Spirit of God, but I can 
also, by examining the promises of God, view the 
Church when she will be in glory with Christ ; and in 
either case her present weakness is apparent. Daniel 
did these two things. In his confession, in chap, ix, 
he had considered much more the past condition of the 
people, whilst here it is much more their future : such 
as will ensue at the conclusion of the trials of chap. xii. 

The introduction of Michael, the great prince, who 
standeth for the. people of God, necessarily leads us on 
to the occurrences at the end, according to the counsels 
of which he assures the accomplishment. The actual 
circumstances they were in, give the leading idea ; he 
begins from that time, and goes on until the time when 
the counsels of God should be brought to pass. 

We only need touch upon the historical part. The 
Persian and Grecian empires form the framework of 
the historical narrative, but the object of the prophecy, 
as may be seen, ver. 14, is, what was to take place in 
the latter days. 
^ Verse 20. " Then said he, Knowest thou ^kaxsfcss^ 



88 

I come unto thee? and now will I return to fight with 
the prince of Persia : and when I am gone forth, lo, 
the prince of Grecia shall come." These two empires 
are viewed in relation to the people of God. They 
were, as we know, the second and third monarchies. 
The first part of the history of the third or Grecian is 
given us in chap, xi, I — 4 ; these verses giving the 
connecting link of this monarchy with that of Persia. 

After its (the Grecian) establishment under the first 
powerful king, it was divided into four parts. We 
have already had some notices of it. The two 
principal kings were those of the north and south ; 
principal, not alone in regard to their power, but 
because either the one or the other had always posses- 
sion of the land of Canaan. This is why they are 
introduced here ; the history of the Holy Land, and 
of the people of God, after the establishment of the 
Greek or third monarchy, occupies the mind of the 
Spirit. Every one is agreed that as to these kings, it 
is a history of the Ptolemies and Seleucidse, and 
the history is so exact, that unbelievers have sometimes 
said that Daniel was written after the events. 

At verse 20, we come to the history of the last of 
these kings. I do not say that what is here related of 
him will be accomplished at the end ; but at all events 
he is the type of that which will take place at the end. 
It is not my object to enter into all the details of the 
historical part ; he makes an expedition against the 
king of the south, then a second, (xi, 29). I pass by 
the details also of these two kings. " At the time 
appointed he shall return, and come toward the south; 
but it shall not be as the former (expedition) nor as the 
latter." "For (ver. 30) the ships of Chittim shall 
come against him ; therefore he shall be grieved and 
shall return." 

Here the power of the west (Chittim) is introduced 
into this history of the two monarchies. The people 



89 

of God were situated between the kings of the north 
and south, exactly as lately the Holy Land became an 
object of contest between Mahomet Ali and the 
Sultan. 

Now, on the occasion of the last expedition here 
noticed, (chap, xi,) these ships of Chittim arrive on the 
scene. A power from the west mixes itself up with 
these two eastern powers, viz., the king of the north 
and the king of the south, — some power from the 
other coast of the Mediterranean, whether Italy or 
Greece. But further, we also find apostates from the 
holy covenant. Thus there are, first, Jews allowed to 
be the objects of the covenant of God, and those who 
are apostates to it ; secondly, those from the west, 
north of the Mediterranean, who enter into the pre- 
vious quarrel ; and by these new elements, the scene 
is completely changed : then in ver. 31, we have the 
last of these kings, viz., of the kings of the north, 
brought before us. "And arms shall stand on his. 
part," or more literally " forces (arms) shall rise from 
(out of ) him." The expression " shall rise from him," 
or " shall come from him," may be used in two senses. 
A king's lieutenant, — one who takes his place as com- 
mandant, or one who succeeds him in the government 
" Arms shall rise from him, and they (the arms) shall 
pollute the sanctuary of strength, (or, which is the 
fortress,) and shall take away the daily sacrifice, 
and shall place the abomination which maketh de- 
solate." 

This verse is of the highest importance, as giving 
us an anticipative figure of the last indignation. The 
Lord Jesus has drawn our particular attention to this 
in Matt, xxiv, and at ver. 21 of chap, xii, of this pro- 
phecy, the calculation, which serves to mark the time 
of blessing, sets out from the event here prefigured. 
" And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be 
taken away, and the abommatioiv\Xi^\.m^^^^R»^ s&fc 



90 

set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and 
ninety days," &c., &c. 

But to return to verse 31 of chapter xi, as to the 
" forces which shall rise ;" it will be some one who 
will come on the part of the king of the north, (I do 
not say who will be the king of the north) — some one 
will come on the part of him who will be the king of 
the north in these times, — who will introduce his forces 
— his arms into the holy place, who will defile the 
sanctuary, and who will place " the abomination which 
causeth desolation." 

As to history, this is evidently what did take place. 
It was the generals of Antiochus Epiphanes who defiled 
the sanctuary. That was by no means the accomplish- 
ment, otherwise the Lord would not have spoken of 
the event as future. A long time after the reign of this 
king, the Lord Jesus came into the world and spoke of 
this prophecy as yet to be. But we have another 
proof of the time when these things will take place ; 
a proof which is connected with the Lord's word 
in Matt. xxiv. In Dan. xii, 1, we read, "And there 
shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since 
there was a nation," <fcc. ; and the Lord Himself speaks 
exactly thus concerning the same time ; and then the 
people of God are to be delivered, an event which had 
not taken place in the time of Jesus, nor has it yet. 

It is clear that we must put aside any Christian cir- 
cumstances, because it is plainly stated that the trouble 
shall happen to the people of Daniel in the last days. 
Now we are not the people of Daniel, and these last 
days have not yet occurred to them. The verse speaks 
of arms — forces which come from this king, and which 
defile the sanctuary, take away the daily sacrifice, and 
place the abomination which causeth desolation. 

All this, while a most important pre-figuring of the 
results of the last days, in more than one particular, 
was literally accomplished in Antiochus Epiphaues, 



91 

the king of the north. Here for the moment we 
drop these kings, and the prophet proceeds with the 
general history. Verses 82, 33, " And such as do 
wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by 
flatteries." 

The king of the north " will corrupt those who do 
wickedly against (or as to) the covenant,*' viz., those 
Jews who are not true to Jewish hopes ; he will incite 
them to apostacy ; for this is the force of the word 
rendered by " he will corrupt," " but the people that 
do know their God, shall be strong and do exploits." 
Here we have a division of Jews into true and false, 
and the developement of good and evil. But we must 
note, that ver. 33, " they that understand among the 
people shall instruct many/' are the same class as 
those spoken of, chap, xii, 3, 10, and also xi, 85 ; they 
are the maskilims, or persons instructed in the mind of 
God, and are a class of persons apart. Thus, at the 
end, also, there will be a remnant of Jews, not only 
those who are spared in general, but persons instructed 
in the mind of God ; and we find the same specially 
distinguished in Isaiah lxv, lxvi, besides those who 
will escape the judgment executed against the wicked 
ones. These understanding ones among the people 
(ver. 33) shall teach the multitude, (the many, the 
mass,) or will give instruction to them. I translate 
the Hebrew word into "the multitude" (the mass) 
because the word many of the text, has the article 
in Hebrew, as if one said the many ; and the article, 
in my judgment, throughout these chapters, is spe- 
cial, (x) 

" Yet they shall fall by the sword and by flame, by 
captivity and by spoil, many days." Such is the con- 
dition of the people. The maskilim are noticed in 
ver. 35, " Now when they shall fall, they shall be 

(x) The passages [found with the article are ix, 27 ; xi, 33, 
39 ; xii, 3. In chap, xi, 34, 44 ; and xii, 4, 10, it is not so. 



92 

holpen with a little help : but many shall cleave to 
them with flatteries. And some of them of under- 
standing shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and to 
make them white, even to the time of the end : because 
it is yet for a time appointed." The trial of faith will 
be through them, for as faithful Jews, one should have 
supposed, that such as these might surely count on the 
help of God ; for they have been encouraging others 
to " trust in the Lord." Nevertheless, some of these 
are to fall, and then, unless faith is very strongV the 
others will say, " Where is their God ?" as in Psalms 
xlii, xliii, which express, in the language of the Spirit 
of Christ, the anguish of the remnant, of whom their 
enemies say, " Where is their God ?'(y) And when 
these understanding ones fall, who had hope in Him, 
the unbelievers will say, there is no intervention of 
God in their behalf; but these judgments being 
appointed, the people are left, speaking generally, 
throughout the period, to go through them, and to 
undergo the consequence of their position. 

Now Christ, in Matt, xxiv, speaks of these times as 
accomplished, according to Dan. xii, in the last days. 
First in general of the things (taking, as an occasion, 
His announcement of the destruction of the Temple) 
which were to take place after His death ; He speaks 
first of these times in general, and then gives, as the 
starting point of the last sorrows, the similar event, 
viz., the moment when the times and the law are 
delivered into the hand of the little horn, — of the 
king who, during 1260 days, does "his own will;" — 
the moment, namely, when the abomination of desola- 
tion is set up in the holy place : an event under and 
after Antiochus with the Roman dominion which 
marks the introduction of the final desolation of 
Jerusalem. 

(j/) Compare the case of our blessed Lord on the cross. 



93 

After this general history of the etate of the Jewsy 
the idolatrous and wicked king is introduced, in ver. 
36. " And the king shall do according to his will ; 
and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself ahove 
every God," &c. Ver. 37, " Neither shall he regard 
the God of his fathers, nor the desire of women," that 
is, the Messiah who had been promised, " nor regard 
any God: for he shall magnify himself above all." 
This is the wicked one. Ver. 38, " But in hia 
estate (z) shall he honour the God of forces ;" viz., 
in the place of the true God he shall honour Mahuzzim 
for God — some idolatry ; for Mahuzzim signifies 
fortresses, or high places fortified. There is probably 
some connection between this and the forces of war 
upon which the king reckons. " And a God whom his 
fathers knew not shall he honour with gold," &c. It 
is to some invention of a god that he does this. Ver. 
38, 39, "Thus shall he do in the most strongholds (Mu- 
huzzim) with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge 
and increase with glory : and he shall cause them to 
rule over many (the many), and shall divide the land 
for gain." 

A difficulty here presents itself; "he shall cause 
them to rule over the many." Who are they whom 
he shall cause to rule ? It appears that he will 
establish certain powers in connection with these false 
gods, and he will be there with these Mahuzzim in 
these fortresses, and then it will be the instruments of 
his power, who will join themselves to him ; he will 
make them (the instruments) rule over the mass of 
Jews, and he will divide their land into lots, as a re- 
compense. This seems to be, so far, the history of 
this king. 

It is remarkable how he is introduced quite sud- 

(z) Rendered by the author "in his place," or "instead.** — 
Translator. 



94 

denly. We must ever remember that when the prophet 
is occupied with the purposes of God towards His 
people at " the end of the indignation," it is in con- 
nection with the kings of the north and south, and 
with the land of Palestine, His own land, which lies 
between them ; and that in the latter day, when the 
people will be under the divine judgments in that very 
land, there will be a small faithful remnant, who hold 
fast by the Holy Covenant, when the great mass are 
ready to apostatize. This is the subject which the 
Spirit brings forward ; and inasmuch as the wicked 
one, this king, will be found in these countries, he is 
introduced as mixed up with these kings of the north 
and south. 

In the New Testament, the sources of wickedness 
are quite different ; for the Spirit of God there con- 
siders the moral condition of Christendom, when the 
apostacy arises, and in consequence, the wicked one is 
pourtrayed as a public apostate ; but evidently it is the 
same person. In chap, vii (a) we saw the western 
power, viz., head of the last monarchy, — the little horn 
of the fourth beast, whilst here the king is seen who 
has to do geographically with the Eastern countries, 
and is among the Jewish people. I shall quote two 
other passages where this idea of the king is found. 
Observe, he is not called the king of the north, though 
geographically within his territory; he is called the 
king, because in the eyes of the prophet he holds that 
position. He it is, who exalts himself and pretends to 
be the king and the pastor of the people of God : a 
pretender, and a bad one, to these two offices : but as 
such he will present himself, and he is so called in Isa. 
xxx, 33 : " Yea, for the king it is prepared." Consult 
also Isa. lvii, 9; "Thou wentest to the king with 

(a) The question relative to the two beasts of Rev. ziii would 
recur here. 



95 

ointment." This passage speaks of the condition of 
the Jews, and of the accusations of God against them. 
Both these portions touch upon the history of the 
Antichrist after he has become king. 

There is one more observation needed, that we may 
be able to link this remarkable parenthesis (in which 
the king is introduced on account of his connection 
with the kings of the north and south) with the rest 
of the chapter; it is that from ver. 21 to the end of 
ver. 35, the prophet is always speaking of the same 
person, whilst from ver. 36 to the end of ver. 39, we 
have the history of this extraordinary king himself. 
These last verses designate the Antichrist properly; 
and my opinion is, that from ver. 21 to the end of ver. 
35, it is the king of the north, but who is also the type 
of Antichrist. I mention this, because many persons 
who have studied the chapter find great difficulty in 
deciding whether the history of the Antichrist begins 
at ver. 21 or at ver. 36. It is the same person from 
ver. 21 to ver. 35 ; and he was a type of Antichrist, 
even Antiochus Epiphanes. 

The Spirit of God makes no mention of those who 
followed him ; it was he who furnished the typical 
circumstances, and which necessarily, therefore, par- 
tially answered to the prophecy. But in verse 36, 
the Spirit speaks of the Antichrist himself, " the king 
shall do according to his will;" before this, I judge, 
they are typical circumstances which apply to Anti- 
christ. 

I hope we understand, that, although we are a part 
of the fourth monarchy (materially not spiritually), 
these prophecies relate immediately and simply to the 
Jewish people, — the people of Daniel in the latter 
days. The Antichrist is the link between this history 
and ours ; for it is the spirit of the apostacy described in 
2 Thessalonians, which is the effective source of the 
conduct of this last king, here presented to us> v^Vsjs* 



96 

connection with the Jews in the East ; but who, 
morally speaking, is allied with those who have aban- 
doned Christianity, or the light now existing. He is 
found allied to the Jews at the beginning of his con- 
nection with them ; afterwards he will deny them, and 
set up himself as God. 

May God preserve us from all trace and appearance 
of that spirit which will shew itself in these days in 
opposition, whether against the Almighty and Most 
High God, or against the Lord Jesus, the Prince of 
princes. May He keep us in humility of heart, 
giving our affections to the Lord Jesus ; so shall we 
be safe. If we are content to be nothing and Jesus 
everything, we shall be guarded by Him, for Him, and 
for ever. 



EIGHTH LECTURE. 
Chap. XI, 36 j XII, 1,2* 



We have already said something in general upon this 
king ;* we have spoken of him in connection with what 
went before ; but, independant of circumstances, as a 
personage, he is of sufficient importance for us to 
notice him more fully. It is generally admitted that 
he is the same as is called Antichrist, the wicked one, 
but under a special character, as I mentioned towards 
the close of the last lecture ; that is, in connection with 
the Jews, and in the land which is an object of dispute 
between the king of the north and the king of the south. 
And, in fact, this wicked one will unite in his own 
person, every feature of iniquity. He will be a blas- 
phemer against the true God — a persecutor of the 
saints — the hea*d of the apostacy — and he will encou- 
rage idolatry ; in fine, it is " the king who shall do 
according to his will." 

It is impossible to mistake the character of the per- 
son mentioned in 2 Thess. ii, " shewing himself that 
he is God ;" and it would be well if we referred to a 
few passages, which mention the different characters 
attributed to him, beginning with this chapter of 
Daniel. 

The first trait is, that he is in Palestine, in the land 
of the heirs of the holy covenant, %svi ra&& Xsh&mSBl 



98 

and magnifies himself above every god, whether false 
or true. In spite of this, he is to prosper " till the 
indignation be accomplished :" G-od permits it, because 
it is the time of His indignation against the Jews, 
chap, viii, 19. This indignation is the period spoken 
of in Isaiah x, 5, 24, 25, "For yet a very little while 
and the indignation shall cease :" there is an indigna- 
tion with a certain limit. It is not said that the time 
of this king is the period of the indignation, but it is 
a time during which God does not interfere to deliver 
Israel. He allows the trial to go on, and Israel to 
suffer the effects of it; and so Antichrist prospers 
until the indignation is accomplished. It is not said, 
that when the indignation is over, Israel will be at 
once re-established in the enjoyment of all her pro- 
mises ; but Christ can then act for Israel, instead of 
leaving her under the indignation. He will yet have, 
to subject the nations to the exercise of His royal 
power, in the midst of His earthly people. 

Verse 37. " Neither shall he regard the god of his 
fathers . ... for he shall magnify himself above all." 
This is a strong feature of the pride of man ; "he mag- 
nifies himself above all." He would efface every idea 
of the true God ; he is indifferent whether about the 
real religion of the heart, or the religion of his 
fathers; he dislikes even the name of Christ (called 
here "the desire of women"); he is even against 
religious customs, and religious nationality ; he has no 
respect for any God. But arrived at this point, it is 
necessary to keep the people in restraint, and he needs 
instruments for this, as well as his gods, mahuzzim 
(fortresses), some species of idolatry which he intro- 
duces when he has denied every god. This idolatry 
will be connected with the interests of those who 
govern ; he will cause them to rule over many {the 
many, the mass), viz., the people of Israel, and the 
country will be divided among his chiefs. So far the 
royal and Judaic history of thia \l\b$. 



99 

We proceed with passages which represent him 
under other points of view. If, as I suppose, he is the 
second beast of Rev. xiii, he will be found in intimate 
connection with the little horn of Dan. viii, where the 
little horn of the fourth beast is described, and, in the 
same chapter, the period determined for the end of the 
persecution of the saints, " until the Ancient of Days 
came," ver. 22, as distinct from the time when He sat 
upon the throne, ver. 9. Thus Christ comes, and "the 
judgment is given to the saints of the most High," or 
"of the high places," and "the time came that the 
saints possessed the kingdom." These passages deter- 
mine the general end of the war which the little horn 
wages against the saints. In the last, it is not said, 
" the saints of the high places." In fact, three things 
are marked, viz., the coming of the Ancient of Days ; 
the judgment given to the saints of the high places ; 
and the time when the saints shall take the kingdom. 

We turn now to certain portions in the New Testa- 
ment, which again speak of this period and of the 
antichristian power of evil under other aspects, just 
as we may behold Christ under different aspects. In 
the Epistle to the Thessalanions the "man of sin" is 
described as a person, the result of the apostacy which 
shall invade Christendom ; " Now we beseech you, 
brethren, that ye be not soon shaken .... except there 
come a falling away first." 2 Thess. ii, 3. 

The first thing is the apostacy, not of the Jews 
(this we have seen in Daniel), but of Christendom, 
and it will necessarily happen before the execution of 
the judgment, — before the day of Christ ; as must also 
the appearance of the "man of sin," who is clearly 
not the apostacy itself, but, I judge, follows and winds 
it up. The Apostle marks the two events before the 
judgment ; viz., the coming in of the apostacy, and the 
revelation of the man of sin — the son of perdition : 
an expression which signifies that he uq&&«&«& ^sw 



100 , 

name, by bis nature, bis character, and bis acts, "who 
opposes and exalts himself against all that is called 
God, or is worshipped." Read to verse 10. 

This is his character in connection with Christendom, 
and Christendom in connection with him. First of 
all, there was a mystery of iniquity, which was com- 
mencing in the times of the apostles, which was to 
continue for a certain time, afterwards an apostacy 
would follow, and then the revelation of the wicked 
one. (b) The Lord will destroy him " with the bright- 
ness of His coming n (the manifestation of His pre- 
sence). But there is something else. The New Testament 
gives us the moral features of the appearance of this 
wicked one, viz., that it is according to the power of 
Satan, and what makes these verses remarkable is, 
that the same words which are used to describe the 
manifestations of this power of Satan, are employed 
speaking of the proof of the mission of Jesus Christ 
as Messiah. Acts ii, 22. 

There are two remarkable circumstances ; viz., that 
the coming of Antichrist is spoken of just as the 
coming of Christ, and a mystery of iniquity, as well 
as a mystery of godliness. As the Son of Man is to 
come, so also will the Antichrist come ; and his coming 
will be after the power of Satan : he will perform 
lying miracles, — it will not be merely a set of principles 
at work ; the effect will be mighty in seducing those 
who perish. A positive power of error comes in, 
because men "received not the love of the truth." 
" God shall send them strong delusion .... for they 
had pleasure in unrighteousness. 1 ' It is a judicial 
blinding. 

It is said also in Isaiah, "Make the heart of this 
people fat." After a period of long-suffering on the 

(b) There is much mention made of this wicked one in the 
Psalms. 



101 

part of God, blindness happened to the Jews, when 
they rejected the Messiah : and when patience has had 
its perfect work, they will yet be delivered over to a 
spirit of idolatry — that spirit which shall, meanwhile, 
have sought out seven spirits more wicked than himself, 
and the last state of that people shall be worse than 
the first. And so when those who call themselves 
Christians, have obstinately refused to receive the 
truth, although it has been proposed to them, a positive 
and special blindness shall come upon them from God, 
" that they all might be damned who believed not the 
truth;' (c) 

We continue our history of this king from Rev. xii. 
There the dragon is seen (who is the devil or Satan, 
and seduces the whole world) cast out of heaven, 
ver. 10, 12. This malicious power no longer occupies 
the heavenly places (d); but when this occurs, it will 
be a time of fearful woe to the earth. It is the begin- 
ning of his " great wrath, because he knoweth that he 
hath but a short time." 

After this we have a vision of the woman, who " is 
nourished for a time, times, and half a time." In other 
words, as soon as Satan is cast out of heaven, a period 
of three and a half years will elapse before he is judged 
on earth ; accordingly, in chap, xiii, we find that the 
dragon gives the beast his power, throne, and great 
authority, — this beast, of whom we read in the same 
chapter, that " power was given him to continue forty 
and two months." He is found with the same charac- 
teristics as those before mentioned, only under more 
detailed historical circumstances.. "And there was 
given unto him a mouth speaking great things and 
blasphemies" (ver. 5). <4 And he opened his mouth 

(c) Man, under the light of creation, Rom. i; the Jews* 
Isaiah vi ; and Christendom, 2 Thess. ii, arrive at the same end. 

(d) This power in heavenly places (Eph. vi), against which 
we now wrestle, consequently is no longrc xJaax^ 



102 

in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, 
and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven." 
Satan could no longer himself meddle with heaven, 
and therefore he sets on the beast against those who 
dwell there: also "it was given unto him to make 
war with the saints (on the earth), and to overcome 
them ; and power was given him over all kindreds and 
tongues and nations " (ver. 6, 7). 

There is a fact here worth observing — it is a kind of 
imitation of the ways of God. As the Father hath 
given all power to the risen Son, and the Holy Spirit 
exercises all the power of Christ before Him, so Satan 
imitates the same thing in evil. The dragon will give 
his throne to the beast ; and remark what is said of 
the character under which he will be worshipped, 
" And I saw one of his heads, as it were, wounded to 
death, and his deadly wound was healed." It is when 
this wound is healed, — when there shall be a kind of 
resurrection (not personal, but the power of the beast 
raised up again), that all the world will wonder after 
the beast, and the second beast will exercise all the 
power of the first beast before him. 

Verse 11. " And I beheld another beast coming up 
out of the earth " . . . . which " causeth the earth and 
them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, 
whose deadly wound was healed." We have here a 
power which pretends to be that of Christ, not His 
heavenly power, but which pretends to be like Christ 
on the earth ; but, in fact, an ear which could hear 
would discover it to be that of the Dragon himself. 
As Pharaoh said to Joseph, " Only in the throne will 
I be greater than thou," so this second beast will exer- 
cise all the power of the first beast before him, .... 
this second beast which speaks like a dragon, whilst it 
has horns like a lamb. Ver. 13, 14. "And he doeth 
great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from 
heaven .... and deceiveth them that dwell on the 



103 

earth." These verses speak of what is done before (in 
the presence of) and in sustaining this power of the 
first beast ; the second beast causes him to be wor- 
shipped, and an image to be made to him, and he seduces 
them that dwell on the earth. 

This second beast is again mentioned in Rev. xix, 
under the designation of the false prophet. Here 
again, as the Spirit of the Father speaking in the 
disciples, acted for the glory of Christ ; so this beast, 
here called " the false prophet/* speaks the language 
of the Dragon, and supports the glory of the last beast. 
It will be a spirit, zealous for idolatry, and who will 
even execute judgment on the earth, as the prophets ere 
now, have done. 

In the Revelation we find the connection of the first 
beast with Babylon, which is yet another thing. In 
chap, xvii, 1, 3, it is said, "I will shew thee the judg- 
ment of the great whore .... and I saw a woman sit 
upon a scarlet coloured beast .... having seven heads 
and ten horns." Verse. 8. " The beast which thou 
sawest was, and is not .... yet is" — this is a kind of 
death and resurrection. When it appears for the last 
time, it has a devilish character, it comes out of the 
pit, and then is destroyed. " And they that dwell on 
the earth shall wonder, when they behold the beast 
that was and is not, and yet is :" or rather " and it is 
there." It is a coming (e) of this beast. When the 
world beholds this appearance of the beast, it is 
astonished. There is another circumstance : " And 
the beast (ver. 1 1) that was and is not, even he is the 
eighth (king) and is of the seven, and goeth into 
perdition. And the ten horns which thou sawest are 
ten kings, which have received no kingdom as yet; 
but receive power as kings one hour with the beast." 
An event which has not yet occurred. 

O) AU the best editions of the Greek Testament employ 
here, the word elsewhere used for the * coming* of Cbx\*V 



104 

We perceive that these kings will exist at the same 
time with the beast. Three of them will fall (see Dan. 
vii), but the seven others will continue. The beast 
rules and unites in a single body the power of these 
kings ; but the kings exist ; it will be a kind of con- 
federation, in which each horn acts royally in his own 
sphere, but gives his power to the beast, who blasphemes 
against God. " For God hath put in their hearts to 
fulfil his will, and to agree, and give their kingdom 
unto the beaSt, until the words of God shall be ful- 
filled." (Rev. xvii, 17). 

Another feature in his character is, "that the ten 
horns (ver. 16) ... . shall hate the whore," who for a 
long while ruled the beast. We remember in Dan. vii, 
that among the ten horns another arose, who got all the 
power of the beast, who, in fact, morally becomes the 
beast, and causes three of the horns to fall before him. 
This one in the eyes of Daniel, and in fact, in his con*, 
duct, will be the beast. This horn that will have the 
dominion, will control, and give its tone to everything. 
Having touched upon the passages which refer to this 
period, we must still remember that it is in Palestine, 
and viewed personally, that we have to do with Anti- 
christ, the king, here. 

But to continue with Daniel xi. Verse 40. " And 
at the time of the end shall the king of the south push 
at him :" ver. 41, "he shall enter also into the glorious 
land." This is the moment when God begins to act. 
Both the kings of the north and south, in their same 
geographical position, are at war with this king, " And 
the king of the north shall come against him like a 
whirlwind." This king of the north seems to be a 
very prominent power, and he possesses the territory 
of the ancient kings of Syria ; my judgment is, that 
the rest of the chapter applies to him ; although, 
formerly, I thought it applied to the king ; but now I 
judge it applies to the king of the north. Daniel now 



105 

continues the thread of tjie history ; (which had been 
interrupted by the. notices, concerning the king ;) that 
is, he resumes that of the Jews, in connection with 
the kings of the north and south ; and there is a fact 
which confirms me in the opinion of this invasion 
(ver. 41) being that of the king of the north; viz., 
" he shall enter into the glorious land :" now if it is a 
question of " the king," he is already there. 

Verse 41. "And many countries shall be over- 
thrown : but these shall escape out of his hand, even 
Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of 
Amnion." This is a circumstance not to be omitted, 
because it demonstrates the exactitude of the written 
word : for in Isaiah xi, 13, you will find that these 
three powers which escape the king of the north, are 
in existence still later : " Ephraim shall not envy 
Jndah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim ; but they 
shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines towards 
the west .... they shall lay their hand upon Edom 
and Moab, and the children of Ammon shall obey 
them." Ver. 42. "He shall stretch forth his hand 
also upon the countries ; and the land of Egypt shall 
not escape ;" an announcement that the king of the 
south loses his kingdom. See Isaiah xi, 15. 

Verses 43, 44. " But he shall have power over the 
treasures of gold and silver, and over all the precious 

things of Egypt But tidings out of the' east 

* and out of the north shall trouble him, therefore he 
shall go forth with great fury, ..... yet he shall 
come to his end and none shall help him." This is the 
end of the king of the north. 

I add a general idea of chap, xii, to shew the con- 
nection. Ver. 1. " And at that time shall Michael 
stand up, the great prince which standeth for the 
children of thy people." Here is special reference to 
the Jews, in whom Daniel was so much interested, 
and on whose account he had fasted and mourned fat 



106 

three full weeks. After having described the events 
pertaining to the kings of the north and south, the 
angel says, notwithstanding all these desolating 
scenes, Michael shall stand up for the children of thy 
people. Nevertheless, "there shall be a time of 
trouble, such as never was since there was a nation." 
This is exactly what is announced in Matt, xxiv, as to 
take place in Judea. " When ye therefore shall see 
the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the 
prophet," &c, ver. 15 — 21. It is clear that this can- 
not happen twice ; it is the time of Israel's deliver- 
ance, " and at that time thy people shall be delivered," 
only it is confined to •* every one that is found written 
in the book." 

One could not fail to remark, while reading the 
chapters of which I have given the abridgement in the 
two preceding lectures, the character of this terrible 
personage of the last days. The' king of the north is 
fearful enough, as a conqueror, and pillaging invader ; 
but this king is spoken of as making war against God; 
it is not merely a desire of conquest, but of open 
opposition to God and the Lamb. It is the effectual 
power of Satan and of a lie ; it is blasphemy, — it is 
persecution. One feels it to be everything the most 
terrible in human hatred, animated by the power of 
Satan fallen from heaven, and who establishes his 
throne upon earth, against the God of heaven and the 
Lamb. The appearing of this wicked one is the most 
important point in these chapters, whether as the 
expression of the iniquity of the Jews and Christen^ 
dom, or as that of the pride of man. 



NINTH LECTURE. 
Chap. XII, 2—13. 



In reading this chapter, one is struck with the parti- 
cular character of .the book, and more especially, with 
the care which God evinces to comfort, or rather to 
shew the most entire sympathy with the remnant, in 
the afflicting circumstances in which they are found. 

It is certain that Daniel still remained in captivity 
at Babylon, (which, indeed, it appears he never left,) 
when the remnant had returned to Jerusalem. So that 
typically he far more represents the state of the people 
in captivity under the Gentiles, than the prophet 
of the people, when God was acknowledging them. (/) 

It is quite true that the remnant will escape at last ; 
but this Daniel saw afar off. He represents specially 
the suffering remnant, and the sympathies of God 
with them. We find in other prophets, as Isaiah and 
Zechariah, magnificent promises for this remnant to 
whom the Lord will reveal Himself, when Christ has 
appeared : He shall make " the house of Judea as his 

(/) It is worthy of remark, that in the prophets of the first 
captivity, God by the Spirit, never calls Israel •• my people :" 
He declares they shall be, and the Spirit remains among them 
as when they came up out of Egypt ; but " Loammi" remains 
unrccalled. 



108 

goodly horse in the battle," and "he that is feeble 
among them shall be as David." Zech. x, 3 ; xii, 8. 
There we see the power of God in manifestation 
among the people at Jerusalem ; but it is not so in 
Daniel. The last thing we see here relative to Jeru- 
salem, is that the king of the north " plants his taber- 
nacles in the glorious holy mountain." There is no 
detail in this book of the subsequent full and remark- 
able deliverance ; but it is rather occupied with the 
Jewish remnant in the land, beaten by the tempest of 
the Gentile monarchies. 

Upon the other hand, there is still the sympathy of 
God with them ; but He is not with His people after 
an evident manner; for they are still in captivity; and 
it is rather an intervention of providence, in a hidden 
way, which delivers and secures, in the midst of trials 
and difficulties. Compare Ps. xliv, 10, 11, where this 
state of things is described. 

Daniel xii, 1. "And at that time shall Michael 
stand up," &c. ; he appears to be the prince of the 
angels, or the archangel. It is a custom to speak of 
archangels, but the Word of God mentions only one, 
the chief of the angels. I am silent as to who it is, 
because the Scripture is ; but however this may be, 
the intervention is a providential angelic one. Michael 
is there, in relationship with the people of Israel. By 
this passage we learn who it is that will stand for the 
children of Daniel's people, as well as the excellency 
of this angelic power which God in His providence 
employs. "Who standeth for the children of thy 
people." It is a time of trouble, as we have seen, and 
herein consists the difference of God's acting, as I have 
just considered it. There is now a providence of God, 
which is a concealed government ; but hereafter there 
will be a manifest and public rule by Christ, when 
every thing will appear, — a government direct from 
God. There is now a government of arrangement by 



109 

"which all things are made to u work together for good 
to them that love God," and for the accomplishment of 
His purposes ; but this action is usually a concealed 
one. In Esther we have a remarkable instance. The 
name of God is not found in the book ; the Spirit has 
wished to shew, that whilst the Jews were in captivity 
God had His eyes upon them ; but that He acted in a 
hidden manner, and would not name Himself in their 
midst. 

In the time of Michael it will be a time of distress 
This is the second thought in the chapter, and it is the 
' same in Jeremiah xxx, 7. There could be but one 
such time, — none is to be like it, — " For the day of 
the Lord is great and very terrible; and who can 
abide it ?" Joel ii, 11. Nevertheless it is the day of 
deliverance for Israel. "Strangers shall no more 
serve themselves of him : but they shall serve the 
Lord their God, and David their king," (Christ) .... 
"but I will not leave thee altogether unpunished." 
Jer. xxx, 8, 9, 11. These promises have evidently 
never yet had their fulfilment ; for it will be a final 
deliverance. 

The same time is alluded to in Matt, xxiv, 21. 
" For there shall be great tribulation .... and except 
those days should be shortened, there should no flesh 
be saved," <fec., &c. This is the terrible distress which 
is to come upon Israel at the last. Consult also Mark 
xiii, 19, for the same account It all occurs at Jeru- 
salem, where the abomination of desolation will be set 
up, or in its vicinity. In Luke xxi, 22, 24, there is a 
certain difference, as we shall see presently. 

Daniel xii, 1. "At that time thy people shall be 
delivered, every one that shall be found written in the 
book." These are the elect : the days are shortened 
on their account, otherwise no flesh would be saved. 
Jerusalem would have been as Sodom or as Gomorrah, 
except the Lord had left a very small ?^m\tf^%^^vv\ 
Bom. ix. 



110 

Verse 2. " And many of them that sleep in the 
dust of the earth shall awake; some to everlasting life, 
and some to shame and everlasting contempt. The 
angel, as it appears to me, speaks in this place of the 
deliverance of the people brought back from among 
the Gentiles. " Many of them," &c. ; it is only a 
question of the people of Daniel, (tn) No doubt 
jndgments will fall upon the Gentiles, but in speaking 
of those with whom God is more immediately occupied, 
as the object of His thoughts, the people of Daniel are 
only intended. I recall to your minds Dan. x, 14, 
" For I am come to make thee understand what shall 
befall thy people in the latter days." The fulfilment 
of this declaration is taken up in chap, x, xi, xii. 
" Many of them which sleep," namely, a multitude of 
Jews in general, but not all, will appear on the scene.; 
as for some, it will be " to everlasting life,'* and as to 
others, " to shame and everlasting contempt," 

The expression, " dust of the earth," is common in 
the writings of the prophets, when a person is in 
captivity and overwhelmed, as in Isaiah xxvi, 11. 
In pronouncing judgment upon the nations, the pro* 
phet says, "They are dead (those who despised the 
Jews, "other lords besides thee have had dominion 
over us,") they are deceased .... therefore thou hast 
visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory 
to perish." But in ver. 19, speaking of the Jews, 

(m) It seems to me that these words are added to complete 
the picture : for the principal part of the prophecy is occupied 
with the details of that part of the people who are found in 
the land when the wicked one shall be in the exercise of his 
terrible and malicious power. But in this verse the lot Of 
those who 'had been lost and were to be gathered from among 
the nations, is given to us. These only enter as accessory into 
the scheme of the prophecy : this portion of the people having 
been without the limits of the prophecy, not having entered 
into the land to figure as the Jewish people. It is for this 
reason that they are represented as '* sleeping in the dost of 
dearth" 



Ill 

"thy dead men shall live, (together with) my dead 
body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell 
in dust : for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the 
earth shall cast out her dead/' Here is the resurrection 
of the Jew. t'Come, my people, enter into thy 
chambers .... hide thyself, as it were, for a little 
moment, until the indignation be overpast/* — this same 
indignation of which we have been speaking, ver. 21, 
"For behold, the Lord cometh out of his place, to; 
punish the inhabitants of the earth." 

God had been, so to speak, concealed ; He had 
allowed the evil to go on : but, dear friends, what a 
thought ! Think of God coming out of His place ! 
When we consider our inability to make head against 
wickedness, — how Christians tremble at the sight of 
the increase of evil, hardly knowing what to do ; 
while they see, on the one hand, the proud self-will of 
man, and on the other this unexpected and inexplicable 
tendency to superstition — the powers of darkness 
under this form having invaded even countries which 
were delivered from it, and who are trembling at it ; 
I say, then, it is precious, in face of all this, to know 
that God will come. out of His place. True, it will be 
in anger for the moment, — in anger against the 
wickedness, and to put it away ; but also, that good 
may be before His face, and before our eyes who are 
fatigued with what we behold. On this account we 
can bear the idea of judgment, and even cry, " How 
long !" And oh, how happy to think of an indigna- 
tion which will change active evil into rest, blessing, 
peace, liberty and freedom from the yoke of sin, as 
soon as the Lord Jesus shall have executed His judg- 
ment! We are not now speaking of the Church, 
(although this is the most precious part,) but of this 
poor world labouring under the yoke of Satan. For 
even when good has been effected, evil gains ground 
on all sides. 



112 

The apostle could well say, " The whole creation 
groaneth," &c. We understand — we who know the 
secret of the goodness of God — that it groans; "ourselves 
also, which have the firstfruits of the Spirit," must 
" groan within ourselves," unless we should withdraw 
ourselves from theloveof God, and from the groanings of 
the Spirit within us. And the more we observe the pro- 
gress of evil, the more we shall feel the need of this indig- 
nation of God, — that His power maybe felt in executing 
judgment in this world: and if faith is strong in our 
hearts, it will engage us in helping out, by the activity 
of love, all those we can from this necessary judgment, 
whether this fearful act is likely to fall on them, owing 
to the natural energy of sin in their hearts, or from 
the superstitions and errors to which they are attached 
by education ; for it will fall upon whatever seduces 
the heart, as it is said, " Come out of her, my people, 
that ye be not partaker of her sins," &c, Rev. xviii. 
We see then, that it is the judgment which will take 
away the power of evil, and for this it i9, that the 
appeal is made to the saints, &c, in the Apocalypse, to 
rejoice in the destruction of Babylon. It will be a 
terrible judgment ; but, until it happens, a poison, a 
venom, corrupts every thing, when even one's own 
self is withdrawn from it. 

I have been led into this digression on the subject 
of the judgment of God, on account of the ending of 
Isaiah xxvi, which I quoted, and to explain the appli- 
cation of the resurrection to the Jewish people. I 
will mention another passage in Ezekiel xxxvii, that 
* of the dry bones, which will help you to understand 
this point. It is often quoted as having reference to 
souls ; and, morally, no doubt, the same effect happens 
to those who are quickened of God ; but the only 
subject of the chapter, is the nation of Israel, and not 
at- all souls. " Son of man, (ver. 11) these bones are 
the whole house of Israel. Behold they say (in cap- 



113 

tivity) our bones are dried." This is not what dead 

souls say ; ** therefore (ver. 12) prophesy thus 

saith the Lord God, Behold, O my people, I will open 
your graves, and cause you to come up out of your 
graves, and bring you into the land of Israel." The 
Israelites, when they return, are treated as if they had 
been buried among the nations. " Then shall ye know- 
that I am the Lord." It would be sad to remain 
there in the land, if it was a literal resurrection ; for 
the hope of those who are literally raised is far 
higher. 

The prophet continues with the history of the two 
sticks, Judah and Israel, which are to become one, 
when " one king shall be king to them all/' Ezek. 
xxxvii, 22. Nothing can be clearer than that the sub- 
ject of the chapter is the deliverance and blessing of 
Israel by Jesus Christ. Daniel xii also treats of 
Israel coming out of the graves — buried among the 
Gentiles ; but it omits the final result under Christ. 
Many, it says, shall awake, not all, and of these some 
shall be for everlasting contempt, as some will be for 
eternal life. This part is added, as I said before, 
because the main concern of the prophecy was with 
the Holy Land and the Jews residing there. But 
other Jews will be manifested in the times which 
precede the final deliverance of Israel ; and the Spirit 
of God, consequently, speaks of these latter in this 
passage. 

The contents of these first verses apply in their 
results to the Jewish remnant, whose deliverance 
terminates that time of distress during which Michael 
stood fast, and delineates all that takes place during 
that period. It is the deliverance of the remnant and 
that of the people, — all those written in the book. 

But besides, among those who are delivered, will be 
some who will be in the front of the battle, as being 
occupied with the things of God, and who will di&c&rcw 



114 

the times : thus " And they that he wise shall shine 
as the brightness of the firmament ; and they that tarn 
many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever." 
If you have paid attention to the preceding chapter, 
you will recognise these wise ones : they are a rem- 
nant who have been often mentioned 3 as in chap, xi, 
35, " and some of them of understanding," &c : ver. 
33 also, " they that understand,* Maschilim. It will 
be an enlightened remnant : persons who will discern 
the times, and who will occupy themselves with the 
welfare of the mass of the people, and that, faithfully, 
according to the light they will possess. " And they 
that turn (the) many to righteousness; 9 * (or rather, 
" instructed the many in righteousness,* 9 this was the 
object of their labours.) There is no thought about 
evangelising, nor of those who are blessed through 
evangelising. The prophet is speaking solely of those 
Jews who shall be engaged in the instruction of the 
mass of the people, with a view of withdrawing them 
from the deceitful ways of Antichrist, and from all the 
evil which he will carry on. Those who have thus 
laboured among the many, will " shine as the stars for 
ever and ever :" this special remnant is mentioned, as 
before said, in Isaiah lxv, lxvi. (») These are the 
closing circumstances of the remnant ; viz., this time 
of distress ; the people delivered, that is, the remnant ; 
many who were buried, as it were, among the nations, 
who shall awake, whether for good or evil ; and the 
special lot of the understanding ones. 

There is still, at the end of the chapter, the reply to 
the question of Daniel, as to the duration of these 
things, of which the solution, for the Jews, was con- 
cealed until the time of the end. 

We are in the time of the end, for it is to be hoped 
that all will soon finish ; but, in another sense, the 

(*) Some little doabt as been thrown on my mind as to this. 



115 

Church is always in the time of the end ; because the 
Church does not belong to the present age; as it is 
said, 1 John ii, 18, "As ye have heard that Antichrist 
shall come, even now are there many Antichrists; 
whereby we know that it is the last time." Now, 
seeing this, " they that be wise/' will apply morally to 
the Church, so far as she preserves the place which 
the Word of God gives her, although she is not 
the direct object of the prophecy. The Church is 
supposed to know that the last days are arrived, and 
that the prophetic warnings are important, in order 
that that day overtake us not as a thief; for to be 
overtaken is not the proper portion of the Church. 
Compare 1 Thess. v, 4, &&, and Rev. iii, 3. And 
hence also in the Apocalypse (feeble as we are in the 
comprehension of it) it is written, "Seal not the 
sayings of the prophecy of this book, for the time is 
at hand. What is said to Daniel is exactly the reverse 
of the position of the Church, which, having an unction 
from the Holy One, knows all things ; but in Daniel it 
is said, " shut up the book, and seal the words, till the 
time of the end." 

Verses 7, 9, 10. " And when he shall have accom- 
plished to scatter the power of the holy people, all 
these things shall be finished. And I heard but I 

understood not And he said .... the words 

are closed and sealed up until the time of the end . . . 
but the wise shall understand." Now, so to speak, the 
Church is the faithful remnant, for the Church com- 
menced with the understanding remnant of the Jews 
— such was its beginning. Thus in the Apocalypse 
one is encouraged to hear and to keep the words of the 
book, and intelligence (o) is supposed among Christians. 

(o) We must distinguish between the intelligence of, and the 
application to oneself of, these prophecies, whatever the 
application may he. What was revealed to Abraham con- 
cerned Lot. 



115 

Verse 11. "And from the time that the daily sacrifice 
shall be taken away, and the abomination that maketh 
desolate, set up, there shall be 1290 days; blessed is 
he that waiteth and cometh to the 1335 days." There 
is something striking in this answer, as concerns the 
Jews. The Lord Jesus uses the same date, omitting 
these days added at the end ; otherwise He gives the 
same point of departure. The date does not begin 
until the last half-week ; because, until then, there is no 
event to furnish an epoch from which one can com- 
mence counting ; the position being then also definite 
and decided. There is a previous half week, during 
which the prince that shall come will be in covenant 
with the people at Jerusalem ; but that which notably 
fixes the time of distress to the Jews, (and this is the 
subject before us,) is the abomination of desolation. set 
up in the holy place at Jerusalem ; and this is at the 
beginning of the last half week. 

This being the principal thing, I doubt whether 
there is any date whatever in the Word as to the 
general course of the prophecy, or for the time which 
elapses between the rejection of Jesus and His return. 
That there may have been events adapted to the 
prophetic facts, analogous in principle, during the 
interval, I do not doubt ; and events most important to 
recognise in their moral features. Many eminent 
Christians have sought to calculate these dates ; but 
my conviction is, that all these will be found wrong in 
the fact. Some have indicated 1844, and some 1847 ; 
I have made them myself in my time ; it is not, then, to. 
blame others, that I say I do not think there is any 
basis for a true calculation : and I doubt whether the 
Lord has fixed any other date, than that of the half, 
week of Daniel, when the abomination, &c, is set up. 

The prophecy speaks of seventy weeks ; but almost 
all Christians allow, that these have passed, except the. 
seventieth one, and that at the end of the sixty-ninth' 



117 

the Lord was upon earth. Moreover, the date of a 
time, times, and half a time, has reference entirely to 
Jerusalem ; and it is not a period of years at all, but 
simply of days ; for this date is given us at the end of 
the chapter, after the sacrifice has been taken away, and 
after the setting up of the abomination. Now the 
words of the Lord Himself afford a complete proof 
that it has no reference to centuries any more than to 
Christendom: for He speaks of a special time; of 
certain persons in peculiar circumstances, interested in 
and occupied with what occurs at Jerusalem, — of 
women with child, — of the time which it takes to flee 
to the mountains, — of the season of the year suiting 
that flight, — and of the sabbath day. Neither could 
we suppose that there would be signs in the sun during 
centuries, <fcc, <fcc. It is of these things that Matt. 
xxiv speaks, as being identified with "the 1260 days," 
and " a time, times, and half a time." 

I will just recall to your memories my previous divi- 
sion of Matt. xxiv. We must keep in mind the 
occasion of the reply of our Lord to His disciples. 
He had passed judgment on the Jewish people, at the 
end of chap, xxiii, " Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that 
killest the prophets, &c. ... for I say unto you, ye 
shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is 
he that cometh in the name of the Lord." Here is a 
positive judgment passed, and upon the nation as such; 
there is no question of individuals ; for He does not 
say to individuals " ye shall not see me." And so it 
must be the nation, or a remnant of it at least, and at 
a time yet to come, who will say to Jesus, " Blessed is 
He that cometh in the name of the Lord." The high 
priests themselves have never said it ; on the contrary, 
their language was, " Away with him, crucify him." 
The Lord had previously pronounced their judgment ; 
but it is of the nation that He says, " Ye shall not see 
me henceforth, until" &c. It is a quotation from 



118 

Ps. cxviii, remarkable for its prophetic announcement 
of the rejection of Him who was to be acknowledged 
at a later time. 

To pass then to Matt, xxiv, 1, &c., "And Jesus 
went out, and departed from the temple ; and his dis- 
ciples came to him for to shew him the buildings of 
the temple ;" for they were yet imbued with a Jewish 
feeling. Verse 3. "And the disciples came unto 
him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things 
be ? and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of 
the end of the world" (age) ? They supposed that 
what the Lord had said about the temple, would take 
place when the Messiah should return ; and they asked 
when these things should happen. 

Observe the expression, " end of the age." When 
the Lord uses it, He does not speak of Christianity: it 
was not then established. TV hen His disciples said 
41 the qge, n they had no thought about Christianity ; 
they spoke about the Jewish age, in which the Messiah 
was expected ; the age of the Law until the Messiah 
should come for the Jews. Their question was, when 
shall the end of that age be I 

Now from ver. 4—14, Jesus tells them the circum- 
stances which should take place: these are warnings ; 
and He adds some circumstances which should happen 
before '* the end of the age ;" that is to say, He closes 
the account of the Jewish remnant which should 
endure to the end. At ver. 14, Jesus details another 
event: "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be 
preached in all the world ; . . . and then shall the end 
come ;" that is, not only certain things should happen 
to His disciples ; but also, there should be the preach- 
ing of the gospel of the kingdom, throughout the 
habitable world, and then should the end come. 

Then He commences His particular instructions to 
His disciples who should be at Jerusalem at " the end 
of the age." As He had spoken of the Jewish nation, 



119 

ao here He speaks to His disciples ; addressing in their 
persons the remnant which should be found at the end : 
" When ye, therefore, shall see the abomination .... 
stand in the holy place, then let them which be in 
Judea flee into the mountains.'* Nothing can be more 
evident than that the Lord speaks of a precise time, 
and not of something which happens morally, and 
which may be distributed, so to speak, over centuries ; 

thus, " neither let him which is in the field" 

" woe to them that are with child, and to them that 
give suck," &c, "Pray that your flight be not in the 
winter, neither on the sabbath day." It is impossible 
not to perceive that the last allusion is to Jews who 
would not venture to go further than a certain dis- 
tance on the sabbath day. 

Verse 2L "For then shall be great tribulation, 
such as was not since the beginning of the world to 
this time, no, nor ever shall be/' We are here 
absolutely in the time of distress (predicted in Dan. 
xii, and Jeremiah xxx, 7) at Jerusalem, to be followed 
by the deliverance of the people of Daniel, at least of 
the remnant, and by the establishment of the Jews in 
Palestine, with David (Christ) as their king. 

But before this unequalled period of tribulation, 
there will be the " the beginning of sorrows." Matt, 
xxiv, 8. And whenever the abomination is placed, there 
will be 1290 days, with 45 added, before there is a 
complete deliverance at Jerusalem. The 45 days 
added will introduce all that the faithful remnant could 
desire in order to their happiness. St. Mark agrees 
with all this ; they both pursue the history until the 
manifestation of Jesus ; " Then if any man shall say 
unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not, (p) 

(p) This, to me, is a convincing proof that this passage does 
not apply, properly speaking, to the Church ; because our 
expectation is to be caught up into the air to meet Jesus. To 
tell us He is in the desert, would, of itself, prove an impostor, 
for we are to be in the air with Him befocmoa cml V*><0omc^ 



120 

for there shall arise false Christs < . . . . For as the 
lightning (vef . 27) cometh out of the east, and shineth 
even Unto the west, so shall also the coming of the Bon 
of man be ; for wheresoever the carcase is* there will 
the eagles be gathered together." There^ where the 
dead body of the Jewish people is, the visitation of 
God will come. 

"What shall be the sign of thy coming V the 
nation will have no sign for its instruction, although 
fearful signs will be there. This is the answer to the 
nation ;— Christ shall come as the lightning. In heaven 
only, there will be a sign at the moment of His 
appearing suddenly ; I do not say what the sign is, 
but there will be one there when He comes : " They 
shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of 
heaven with power and great glory." Matt, xxiv, 30* 

I will add a few remarks as to Luke xxi. There is 
a difference ; for Luke does not occupy himself in the 
same manner with Jewish details. It is not the gospel 
of the Jewish kingdom. The only question of the 
disciples is, " When shall these things be?" It is not 
about " the end of the age." It applies only to that 
which should happen at the destruction of Jerusalem. 
When Titus took it, more or less of those fearful events 
took place, similar to what will happen at the end ; 
but it is not the same thing as the time " such as never 
was." There will be great earthquakes, &c. Head 
down to ver. 10. 

In Luke's gospel, there is more reference to evan- 
gelizing in a direct manner, although the result, as to 
testimony, is the same : " ye shall be hated of all men 
for my name's sake." " In your patience possess ye 
your souls." But there is not a word about the 
abomination of desolation. " When ye shall see Jeru- 
salem compassed with armies, then know that the 
desolation thereof is nigh." And this was accom- 
plished ia the siege of Jerusalem which has already 



121 

taken place, as history testifies. Possibly, there may 
be similar features when the nations shall surround 
Jerusalem ; but no mention is made in Luke of a time 
of distress, such as never was, and the interval between 
the fall of Jerusalem and the fulfilling the times of 
the Gentiles is distinctly predicted. What is said is, 
" There shall be great distress in the land, and wrath 
upon this people," and they " shall be led away cap- 
tives into all nations : and Jerusalem shall be trodden 
down until the times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled." 
This is altogether another matter. There is no account 
of any deliverance of the Jews. It is not said, 
"Blessed is he ... . that cometh to the 1335 days ;" 
but, on the contrary, Jerusalem is trodden down untH 
the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled; things are left 
in this state by the recital; the events following it 
being applicable down to the end, but accomplished in 
the desolation of Jerusalem by Titus. Then ver. 25, 
"There shall be signs in the sun and in the moon." 
Generally speaking, Luke does not answer to the 
exact accomplishment of the prophecies of Daniel, 
but principally to those whose fulfilment is now passed, 
and which Jesus set forth to His disciples, to influence 
their conduct, according to their particular question, 
ver. 7 ; and the signs which He gives (ver. 24^ 25) are 
applicable rather to the Gentiles, than to Jerusalem 
and the Jews. 

But to conclude. Dan. xii, 7. "It shall be for a, 
time, times, and a half; and when he shall have 
accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, 
all these things shall be finished." This is another 
proof that this date relates to the end ; for it is evident 
that he has not accomplished to scatter the power of 
the holy people. They are still scattered. "And I 
heard, but I understood not." 

We are not to conceive of the "end of the indig- 
nation," as if it was the complete and entire re-estja- 



122 

bfishtnent of the Jews in all their privilege*. Whe» 
the indignation is over, then the Christ, — God, and 
the Christ in the name of God, — takes Israel as His 
people, to begin to establish them fully. The Jews 
having again become the people of God, He begins to 
put them into the enjoyment of all their privileges ; 
and Christ begins to appropriate to Himself His rights 
as Messiah. 

"None of the wicked shall understand." (ver. 10.) 
It will be the same in the Christian apostacy. " God 
shall send them strong delusion, that they should 
believe a lie ;" " but the wise shall understand." "And 
from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken 
away .... there shall be 1290 days.' 9 I have no 
knowledge why there should be the addition of these 
30 days to 1260, unless it be an indication that after 
the end of the half week, during which the Antichrist 
prospers, there will yet be needed 30 days, before the 
final blessing to the Jews comes in. " Blessed is He 
that waiteth and cometh to the 1335 days,*' — for then 
the people will evidently be in a state of blessing. 
But, as I before said, Daniel gives no explanation or 
detail of this happiness, because the aim of the book 
is to shew the care which God takes of the remnant, 
during the time of its sojourn (and this was Daniel's 
case) among the Gentiles. Other prophecies speak 
of their happy position after their re-settlement ; but 
Daniel limits himself to the expression that they shall 
be blessed. 

" But go thou thy way .... and thou shalt stand in 
thy lot at the end of the days." Thou shalt enjoy all 
this blessedness, be not troubled ; God will take care 
of this, thou shalt have thy part in it all. We know 
that it is at the first resurrection — the resurrection of 
the saints — that Daniel will partake of this, in com- 
pany with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all those 
who have been faithful in every epoch. 



123 



We have now arrived at the conclusion of this re- 
markable book. I have not pretended to anything 
more than to give you its great features, such as God 
has, as yet, shewn them to me. By their help you 
may be enabled to proceed further for yourselves. 
May God bless His Word. 



J. B. BATSMAN, PRINTER, I, IVY LAM* *IK¥KM*nrat 1SS*C*»- 



May be had of the same Publisher. 

THE HOPES OF THE CHURCH OF GOD, in connection 
with the destiny of the Jews and the nations, as revealed in 
Prophecy. By J. N. Darby. Is. 8d. 

SIMPLE TESTIMONY, for the comfort and profit of the 
children of God. Published chiefly from papers sent from 
Demerara. In three vols., price Is. 4d. each, cloth. 

THOUGHTS ON ROMANISM. I. The Authority of the 
Church ; — II. The Sacrifice of the Mass;— III. Purgatory; 
— IV. The Virgin Mary. Id. each, or Nos. I — IV. in 
cover, 4d. 

AN INTRODUCTION to the CANTICLES. Royal 18mo. 6d. 
HEAVEN and EARTH. Second edition, revised and enlarged, 

Royal 18mo. 6d. 
ENOCH, Uniform with the Book of Job, Canticles, &c. 6d. 
ISAAC. Uniform with above. 6d. 

ABRAHAM, uniform with Introduction to the Canticles, &c. 6d. 
JACOB. Uniform with above. 6d. 
JOSEPH. Uniform with above. 6d. 
MOSES ON PISGAH, Id. 
ON THE GOSPEL BY ST. JOHN, reprinted from the Christian 

Witness, third edition, revised and enlarged, cloth 2s. 6d. 
ON THE GOSPEL BY ST. LUXE, reprinted from the Christian 

Witness, Second edition, cloth 2s. 

SHORT MEDITATIONS on ELIStfA. Is.; cloth extra, Is. 6d. 

SHORT MEDITATIONS ON THE PSALMS, chiefly in their 
Prophetic character. Second Edition, enlarged, pp. 216, 
Royal 18mo , 3s. 

OLD NARQUOIS, the Negro Driver, By L. Strong. 2d. 

THE CONDEMNED NEGRO ; or, Man's Victim, God's Chosen. 
By the Author of Old Narquois. 2d. 

GOSPEL PREACHING, by L. Strong. Nos. 1—2, ljd. each. 
SALOME, a Poem, by Sir E. Denny, Id. 
HYMNS ON THE CHURCH'S HOPE, by Sir E. Denny, Id. 
ZION, a Poem, by Sir E. Denny, on card-board, with the 

Music, 3d. 
JOHN BUNYAN, a Witness for the Truth. Id. 
THE PATRIARCHS. By J. G. Bellett. Cloth, 5s. ; calf, 7*. 
THE EVANGELISTS. By J. G. Bellett. Cloth, 5s. ; calf, 7s. 




The borrower must return this item on or before 
the last date stamped below. If another user 
places a recall for this item, the borrower will 
be notified of the need for an earlier return. 

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt 

the borrower from overdue fines. 



Andover-Harvard Theological Library 
Cambridge, MA 02138 617*495-5788 



Please handle with care. 

Thank you for helping to preserve 
library collections ai 




