LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 

PRINCETON,  N.  J. 


PRESENTED  BY 

Mr.   Ho el  Lawrence  McQueen 
Division  JtjZ^_r\  1  D 

Section  _  _  i  JL/  _CU.l 


V.5 


:m>.      ^ 


SYNOPSIS 


or 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE, 


By  J.  N.  DAEBY. 


VOK  V. 


(>^OLOSSIANS— THE  REVELATIOM 


NEW    EDITION— REVISED. 


LONDON: 
G.    MORRISH.    20,   PATERNOSTER    SQUARE 


CONTENTa 


COLOSSIANS 

I  Thessalonians 

II  Thessalonians 

I  Timothy 

II  Timothy 
Titus 

Philemon  • 

Hebrews  - 
James 

I  Peter  - 

II  Peter 

I  John 

II  John 

III  John 

JUDE 

The  Revelation 


PAOB 

1 

57 

112 

132 

161 

208 

225 

230 

350 

370 

405 

422 

476 

478 

. 

481 

489 

■.■>'  ■' 


SYNOPSIS 


OF 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 


COLOSSIANS. 


The  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  looks  at  the  Christian  as 
risen  with  Christ,  but  not,  as  in  that  to  the  Ephesians, 
as  sitting  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ.  A  hope  is  laid 
up  for  him  in  heaven ;  he  is  to  set  his  affections  on 
things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth.  He  has  died 
with  Christ  and  he  is  risen  with  Him,  but  not  sitting 
in  heavenly  places  in  Him  yet.  We  have  in  it 
a  proof  of  that  which  other  epistles  demonstrate, 
namely,  the  blessed  way  in  which  our  God  in  His 
grace  turns  everything  to  the  good  of  those  that  love 
Him. 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  the  Holy  Ghost  had 
developed  the  counsels  of  God  with  regard  to  the 
church — its  privileges.  The  Christians  of  Ephesus 
had  nothing  to  be  reproached  with  :*  therefore  the 
Holy  Ghost  could  use  the  occasion  furnished  by  that 
faithful  flock  to  unfold  all  the  privileges  which  God 

*  How  painful  it  is  to  see  this  beloved  church  taken  after- 
wards as  an  example  of  the  first  love  being  lost  1  But  all  tends 
to  the  end. 

VOL.  V.  I.  B 


2  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

had  ordained  for  the  church  at  large,  by  virtue  of  its 
union  with  Jesus  Christ  its  Head,  as  well  as  the 
individual  privileges  of  the  children  of  God. 

It  was  not  so  with  the  Colossians.  They  had  in 
some  measure  slipped  away  from  this  blessed  portion, 
and  lost  the  sense  of  their  union  with  the  Head  of  the 
body ;  at  least,  if  it  was  not  actually  so,  they  were 
assailed  by  the  danger,  and  liable  to  the  influence  of 
those  who  sought  to  draw  them  away  from  it,  and  sub- 
ject them  to  the  influence  of  philosophy  and  Judaism,  so 
that  the  apostle  had  to  occupy  himself  with  the  dan- 
ger, and  not  merely  with  their  privileged.  This  union 
with  our  Head  (thank  God  !)  cannot  itself  be  lost ;  but 
as  a  truth  in  the  church,  or  of  realisation  by  indi- 
viduals, it  may.  We  know  this  but  too  well  in  the 
church  of  the  day  we  live  in.  This  however  gives 
occasion  to  the  Spirit  of  God  to  develop  all  the  riches 
and  all  the  perfection  which  are  found  in  the  Head 
and  in  His  work,  in  order  to  recover  the  members  of 
the  body  from  their  spiritual  feebleness,  or  maintain 
them  in  the  full  practical  enjoyment  of  their  union  with 
Christ,  and  in  the  power  of  the  position  gained  for 
them  by  that  union.  For  us  this  is  abiding  instruction 
with  regard  to  the  riches  that  are  in  the  Head. 

If  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  delineates  the  privi- 
leges of  the  body,  that  to  the  Colossians  reveals  the 
fulness  that  is  in  the  Head,  and  our  completeness  in 
Him.  Thus  in  that  to  the  Ephesians  the  church  is 
the  fulness  of  Hiui  who  filleth  all  in  all ;  in  that  to 
the  Colossians,  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells 
in  Christ  bodily,  and  we  are  complete  in  Him.  There 
is  another  diflerence  however,  which  it  is  important  to 
remark.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  we  do  not — 
save  in  the  expression,  "  love  in  the  Spirit " — find  any 
mention  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  is  fully  brought  for- 
ward in  the  Ephesians.  But  on  the  other  hand,  we 
have  Christ  as  our  life  far  more  fully  developed,  of 


COLOSSIANS.  3 

equal  importance  in  its  place.  In  Ephesians  we  have 
more  largely  the  contrast  of  heathenism  with  christian 
privilege  and  state.  The  formation  of  the  soul  in 
living  likeness  to  Christ  is  largely  developed  in  Colos- 
sians.  It  is  more,  in  the  well-known  expressions, 
Christ  in  us  than  we  in  Christ,  though  these  cannot  be 
separated.  A  further  important  difference  is  that  in 
Ephesians  the  unity  of  Jew  and  Gentile  in  one  body 
holds  a  large  place.  In  Colossians  the  Gentiles  only 
are  in  view,  though  in  connection  with  the  doctrine  of 
the  body.  These  differences  well  noted,  we  may  say 
that  the  two  epistles  have  a  great  resemblance  in  their 
general  character. 

They  commence  in  nearly  the  same  way.*  Both 
are  written  from  Rome,  while  the  apostle  was  a  pri- 
soner in  that  city,  and  sent  by  the  same  messenger 
and  on  the  same  occasion,  as  well  probably  as  that  to 
Philemon :  so  the  names  and  salutations  give  us  reason 
to  believe.  The  address  to  the  Ephesians  places  them 
perhaps  more  immediately  in  connection  with  God 
Himself,  instead  of  presenting  them  as  in  brotherly 
communion  on  earth.  They  are  not  called  brethren 
in  Ephesians  i.  1,  only  saints  and  faithful  in  Christ 
Jesus.  They  are  viewed  as  walking  on  earth  in 
Colossians,  though  risen.  Hsnce  there  is  a  long 
prayer  for  their  walk,  though  on  high  and  holy 
ground  as  delivered.  In  Ephesians  it  begins  with  the 
full  purpose  and  fruit  of  God's  counsels.  In  that 
epistle  the  apostle's  heart  expands  at  once  in  the  sense 
of  the  blessings  enjoyed  by  the  Ephesians.  They  were 
blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  the  heavenly 
places  in  Christ.  For  the  Colossians  there  was  a  ho'pe 
laid  up  in  heaven.  And  there  is  a  preface  of  many 
verses  referring  to  the  gospel   they  had   heard,  and 

*  The  name  of  Timotheus  is  not  fonnd  in  the  address  to  the 
saints  at  Ephesus. 

L 


4  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

introducing  his  prayer  for  their  walk  and  state  down 
here.  This  brings  us  where  Ephesians  i.  7  brings  us, 
but  with  a  much  more  enlarged  development  of  the 
personal  glory  of  Christ,  and  more  in  an  historical  way 
of  God's  actual  dealings.  It  is  also  a  more  personal 
church  address  than  the  Ephesians. 

But  let  us  consider  more  closely  that  which  is  said 
to  the  Colossians.  The  blessed  calling  of  w^hich  the 
apostle  speaks  (Eph.  i.  3-10),  and  the  privileges  of  the 
inheritance  (11-14),  are  wanting  in  Colossians;  risen 
but  on  earth,  they  are  not  sitting  in  heavenly  places, 
all  things  being  thus  their  inheritance.  It  is  not  they 
in  Christ  there,  but  Christ  in  them  the  ho'pe  of  glory, 
and  the  prayer  referred  to  above  fills  up  the  chapter 
till  we  come  to  the  common  ground  of  Christ's  glory 
in  Colossians  i.  15 ;  and  even  here  the  divine  glory  of 
Christ  is  brought  out  in  Colossians,  the  simple  fact  of 
the  purpose  of  God  as  to  Christ  in  Ephesians.  And 
not  only  we  have  not  God's  inheritance  ours  ;  but  in 
Colossians  the  Spirit  as  earnest  of  it  is  not  spoken  of. 
This  indeed  we  have  seen  is  characteristic  of  Colos- 
sians. The  Spirit  is  not  spoken  of,  but  life.  We  have 
the  Person  and  divine  glory  of  Christ,  and  our  com- 
pleteness in  Him,  more  insisted  on  in  Colossians  ;  but 
not  the  saints'  place  with  God  in  the  same  way. 
Further,  as  the  saint  is  looked  at  as  on  earth,  not  in 
Christ  on  high,  his  responsibility  is  brought  in.  (Chap. 
i.  23.)  Colossians  i.  3  answers  to  Ephesians  i.  16  : 
only  one  feels  that  there  is  more  fulness  in  the  joy  of 
Ephesians  i.  16.  Faith  in  Christ  and  love  to  all  saints 
are  found  in  each  exordium,  as  the  occasion  of  the 
writer's  joy. 

The  subject  of  his  prayer  is  quite  different.  In  the 
Ephesians,  where  he  develops  the  counsels  of  God  with 
regard  to  the  church,  he  prays  that  the  saints  may 
understand  them,  as  well  as  the  power  by  means  of 
\vlnch  they  participated  in  them.     Here  he  prays  that 


COtOSSTANS.  5 

their  walk  may  be  guided  by  divine  intelligence.  But 
this  belongs  to  another  cause,  to  the  point  of  view 
from  which,  in  his  discourse,  he  looks  at  the  saints. 
We  have  seen  that  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  he 
views  them  as  sitting  in  the  heavenlies.  Their  in- 
heritance consequently  is  that  of  all  things  which  are 
to  be  gathered  together  under  Christ  as  Head.  Here 
he  prays  for  them  in  view  of  a  hope  laid  up  for  them 
in  heaven ;  his  prayer  therefore  refers  to  their  walk, 
that  it  may  be  in  harmony  with  the  object  which  they 
had  set  before  them.  As  on  earth  and  in  danger  of 
not  adhering  to  the  Head,  the  believers  in  Colosse 
were  in  danger  of  departing  from  that  object.  He 
prayed  therefore  in  view  of  that  heavenly  hope.  They 
had  heard  of  this  perfect  and  glorious  hope.  The 
gospel  had  proclaimed  it  everywhere. 

It  was  this  gospel  preached  in  view  of  a  hope  laid 
up  in  heaven  which  had  produced  fruit  among  men, 
fruit  that  was  characterised  by  its  heavenly  source. 
Their  religion,  that  which  governed  their  heart  in 
these  relationships  with  God,  was  heavenly.  The 
Colossians  were  in  danger  of  falling  back  into  the 
current  of  ordinances,  and  of  the  religious  customs  of 
man  living  in  the  world,  whose  religion  was  in  con- 
nection with  the  world  in  which  he  dwelt,  and  not 
enlightened,  not  filled  with  heavenly  light.  There  is 
nothing  but  conscious  union  with  Christ  which  can 
keep  us  securely  there.  Ordinances  to  reach  Him  can 
have  no  place  where  we  are  united  to  Him ;  the  philo- 
sophy of  human  thoughts  none,  where  we  possess 
livingly  divine  ones  in  Christ. 

Nevertheless  how  precious  it  is — even  if  we  are  not 
in  the  full  height  of  our  calling — to  have  an  object  set 
before  our  hearts  which  delivers  us  from  this  world, 
and  from  the  influences  which  hide  God  from  us  ! 
Such  is  the  apostle's  object  in  this  scripture.  He 
directs  the  eyes  of  the  Colossians  to  heaven,  in  order 

I. 


6  THE  BOOJfS   OF  THE   BIBtS. 

that  they  may  see  Christ  there,  and  regSLin  that  sehs^ 
of  their  union  with  the  Head  which  they  had  in  some 
measure  lost,  or  were  in  danger  of  losing.  The  ground- 
work was  however  there — faith  in  Christ  and  love  to 
all  saints.  They  only  needed  realising  their  union 
with  the  Head  ;  which  moreover  could  alone  maintain 
them  in  the  heavenly  element  above  ordinances,  above 
human  and  earthly  religion. 

The  apostle,  in  order  to  raise  them  up,  sets  out  as 
usual  from  the  point  where  he  found  good  in  the 
saints  to  whom  he  wrote.  This  heavenly  hope  had 
reached  them  and  had  produced  fruit.  It  is  this 
which  distinguishes  Christianity  from  all  other  re- 
ligions, and  in  particular  from  the  Jewish  system, 
which — although  individuals  who  were  in  it  by  grace 
sighed  for  heaven — hid  God  behind  the  veil,  and  enve- 
loped the  conscience  in  a  series  of  ordinances  at  a 
distance  from  Him. 

Now,  based  upon  this  hope  which  placed  the  inner 
life  of  the  Christians  in  connection  with  heaven,  the 
apostle  prays  that  the  Colossians  may  be  j&lled  with 
the  knowledge  of  the  will  of  God  in  all  wisdom  and 
spiritual  understanding.  It  is  the  fruit  of  a  risen 
man's  connection  with  God  on  the  earth.  This  is 
very  different  from  commandments  and  ordinances. 
It  is  the  fruit  of  intimate  communion  with  God,  of 
knowledge  of  His  character  and  of  His  nature  by 
virtue  of  this  communion ;  and,  although  it  refers  to 
practical  life,  as  belonging  to  the  inner  life,  it  leaves 
ordinances  completely  behind.  The  apostle  had  to 
begin  at  this  practical  end,  at  christian  life.  Perhaps 
the  Colossians  did  not  at  first  understand  the  bearing 
of  these  instructions,  but  they  contained  a  principle 
which,  already  planted  in  their  heart  and  capable  of 
being  re-awakened,  led  them  to  the  point  which  the 
apostle  aimed  at,  and  was  at  the  same  time  a  very 
precious  privilege,  the  value  of  which  they  were  in  a 


eoLos^iAi^s.  7 

fjosition  to  apprehend.  Such  is  charity.  The  aposUe 
develops  their  privileges  in  this  respect  with  force 
and  clearness,  as  one  to  whom  such  a  walk  was  well 
known,  and  moreover  with  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  They  are  not  in  heaven  but  on  earth,  and  this 
is  the  path  that  suited  those  risen  with  Christ  and 
looking  to  heaven  from  the  earth.  It  is  divine  life 
on  earth,  not  the  Holy  Ghost  putting  the  soul  of  the 
believer  at  the  centre  of  divine  counsels,  as  in  Ephe- 
sians  iii.  through  Christ  dwelling  in  the  heart  by 
faith. 

The  first  principle  of  this  practical  heavenly  life 
was  the  knowledge  of  the  will  of  God — to  be  filled 
with  it,  not  to  run  after  it  as  a  thing  without  us,  nor 
in  indecision,  in  uncertainty,  as  to  what  it  was,  but 
to  be  filled  with  it  by  a  principle  of  intelligence  which 
comes  from  Him,  and  which  forms  the  understanding 
and  the  wisdom  of  the  Christian  himself.  The  cha- 
racter of  God  was  livingly  translated  in  the  apprecia- 
tion of  everything  that  the  Christian  did.  And 
remark  here  that  the  knowledge  of  God's  will  is  based 
on  the  spiritual  state  of  the  soul — wisdom  and  spiritual 
understanding.  And  this  is  of  all  practical  importance. 
No  particular  direction  by  man  as  to  conduct  meets 
this  at  all — rather  saves  us  from  the  need  of  spiritual 
understanding.  No  doubt  a  more  spiritual  mind  may 
help  me  in  the  discernment  of  God's  will  ;*  but  God 
hab  connected  the  discovery  of  the  path  of  His  will, 
His  way,  with  the  inward  state  of  the  soul,  and 
causes  us  to  pass  through  circumstances — human  life 
here  below — to  test  and  to  discover  to  ourselves  what 
that  state  is,  and  to  exercise  us  therein.  The  Christian 
has  by  his  spiritual  state  to  know  God's  ways.     The 


♦  It  is  one  of  the  deceits  of  the  heart  that,  when  we  really 
know  God's  will  quite  well,  we  go  to  ask  advice  of  one  no  more 
spiritual  than  ourselves. 

1. 


8  THB   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

word  is  the  means.  (Compare  John  xvii.  17,  19.) 
God  has  a  way  of  His  own  which  the  vulture's  eye 
hath  not  seen,  known  only  to  the  spiritual  man,  con- 
nected with,  flowing  from,  and  to,  the  knowledge  of 
God.  (Compare  Exod.  xxxiii.  13.)  Thus  the  Chris- 
tian walks  worthy  of  the  Lord ;  he  knows  what 
becomes  Him,*  and  walks  accordingly,  that  he  may 
please  Him  in  all  things,  bearing  fruit  in  every  good 
work,  and  growing  by  the  knowledge  of  God. 

It  was  not  then  only  the  character  of  life :  this  life 
was  productive  ;  it  bore  fruit,  and,  as  life  grew  up,  by 
increasing  knowledge  of  God.  But  this  connection 
with  God  brings  in  another  very  precious  considera- 
tion. Besides  the  character  and  the  living  energy 
which  are  in  relationship  with  this  knowledge,  the 
strength  of  the  Lordf  is  developed  in  it  also.  They 
draw  strength  from  Him.  He  gives  it  that  they 
might  walk  thus.  "  Strengthened,"  he  says,  "  with  all 
might,  according  to  the  power  of  his  glory."  Such  is 
the  measure  of  the  Christian's  strength  for  a  life  in 
harmony  with  the  character  of  God.  Thus  the  cha- 
racter of  this  life  is  revealed  in  the  heavenly  glory  on 
high — Jesus  Christ.  On  earth  its  manifestation — as  it 
had  been  in  Jesus  Christ — is  realised  in  all  patience  and 
long-suffering  with  joy,  in  the  midst  of  the  sorrow  and 
afflictions  of  the  life  of  God  in  this  world.  This  form 
of  the  life  too  is  striking :  all  divine  strength  according 
to  His  glory  given  in  order  to  be  patient,  to  endure. 
What  a  character  it  gives  to  the  Christian's  life  in  this 


*  There  are  three  measures  given  of  the  Christian's  walk  in 
this  form :  worthy  of  God  who  has  called  us  to  His  own  kingdom 
and  glory ;  worthy  of  the  Lord,  here ;  and  worthy  of  the  voca- 
tion with  which  we  are  called,  that  is,  the  Holy  Ghost  dwellin  .- 
in  the  church,  Ephesians  ii. ;  developed  as  it  is  in  the  end  of 
chapter  iii. 

+  The  antecedent  is,  I  think,  here  the  Lord ;  but  the  Lord  and 
God  are  greatly  merged  in  one  thought. 


COLOSSIANS.  d 

world !  And  there  is  a  generous  bearing  with  others 
which  it  enables  us  to  maintain.  Nor  is  anything  a 
more  manifest  fruit  of  power  than  this.  Will  too  is 
here  subdued.  Thus,  in  spite  of  all  we  have  to  endure, 
we  have  with  God  constant  joy.  It  is  a  blessed  picture 
of  the  form  in  which  divine  life  manifests  itself. 

And  here  the  apostle  connects  this  life  of  endurance 
with  that  which  is  its  source,  its  aim,  and  its  present 
possession  by  faith.  Walking  thus  we  are  full  of  joy, 
and  we  give  thanks  to  the  Father  who  has  made*  us 
meet  to  share  the  portion  of  the  saints  in  light.  Here 
are  the  saints  established  in  their  proper  relationship 
with  God  (their  Father)  in  heaven — in  the  light,  that 
which  God  is,  and  in  which  He  dwells.  Thus  we  have 
the  state  of  the  soul,  the  character  of  the  walk,  and 
the  strength  in  which  we  accomplish  it.  As  to  meet- 
ness  for  God  in  light,  we  possess  it.  Moreover  we  are 
translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son. 

The  means  employed,  and  the  practical  character  of 
the  work  which  sets  us  in  the  light,  are  then  pre- 
sented, introducing  us  (as  far  as  Colossians  does)  into 
the  counsels  of  God,  but  in  a  practical  way — in  their 
results  future  or  present,  not  in  counsel  or  as  the 
mystery  of  His  will. 

The  Father  has  delivered  us  from  the  power  of 
darkness,  and  transported  us  into  the  kingdom  of  the 
Son  of  His  love.  It  is  not  a  Jewish  rule  for  man ;  it 
is  an  operation  of  the  power  of  God,  who  treats  us  as 
altogether  by  nature  the  slaves  of  Satan  and  of  dark- 
ness ;  and  places  us  by  an  act  of  that  power  in  an 
entirely  new  position  and  relationship  with  Himself. 
We  see  indeed  here,  if  we  examine  the  principles  in 
their  origin,  the  same  thing  as  in  Ephesians  i.  4,  5 ;  ii. 


*  Take  especial  notice  here,  that  it  is  not  said  "will  make 
us  meet,"  as  a  thing  yet  to  be  done,  and  in  which  we  make 
progress. 

I. 


16  THis  feOOkS  OF  tHE  fitfitft. 

1-6,  as  to  our  position  before.  But  it  is  evident  that 
the  fulness  and  definiteness  of  a  new  creation  are 
wanting.*  "The  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light," 
"the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  his  love,"  remind  us  of 
Ephesians  i.  4,  5  ;  but  it  is  not  the  thing  itself,  as  it  is 
in  God's  mind,  but  our  having  been  made  meet  for  it 
when  here ;  nor  consequently  the  development  of  a 
position  with  which  one  is  familiar  as  standing  in  it. 
The  power  and  the  love  of  the  Father  have  made  us 
meet  for  it,  and  although  the  character  of  God  is 
necessarily  there  as  light  and  love,  according  to  His 
relationship  to  His  Son,  yet  what  we  have  here  is  not 
our  own  relationship  with  God  Himself,  outside  the 
question  of  whence  He  took  us,  but  the  work  in 
general  which  places  us  there  in  contrast  with  our 
previous  position.  He  has  delivered  us  from  the 
power  of  darkness,  and  translated  us  into  the  kingdom 
of  His  dear  Son ;  we  have  part  in  the  inheritance  of 
the  saints  in  light :  but  where  is  the  saint  "  without 
blame  before  him  in  love  ?"  where  our  relationship  to 
Him,  according  to  the  counsels  of  Him  who  saw  only 
the  good  which  He  purposed  in  His  own  heart  ?  where 
the  "  children  unto  himself  by  Jesus  Christ,"  through 
His  predestination  before  the  world  was  ? 

In  Ephesians  deliverance  is  brought  in  as  a  conse- 
quence of  the  position  in  which  the  heirs,  the  objects 
of  the  eternal  counsels  of  God,  are  seen.-|-     Here  de- 

*  We  shall  also  see,  further  on,  that  the  startinjrr-point  is 
somewhat  different,  and,  though  Ephesian  ground  is  partially 
referred  to,  brings  in  man  as  he  is  found  living  in  sin,  and  less 
absolutely  to  God,  who  finds  him  already  dead  in  sins,  and 
creates  him  according  to  His  own  counsels.  But  of  this  here- 
after. Further,  in  Ephesians  i.  0  our  place  is  full  grace  in  Christ; 
in  Colossians  i.  it  is  present  actual  deliverance  fi'om  the  power 
of  darkness  and  translation  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  His 
love — not  X^P'C  or  \apiTa)ffiQ  Iv  rtp  ■^yaTrrjftivtp. 

t  This  belongs  to  the  principle  mentioned  above.  In  Ephe- 
sians, all  is  seen  from  the  point  of  view  of  God's  eternal  counsels 


COtOSSlANS.  11 

liverance  is  the  chief  subject.  How  dangerous  and 
disastrous  it  is  to  depart  from  the  Head,  and  to  lose 
the  full  consciousness,  in  the  light,  of  our  union  with 
Him !  How  perfect  and  precious  is  that  grace  which 
takes  notice  of  our  condition,  and  brings  us  out  of  it 
to  God,  to  make  us  enjoy — according  to  the  power  and 
grace  of  God — the  inestimable  position  which  He  has 
given  us  in  Christ ! 

The  means  which  the  Spirit  here  employs  to  accom- 
plish this  work  of  grace  is  the  development  of  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  of  the  Son  of  His  love. 

Here  alone,  I  believe,  is  the  kingdom  called  the 
kingdom  of  the  Son ;  and,  I  think,  it  is  only  as  intro- 
ducing His  Person  as  the  centre  of  everything  and 
giving  us  the  measure  of  the  greatness  of  the  blessing. 
It  is  the  kino;dom  of  One  who  has  this  place,  the  Son 
of  His  love,  into  which  we  are  introduced.  It  is  in- 
deed His  kingdom ;  and  in  order  that  we  may  appre- 
hend the  character  of  this  kingdom  as  it  is  now  for  us, 
and  our  nearness  to  God  as  having  part  in  it,  it  is 
called  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  His  love.  It  is  this 
which  is  the  present  foundation  and  characteristic  of 
the  relationship  with  God  of  those  who  are  truly  in 
and  of  it.  As  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  man,  it  is 
His  manifestation  hereafter  in  glory  and  in  govern- 
ment. Here  it  is  characterised  by  the  relationship  of 
the  Son  Himself  to  the  Father,  in  His  Person,  with 
the  addition  of  that  which  gives  us  a  full  title  to  share 
it — redemption  through  His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of 
sins. 

The  apostle,  having  thus  introduced  the  Son  in  His 
relationship  to  the  Father,  as  the  central  and  mighty 

before  evil  existed,  the  good  which  He  purposed  in  Himself 
although  redemption  was  necessary  when  evil  had  come  in,  and 
the  glory  of  God  Himself  and  the  basis  of  our  glory  in  the  ac- 
complishment of  them,  was  made  good  in  it.  In  Colossians  man 
in  evil  is  the  object  of  grace. 

I, 


12  TfiE  BOOKS  Of  TfiE  BIBLE. 

object  which  was  to  attract  the  heart  of  the  Colossians 
and  set  them  free  from  the  yoke  of  ordinances 
sketches  now  the  different  parts  of  the  glory  of  that 
Person.  If  therefore  the  assembly's  own  glory  is  want- 
ing, that  of  Jesus  is  so  much  the  rather  set  in  stronger 
relief  before  us.  Thus  God  brings  good  out  of  evil, 
and  in  every  way  feeds  His  beloved  people. 

The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God. 
It  is  in  the  Son  of  His  love  that  we  see  what  God  is. 
(Compare  John  i.  18 ;  and  also  1  John  1.  2.)  This  is 
the  first  character  of  His  personal  glory,  the  essential 
centre  of  all  the  rest.  Now,  in  consequence  of  this 
proper  character  of  His  Person,  He  takes  by  right  the 
position  of  representing  God  in  the  creation.  Adam 
was  created  in  some  sort  in  the  image  of  God,  and 
placed  as  centre  in  a  creation  that  was  subjected  to 
him.  But,  after  all,  he  was  only  a  figure  of  the 
Christ,  of  Him  who  was  to  come.  The  Son,  in  His 
very  Person,  in  His  nature  (and  for  us  as  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father),  is  He  who  makes  God  known, 
because  He  presents  Him  in  His  own  Person  and  in  a 
full  revelation  of  His  being  and  of  His  character  be- 
fore men  and  in  the  whole  universe ;  for  all  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead  dwells  bodily  in  Him.  Nevertheless 
He  is  a  man.  He  is  thus  seen  of  angels.  We  have 
seen  Him  with  our  eyes  or  by  faith.  Thus  He  is  the 
image  of  the  invisible  God.  The  perfect  character 
and  living  representation  of  the  invisible  God  have 
been  seen  in  Him.  Wondrous  truth  for  us  with  regard 
to  the  Person  of  our  Saviour  ! 

But  then  what  place  can  He  have  in  creation  when 
He  has  come  into  it  according  to  the  eternal  counsels 
of  God  ?  He  could  have  but  one,  namely,  that  of 
supremacy  without  contestation  and  without  contro- 
vers}^  He  is  the  firstborn  of  all  creation;  this  is  a 
relative  name,  not  one  of  date  with  regard  to  time. 
It  is  said  of  Solomon,  "  I  will  make  him  my  firstborn, 


COLOSSIANS.  13 

higher  than  the  kings  of  the  earth."  Thus  the  Crea- 
tav,  when  He  takes  a  place  in  creation,  is  necessarily 
its  Head.  He  has  not  yet  made  good  His  rights, 
because  in  grace  He  would  accomplish  redemption. 
We  are  speaking  of  His  rights — rights  which  faith 
recognises. 

He  is  then  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  and, 
when  He  takes  His  place  in  it,  the  firstborn  of  all 
creation.  The  reason  of  this  is  worthy  of  our  atten- 
tion— simple,  yet  marvellous :  He  created  it.  It  was 
in  the  Person  of  the  Son  that  God  acted,  when  by  His 
power  He  created  all  things,  whether  in  heaven  or  in 
the  earth,  visible  and  invisible.  All  that  is  great  and 
exalted  is  but  the  work  of  His  hand;  all  has  been 
created  by  Him  (the  Son)  and  for  Him.  Thus,  when 
He  takes  possession  of  it,  He  takes  it  as  His  inherit- 
ance by  right.  Wonderful  truth,  that  He  who  has 
redeemed  us,  who  made  Himself  man,  one  of  us  as  to 
nature,  in  order  to  do  so,  is  the  Creator.  But  such  is 
the  truth. 

In  connection  with  this  admirable  truth,  it  was  a 
part  of  God's  counsels  that  man  should  have  dominion 
over  all  the  works  of  His  hands.  Thus  Christ,  as 
man,  has  it  by  right,  and  will  take  possession  of  it  in 
fact.  This  part  of  the  truth  of  which  we  are  speaking 
is  treated  in  Hebrews  ii. ;  we  shall  consider  it  in  its 
place.  I  introduce  it  here  merely  that  we  may  under- 
stand the  circumstances  under  which  the  Son  takes 
possession.  The  Spirit  speaks  of  the  One  who  is  man, 
but  the  One  who  is  at  the  same  time  Creator  of  all 
things,  the  Son  of  God.  They  were  created  by  Him, 
they  were  necessarily  then  created  also  for  Him. 

Thus  we  have  hitherto  the  glory  of  the  Person  of 
Christ  and  His  glory  in  creation  connected  witli  His 
Person.  In  Him  is  seen  the  image  of  the  invisible 
God.  He  has  created  all  things  :  all  is  for  Him  ;  and 
He  is  the  firstborn  of  all  that  is  created. 


14  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Another  category  of  glory,  another  supremacy,  is 
now  presented.  He  takes  a  special  place  in  relation 
to  the  assembly  in  the  power  of  resurrection.  It  is 
the  introduction  of  divine  power,  not  in  creation  but 
in  the  empire  of  death ;  in  order  that  others  may  par- 
ticipate in  His  glory  by  redemption,  and  by  the  power 
of  life  in  Him.  The  first  glory  was,  so  to  speak, 
natural — the  latter  special  and  acquired  (although  in 
virtue  of  the  glory  of  His  Person)  by  undergoing  death, 
and  all  the  power  of  the  enemy  in  it.  Accordingly  it 
is  connected,  as  wi  have  just  said,  with  redemption, 
and  with  the  introduction  of  others  into  the  participa- 
tion of  the  same  privileges.  He  is  the  Head  of  the 
body  which  is  the  assembly,  the  Beginning,  the  First- 
born from  among  the  dead,  that  in  all  things  He  might 
have  the  pre-eminence.  He  is  the  Firstborn  of  crea- 
tion. He  is  the  Firstborn*  according  to  the  power  of 
resurrection,  in  this  new  order  of  things  in  which  man 
is  predestined  to  an  entirely  new  position,  gained  by 
redemption,  and  in  which  he  participates  in  the  glory 
of  God  (as  far  as  that  which  is  created  can  do  so),  and 
that  by  participating  in  divine  life  in  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God  and  everlasting  life ;  and,  as  regards  the 
assembly,  as  members  of  His  body.  He  is  the  First- 
born of  creation,  the  Firstborn  from  among  the  dead ; 
the  Creator  and  the  conqueror  of  death  and  the 
enemy's  power.  These  are  the  two  spheres  of  the 
display  of  the  glory  of  God.  The  special  position  of 
the  assembly,  the  body  of  Christ,  forms  a  part  of  the 
latter.  He  must  have  this  resurrection-glory,  this 
universal  pre-eminence  and  superiority  also,  as  being 

*  One  of  these  pre-eminences  depends  on  His  divine  rights  as 
Creator,  the  other  on  His  work  and  on  the  power  displayed  in 
His  humanity  in  the  act  of  resurrection.  He  holds  all  as  man 
and  all  by  divine  power ;  but  in  some  sort  it  may  be  said  that 
one  part  of  His  glory  depends  on  His  divinity,  the  other  qd.  His 
victory  as  man. 


COLOSSI  ANS.  15 

man,  for  all  the  fulness  (namely,  of  the  Godhead,  see 
chap.  ii.  9)  was  pleased  to  dwell  in  Him.  What  place 
could  He  have  except  that  of  first  in  all  things !  But, 
before  speaking  of  that  which  follows,  some  important 
remarks  are  yet  to  be  made  on  that  which  we  have 
been  considering. 

The  Son  is  here  presented  to  us  as  Creator,  not  to 
the  exclusion  of  the  Father's  power,  nor  of  the  opera- 
tion of  the  Spirit.  They  are  one,  but  it  is  the  Son 
who  is  here  set  before  us.  In  John  i.  it  is  the  Word 
who  creates  all  things.  Here,  and  in  Hebrews  i.,  it  is 
under  the  name  of  Son,  that  He,  who  is  also  the  Word, 
is  revealed  to  us.  He  is  the  Word  of  God,  the  expres- 
sion of  His  thought  and  of  His  power.  It  is  by  Him 
that  God  works  and  reveals  Himself.  He  is  also  the 
Son  of  God  ;  and,  in  particular,  the  Son  of  the  Father. 
He  reveals  God,  and  he  who  has  seen  Him  has  seen 
the  Father.  Inasmuch  as  born  in  this  world  by  the 
operation  of  God  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  He  is  the 
Son  of  God.  (Psalm  ii.  7  ;  Luke  i.  35.)  But  this  is  in 
time,  when  creation  is  already  the  scene  of  the  mani- 
festation of  the  ways  and  counsels  of  God.  But  the 
Son  is  also  the  name  of  the  proper  relationship  of  His 
glorious  Person  to  the  Father  before  the  world  was. 
It  is  in  this  character  that  He  created  all  things.  The 
Son  is  to  be  glorified  even  as  the  Father.  If  He 
humble  Himself,  as  He  did  for  us,  all  things  are  put 
into  His  hands,  in  order  that  His  glory  may  be  mani- 
fested in  the  same  nature  in  the  assumption  of  which 
He  humbled  Himself.  And  already  the  power  of  life 
and  of  God  in  Him  is  manifested  by  resurrection,  so 
that  He  is  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power 
by  the  resurrection.     This  is  the  proof  of  it. 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  that  which  is  set 
before  us  is  the  proper  glory  of  His  Person  as  the  Son 
before  the  world  was.  Pie  is  the  Creator  as  Son.  It 
is  important  to  observe  this.     But  the  persons  are  not 

L 


16  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

separated  in  their  manifestation.  If  the  Son  wrought 
miracles  on  earth,  He  cast  out  devils  by  the  Spirit; 
and  the  Father  who  dwells  in  Him  (Christ)  did  the 
works.  Also  it  must  be  remembered,  that  that  which 
is  said  is  said,  when  He  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  of 
His  complete  Person,  man  upon  earth.  Not  that  we 
do  not  in  our  minds  separate  between  the  divinity  and 
the  humanity  ;  but  even  in  separating  them  we  think 
of  the  one  Person  with  regard  to  whom  we  do  so.  We 
say,  Christ  is  God,  Christ  is  man ;  but  it  is  Christ  who 
is  the  two.  I  do  not  say  this  theologically,  but  to 
draw  the  reader's  attention  to  the  remarkable  expres- 
sion, "  All  the  fulness  was  pleased  to  dwell  in  him." 
All  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  was  found  in  Christ. 
The  Gnostics,  who  in  later  years  so  much  harassed  the 
assembly,  used  this  word  "  fulness  "  in  a  mystical  and 
peculiar  sense  for  the  sum  and  source  (and  yet  after 
all,  in  the  sense  of  a  locality ;  for  it  had  a  opog,  limits 
which  separated  it  from  everything  else)  of  divinity 
which  developed  itself  in  four  pairs  of  beings — 
syzygies — Christ  being  only  one  of  a  pair.*  It  is  not 
necessary  to  go  further  into  their  reveries,  except  to 
observe  that,  with  different  shades  of  thought,  they 
attribute  creation  to  a  god  either  inferior  or  evil,  who 
also  was  the  author  of  the  Old  Testament.  Matter, 
they  said,  did  not  proceed  from  the  supreme  God. 
They  did  not  eat  meat ;  they  did  not  marry ;  at  the 
same  time  they  gave  themselves  up  to  all  sorts  of 
horrors  and  dissoluteness  ;  and,  strange  to  say,  asso- 
ciated themselves  with  Judaism,  worshipped  angels,  &c. 
The  apostle  was  often  in  conflict  with  these  tools  of 
Satan.  Peter  also  mentions  them.  Here  Paul  sets 
forth,  by  the  word  of  God,  the  whole  fulness  of  the 
divinity  of  Christ.  Far  from  being  something  inferior, 
an  emanation,  or  having  a  place  however  exalted  in 

*  Indeed  added  to  the  foui'  as  supplementary. 


COLOSSIANS.  17 

those  endless  genealogies,  all  the  fulness  itself  dwelt  in 
Him.  Glorious  truth  with  regard  to  the  Person  of 
the  Lord  our  Saviour !  We  may  leave  all  the  foolish 
imaginations  of  man  in  the  shade,  in  order  to  enjoy 
the  perfect  light  of  this  glorious  fulness  of  God  in  our 
Head  and  Lord.  All  the  fulness  was  in  Him.  We 
know  indeed  the  Father,  but  revealed  by  Him.  We 
possess  indeed  the  Spirit,  but  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit 
was  in  Him,  and  because,  having  accomplished  our 
redemption  and  our  purification,  He  then  received 
that  Spirit  for  us.  And  God  Himself  in  all  His  fulness 
was  revealed,  without  any  reservation,  in  the  Person  of 
Christ ;  and  this  Christ  is  ours,  our  Saviour,  our  Lord. 
He  has  been  manifested  to  us  and  for  us.  What  a 
glorious  truth  for  us  ! 

It  is  for  His  own  glory,  no  doubt,  that  He  should 
be  known  as  He  is,  as  love  ;  but  it  is  not  the  less  true 
that  this  revelation  was  in  connection  with  us.  It  is 
not  only  the  Son  revealing  the  Father,  sweet  and  pre- 
cious as  that  fact  is ;  it  is  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
as  such  that  is  revealed  and  shewn  forth  in  Christ.  It 
was  the  good  pleasure  of  the  fulness  to  dwell  there. 

But  Christ  was  not  only  the  Head  of  creation  in 
virtue  of  the  divine  glory  of  His  Person,  and  the  Head 
of  the  assembly  as  risen  from  among  the  dead  and 
victorious  over  the  power  of  the  enemy ;  creation, 
and  all  those  who  were  to  form  the  assembly,  were 
alike  far  from  God,  and  the  latter  were  so  even  in 
their  will ;  to  be  in  relationship  with  God  they  must 
be  reconciled  to  Him.  This  is  the  second  part  of  the 
glory  of  Christ.  Not  only  was  it  the  good  pleasure  of 
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  to  dwell  in  Him,  but  by 
Him  to  reconcile  all  things  to  itself,  having  made 
peace  by  the  blood  of  the  cross.  This  reconciliation  of 
things  in  heaven  as  well  as  on  the  earth  is  not  yet 
accomplished.  Peace  is  indeed  made  by  the  blood, 
but  tlie  power  has  not  yet  come  in  to  bring  back  the 
Y<^L.  v;  ^  G 


18  THE   BOOKS    OF   THE  BIBLE. 

whole  into  actual  relationship  with  God  according  to 
the  value  of  that  blood. 

Thus,  in  Israel,  the  blood  was  put  upon  the  mercy- 
seat,  and  expiation — peace,  was  made  ;  but  besides  this 
everything  was  sprinkled,  and  the  sins  of  the  people 
were  confessed.  This,  with  regard  to  Israel  and  to 
creation,  has  not  yet  been  done.  As  to  that  which  is 
outward,  it  remains  still  at  a  distance  from  God, 
although  peace  is  made.  We  know  that  it  is  the  good 
pleasure  of  God  to  reconcile  all  things  in  heaven,  and 
on  the  earth,  by  virtue  of  this  blood.  All  things  shall 
be  restored  to  order  under  a  new  rule.  The  guilty, 
remaining  in  their  sins,  will  be  outside  this  scene  of 
blessing ;  but  heaven  and  earth  will  be  completely 
freed  from  the  power  of  evil  (and  even  from  its  pre- 
sence during  the  millennium,  as  regards  manifestation 
— still  later,  absolutely  from  its  presence  itself),  accord- 
ing to  the  virtue  of  that  blood  which  has  separated 
between  good  and  evil,  according  to  the  character  of 
God  Himself,  and  so  glorified  God  that  peace  is  made. 
God  can  act  freely  for  blessing  ;  but  here  the  work  is 
twofold,  like  the  glory  of  the  Person  of  Christ,  and 
refers  to  the  same  objects  as  His  glory.  It  is  in  the 
counsels  of  God  to  reconcile  unto  Himself  all  things  in 
heaven  and  on  the  earth  through  Christ.  But  Chris- 
tians He  has  already  reconciled.  Once  not  only  defiled, 
like  the  creature,  but  enemies  in  their  minds,  He  has 
already  reconciled  them  in  the  body  of  His  flesh  by 
means  of  death.  The  perfect  work  which  Christ 
accomplished  in  His  body,  blotting  out  our  sins  and 
perfectly  glorifying  God  His  Father,  has  brought  us 
into  relationship  with  God  in  His  holiness  according 
to  the  efficacy  of  that  work;  that  is  to  say,  it  is 
efficacious  to  present  us,  perfectly  reconciled,  holy, 
without  blemish  and  without  blame,  before  His  face ; 
and  with  the  consciousness  of  it,  and  of  the  love  that 
h^-s  wrought  it,  and.  the  favour  into  which  we  are 


COLOSSI  ANS.  19 

brought,  so  that  in  the  sense  of  this  the  heart  is 
brought  back  to  God :  we  are  reconciled  to  God.  This 
supposes  that  we  continue  steadfast  in  the  faith  unto 
the  end. 

The  position  of  the  Colossians  gave  room  for  this 
warning,  being  viewed  as  walking  on  earth.*  We 
have  seen  that  they  had  a  little  departed,  or  were  in 
danger  of  departing,  from  the  realisation  of  their  union 
with  Christ. 

It  will  be  noticed  also,  that  the  apostle  speaks  of 
his  gospel  as  spread  abroad  in  all  the  world.  Grace 
had  overstepped  the  narrow  limits  of  Judaism  and  the 
expectation  of  the  Messiah,  in  order  to  make  known 
the  testimony  of  the  perfect  love  of  God  in  the  whole 
creation  under  heaven,  of  which  Paul  was  the  instru- 
ment as  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles. f 

Hitherto,  then,  the  Spirit  of  God  has  sdt  before  us 
the  two  pre-eminences  of  Christ,  that  over  creation 
and  that  over  the  assembly,  and  the  two  reconciliations 
which  answer  to  them,  namely,  first,  that  of  the  things 
over  which  Christ  is  set  as  Head,  that  is,  of  all  things 
in  heaven  and  earth ;  and  second,  that  of  Christians 
themselves  :  the  la^tter  already  accouiplished,  the  former 
yet  to  come.  The  ministry  of  the  apostle  had  now 
the  same  double  character.     He  has  not  undoubtedly 

*  When  the  Christian  is  viewed  as  in  Christ,  there  is  no  "if:" 
we  are  in  Him.  When  he  is  viewed  as  a  pilgrim  here,  we  are 
on  the  road  to  actual  glory,  and  have  to  reach  the  goal,  and 
here  "if"  comes  in,  and  danger,  and  the  need  of  being  kept. 
But  then  we  have  the  fullest  assurance  that  we  shall  he  kept 
and  never  perish,  and  be  confirmed  to  the  end,  and  the  good 
work  completed.  Thus  dependence  on  God  is  maintained  in 
the  saved,  and  confidence  in  His  faithfulness. 

t  Note  here  how  clear  and  full  the  statement  is  :  verse  14, 
redemption  and  forgiveness  ;  verse  21,  reconciliation  with  God; 
verse  18,  deliverance  and  introduction  into  the  kingdom ;  verse 
12,  we  are  made  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light.  All  this  we  have,  and  so  are  called  to  walk 
worthy  of  the  Lord. 

If 


20  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

to  preach  in  heaven ;  but  his  ministry  is  exercised  in 
every  place  under  heaven  where  there  is  a  soul  to 
hearken.  He  is  a  minister  of  that  gospel ;  and  then  he 
is  a  minister  of  the  assembly,  a  distinct  service  or 
ministry,  making  known  its  true  position  and  its 
privileges,  connected  indeed  with  the  other,  in  that  the 
gospel  went  out  also  to  the  Gentiles  to  bring  them  in. 
(Vers.  23,  25.)  By  this  last  instruction  he  completed 
the  word  of  God :  an  important  principle  with  regard 
to  the  exclusive  authority  of  the  written  word,  which 
shews  that  its  totality  already  exists,  demonstrated  by 
the  subjects  which  it  comprises ;  subjects  which  are 
entirely  completed,  to  the  exclusion  of  others  which 
people  may  seek  to  introduce.  The  circle  of  truths 
which  God  had  to  treat,  in  order  to  reveal  to  us  the 
glory  of  Christ  and  to  give  us  complete  instruction 
according  to  His  wisdom,  is  entire,  when  the  doctrine 
of  the  assembly  is  revealed.  There  were  no  others  to 
be  added.* 

But  this  doctrine  in  particular  exposed  the  apostle 
to  persecution  and  sufferings,  which  the  Jews  especially, 
and  the  enemy  sought  in  every  way  to  inflict  upon 
him.  But  he  rejoiced  in  this  as  a  privilege,  because 
Christ  had  suffered  on  account  of  His  love  for  the 
assembly — for  His  own.  The  apostle  speaks  here,  not 
of  the  efl5cacy  of  His  death,  but  of  the  love  which  led 
Him  to  suffer.  Looked  at  in  this  point  of  view,  the 
apostle  could  participate  in  His  sufferings,  and  we  also 
in  our  little  measure ;  but  the  apostle  in  a  peculiar 
manner,  as  the  special  witness-bearer  to  this  truth. 
If  Christ  had  been  content  to  accept  the  position  of 

•  It  is  not  a  question  here  as  to  the  dates  of  the  books,  but  of 
the  circle  of  subjects.  The  law,  the  kinfjdom,  the  Person  of 
Christ,  redemptiou  and  the  ways  of  God,  had  ah'eady  been 
brought  out ;  the  doctrine  of  the  assembly  was  then  to  be  re- 
vealed, in  order  to  make  the  communications  pf  God  complete 
ftS  to  their  subjects, 


COLOSSiANS.  21 

Messiah  according  to  man,  He  would  have  been  well 
received.  If  Paul  had  preached  circumcision,  the 
offence  of  the  cross  would  have  ceased :  man  could 
have  taken  part  in  the  religion  of  God,  if  His  religion 
had  recognised  man  in  the  flesh.  But  if  God  is 
revealed,  if  His  grace  extends  to  the  Gentiles,  if  by 
this  grace,  and  without  having  respect  to  the  Jew 
more  than  to  the  Gentile,  He  foims  an  assembly,  which 
is  the  body  of  Christ,  sharing  the  heavenly  glory  of 
His  Son — this  is  what  the  flesh  cannot  endure.  To  be 
thus  shut  out  as  nothing  worth  before  God,  even  in 
its  religion,  take  what  pains  it  might — this  is  unbear- 
able. This  is  the  source  of  the  enmity  of  the  Judaising 
spirit,  which  is  founded  on  the  flesh,  on  man,  and 
which  is  constantly  reappearing  in  the  apostle's  his- 
tory, whether  as  exciting  the  hatred  of  the  heathen, 
or  as  corrupting  the  doctrine  of  Christ  and  the 
simplicity  of  the  gospel.  Religion  in  the  flesh  boasts 
its  own  peculiar  privileges.  (See  Phil,  iii.) 

Thus  we  have  a  double  ministry,  as  well  as  a  double 
pre-eminence  of  Christ,  and  a  double  reconciliation; 
and  each  having  a  similar  relationship  the  one  to  the 
other:  Christ,  the  Head  of  all  things  in  heaven  and 
earth,  the  Head  of  the  asssembly ;  all  things  in  heaven 
and  earth  are  to  be  reconciled,  Christians  are  reconciled ; 
Paul  exercises  his  ministry  in  the  whole  creation 
under  heaven,  he  is  the  minister  of  the  assembly. 
Naturally  his  ministry  was  limited  to  the  earth.  In 
every  respect  the  extent  and  bearing  of  the  glory  of 
Christ,  and  of  the  ministry,  went  beyond  the  limits  of 
Judaism,  and  were  in  contrast  with  the  whole  system. 

The  apostle  then  insists  on  the  second  part  of  his 
ministry,  of  which  he  had  been  just  speaking ;  dwelling 
however  particularly  on  that  which  met  the  need  of 
the  Colossians,  and  developing  it,  in  order  to  secure 
them  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  whole  circle  of  these 
precious  truths.  He  completed  the  word  of  God  by 
L,  n. 


22  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

announcing  this  mystery,  which  had  been  hidden  froiii 
all  ages  and  generations,  but  was  now  manifested  to 
the  saints.  No  display  of  the  ways  of  God  since  the 
creation  had  (in  the  truths  on  which  it  was  founded,  in 
the  revelation  of  God — of  His  power,  or  of  His  thoughts, 
which  formed  its  basis  and  gave  it  its  character) 
contained  the  mystery  contained  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
assembly.  It  had  not  been  communicated  to  any 
of  those  who  formed  part  of  the  system  which 
preceded  it,  or  who  were  the  medium  of  light  to 
others,  as  instrumental  in  the  revelation  of  the  light 
of  God.  Angels,  men,  Israel,  the  prophets — all  were 
alike  in  ignorance  of  it.  The  assembly  (this  body 
united  to  the  Son  of  God  become  man  and  glorified) 
and  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  into  that  unity  was 
hidden  from  them  all. 

Now  that  Christ  the  Head  of  the  assembly,  the 
Head  of  the  body,  was  glorified,  the  mystery  of  this 
body  was  made  known.  The  apostle  here  dwells  on 
one  particular  side  of  this  subject,  which,  after  the 
Person  of  Christ,  forms  the  centre  of  all  God's  ways. 
This  side  is  Christ  in  us,  especially  as  Gentiles,  the 
hope  of  glory.  And  in  this  again  we  see  how  the 
saints  are  viewed  as  on  earth,  though  in  the  power  of 
resurrection.  The  aspect  here  given  of  the  mystery  is, 
Christ  in  us  down  here,  not  union  with  Him  actually 
in  glory,  though  inseparable  from  that.  In  fact  this 
mystery  was  in  every  way  a  new  thought,  a  new 
truth.  That  which  was  known  was  a  Messiah  who 
should  be  manifested  among  the  Jews,  the  accomplish- 
ment of  glory  in  their  midst ;  the  Gentiles  at  most 
having  part  in  it,  as  subordinate  to  the  people  of  God. 
But  according  to  the  doctrine  of  the  assembly,  Christ 
invisibly  dwelt  in  the  midst   of  the   Gentiles,*  and 

*  I  have  already  remarked  that  the  Gentiles  are  especially 
in  view  in  the  Colossians,  not  the  union  of  Jew  and  Gentile 
in  one. 


CiOLossTAN^.  23 

even  in  them  ;  and  as  to  the  glory  He  was  only  the 
hoye  of  it.  A  Christ  dwelling  in  the  hearts  of  men, 
and  of  men  formerly  rejected  and  outside  the  pro- 
mises, and  tilling  their  hearts  with  joy  and  glory  in 
the  consciousness  of  union  with  Himself — this  was 
the  wondrous  mystery  prepared  of  God  for  the  bless- 
ing of  the  Gentiles.  It  was  this  Christ,  a  Christ  such 
as  this,  whom  Paul  preached,  warning  every  man,  and 
teaching  every  man  according  to  the  full  development 
of  the  wisdom  of  God,  which  wrought  mightily  in  the 
apostle  by  the  Spirit,  in  order  that  he  might  present 
every  man  in  a  spiritual  state  answering  to  this  reve- 
lation of  Christ,  as  being  also  its  fruit.  Not  that 
every  man  would  receive  it ;  but  there  was  no  longer 
any  liinit.  All  distinction  between  them  was  blotted 
out,  alike  by  sin  and  by  grace,  and  there  was  but  one 
thing  to  do ;  that  is,  to  seek  that  every  man,  by  the 
power  of  the  word  and  the  Spirit,  should  reflect  Christ 
and  grow  up  unto  the  stature  of  His  fulness,  as  re- 
vealed in  the  doctrine  committed  to  the  apostle.  He 
laboured  for  this  according  to  the  working  of  Christ 
in  him;  for  Christ  was  not  only  the  object,  but  the 
power  that  wrought  to  form  souls  after  His  own 
image. 

Now  this  power  wrought  in  the  apostle's  weakness ; 
in  a  human  heart,  that  felt  the  necessities  of  men  and 
the  difficulties  that  occurred  by  the  way — that  felt 
them  as  a  man,  although  according  to  God,  and  was 
the  fruit  of  His  love.  He  desired  that  the  Colossians 
should  understand  the  conflict  he  had  for  them,  and 
for  all  those  who  had  never  seen  him,  in  order  that 
they  might  be  encouraged  and  be  thoroughly  united 
in  love  ;  so  that  they  might  understand,  in  all  the 
riches  of  a  full  assurance,  the  mystery  of  God. 

The  apostle  felt  that  it  was  this  which  they  needed 
and  which  would  be  a  blessing  to  them.  He  knew 
that  union  with  Christ,  realised  in  the  heart,  was  a 


S4  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BtBtfi. 

safeguard  from  the  wiles  of  the  enemy,  to  which  the 
Colossians  were  exposed.  He  knew  the  unutterable 
value  of  this  union,  and  even  of  its  realisation  by- 
faith.  He  laboured,  he  wrestled  in  prayer — for  it  is 
indeed  a  conflict — in  order  that  the  full  sense  of  this 
union  with  the  glorious  Head  might  be  wrought  in 
their  hearts,  so  that  the  Christ  on  high  should  be  in 
them  by  faith.  All  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge  were  found  in  the  mystery,  of  which  this 
was  to  their  souls  the  centre  and  the  power.  They 
had  not  to  seek  elsewhere.  Science,  falsely  so  called, 
might  pretend  to  furnish  them  with  heights  to  which 
the  simplicity  of  the  doctrines  of  Christ  did  not  reach; 
but  in  fact  the  wisdom  of  God  and  the  depths  of  His 
counsels  left  these  cloudy  efforts  of  the  human  mind 
at  an  infinite  distance.  Moreover  they  were  truth 
— reality — instead  of  being  but  the  creatures  of 
imagination  inspired  by  the  enemy. 

For  this  reason  the  apostle  had  brought  forward 
these  marvellous  revelations  of  God  respecting  the 
double  glory  of  Christ,  and  with  regard  to  His  Person. 
He  declared  them  in  order  that  no  one  should  beguile 
the  Colossians  with  enticing  words.  He  avails  him- 
self of  the  order  that  existed  among  them,  and  of 
their  faith  to  guard  them  against  the  danger  they 
were  in  from  these  thoughts  which  might  glide 
unperceived  into  their  minds,  while  all  was  yet  going 
on  well,  and  the  consciousness  of  their  faith  was  not 
touched.  This  often  happens.  People  have  faith  in 
Christ,  they  walk  well,  they  do  not  perceive  that 
certain  ideas  overthrow  that  faith  ;  they  admit  them, 
while  still  maintaining  the  profession  of  faith  together 
with  these  ideas;  but  the  force  of  the  truth  and  the 
sense  of  union  with  Christ  and  the  simplicity  that  is 
in  Him  are  lost.  The  enemy  has  so  far  attained  his 
end.  That  which  is  received  is  not  the  development 
of  Christ,  but  something  outside  Him. 


COLOSSIANS.  ^5 

Therefore  the  apostle  says,  "  As  ye  have  received 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  walk  in  him ;  rooted  and  built 
up  in  him,  and  confirmed  in  the  faith,  even  as  ye 
have  been  taught."  When  we  have  received  Christ, 
all  the  rest  is  but  a  development  of  that  which  He  is, 
and  of  the  glory  which  the  counsels  of  God  have  con- 
nected with  His  Person.  Knowledge,  or  pretended 
knowledge,  outside  this,  does  but  turn  us  away  from 
Him,  withdraw  our  hearts  from  the  influence  of  His 
glory,  throw  us  into  that  which  is  false,  and  lead  our 
souls  into  connection  with  the  creation  apart  from 
God,  and  without  possessing  the  key  to  His  purposes. 
Thus,  since  man  is  incapable  of  fathoming  that  which 
exists,  and  of  explaining  it  to  himself,  his  efforts  to  do 
so  cause  him  to  invent  a  mass  of  ideas  that  have  no 
foundation,  and  to  endeavour  to  fill  up  the  void  that  is 
found  in  his  knowledge  through  his  ignorance  of  God 
by  speculations,  in  which  (because  he  is  at  a  distance 
from  God)  Satan  plays  the  chief  part  without  man's 
suspecting  it. 

Man,  as  a  child  of  Adam,  is  not  at  the  centre  of  the 
immense  system  of  God's  ways.  Out  of  Christ  and 
without  Christ,  he  does  not  know  the  centre ;  he 
speculates,  without  foundation  and  without  end,  only 
to  lose  himself  more  and  more.  His  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil,  and  the  energy  of  his  moral  faculties, 
do  but  lead  him  astray  the  more,  because  he  employs 
them  on  higher  questioHo  than  those  which  simply 
relate  to  physical  things;  and  they  produce  in  him 
the  need  of  reconciling  apparently  inconsistent  prin- 
ciples, which  cannot  be  reconciled  without  Christ. 
Moreover  the  tendency  of  man  is  always  to  make 
himself,  as  he  is,  the  centre  of  everything;  and  this 
renders  everything  false. 

Christians  then  ought  to  walk  with  simplicity  in 
the  ways  of  the  Lord,  even  as  they  have  received 
Him ;  and  their  progress  ought  to  be  in  the  know- 

IL 


^6  THE   feOOitS  of  t^E   BT^Lfi. 

ledge  of  Christ,  the  true  centre  and  fulness  of  all 
things. 

When  man  occupies  himself  philosophically  with  all 
things,  the  insufficiency  of  his  own  resources  always 
throws  him  into  the  hands  of  an  intellectual  leader, 
and  into  tradition ;  and,  when  religion  is  the  subject, 
into  traditions  which  develop  the  religion  of  the  flesh, 
and  are  suited  to  its  powers  and  tendencies. 

In  those  days  Judaism  had  the  highest  pretensions 
to  this  kind  of  religion,  allied  itself  with  human 
speculations  and  adopted  them,  and  even  pursued 
them  assiduously ;  offering  at  the  same  time  proofs  of 
divine  origin,  and  a  testimony  to  the  unity  of  the 
Godhead,  which  the  absence  of  the  grossness  of  Pagan 
mythology  and  the  meeting  of  human  consciousness  of 
the  divine  rendered  credible.  This  relative  purity 
tended  to  remove — for  enligrhtened  minds — that  which 

o 

was  disgusting  in  the  Pagan  system.  The  Jewish 
system  had,  by  the  death  of  Jesus,  lost  all  pretension 
to  be  the  true  worship  of  God  ;  and  was  therefore 
suited  (by  the  advantages  it  offered  in  the  compara- 
tive purity  of  its  dogmas)  to  be  an  instrument  of 
Satan  in  opposing  the  truth.  At  all  times  it  was 
adapted  to  the  flesh,  was  founded  on  the  elements  of 
this  world,  because  by  its  means,  when  owned  of  God, 
God  was  proving  man  in  the  position  man  stood  in. 
But  now  God  was  no  longer  in  it ;  and  the  Jews, 
moved  by  envy,  urged  the  Gentiles  to  persecution ;  and 
Judaism  allied  itself  to  Pagan  speculations,  in  order  to 
corrupt  and  sap  the  foundations  of  Christianity,  and 
destroy  its  testimony. 

In  principle  it  is  always  thus.  The  flesh  may 
appear  for  a  time  to  despise  tradition,  but  that  which 
is  purely  intellectual  cannot  stand  in  the  midst  of 
humanity  without  something  religious.  It  has  not 
the  truth  nor  the  world  which  belongs  to  faith,  and 
for  an  immense  majority  superstition  and  tradition 


COLOSSTANS.  27 

are  needed ;  that  is  to  say,  a  religion  which  the  flesh 
can  lay  hold  of,  and  which  suits  the  flesh.  God  by 
His  power  may  preserve  a  portion  of  the  truth,  or 
allow  the  whole  to  be  corrupted ;  but  in  either  case 
true  christian  position  and  the  doctrine  of  the  assembly 
are  lost.* 

We  may  indeed  find  philosophy  apart  from  the 
religion  of  the  flesh,  and  the  latter  apart  from  the 
former;  but  in  this  case  philosophy  is  impotent  and 
atheistic,  the  religion  of  th^  flesh  narrow,  legal,  super- 
stitious, and,  if  it  can  be  so,  persecuting. 

In  our  chapter  we  find  philosophy  and  the  emptiness 
of  human  wisdom  united  with  the  traditions  of  men, 
characterised  as  "the  elements  of  this  world,"  in  op- 
position to  Christ :  for  we  have  a  heavenly  Christ 
who  is  a  perfect  contrast  to  the  flesh  in  man  living  on 
earth,  a  Christ  in  whom  is  all  wisdom  and  fulness,  and 
the  reality  of  all  that  which  the  law  pretended  to 
give,  or  which  it  presented  in  figure :  and  who  is  at 
the  same  time  an  answer  to  all  our  wants.  This  the 
apostle  develops  here,  shewing  death  and  resurrection 
with  Him  as  the  means  of  participating  in  it. 

And  first  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells  in 
Him  bodily.  Instead  of  the  misty  speculations  of 
men  and  fantastic  ?eons,  we  have  the  fulness  of  God 
bodily,  in  a  real  human  body,  and  thus  efiicaciously 
for  us,  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  second 
place  we  are  complete  in  Him ;  we  need  nothing  out 
of  Christ,  t     On  the  one  side,  we  have,  in  Him,  God 

*  There  were  some  very  beautiful  legends,  embracing  partial 
truths,  in  the  Gnostic  system ;  but  they  had  lost  God  and  truth, 
and  reality  of  conscience  before  God. 

t  These  expressions  relate  to  the  double  character  of  Christ 
ah-eady  set  before  us  in  chapter  i.  They  shew  us  what  we  have 
in  Christ  in  a  positive  way,  as  that  which  follows  applies  it  to 
everytliing  here  below  which  would  prevent  our  enjoying  it.  In 
Christ  is  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  the  object  of  our  delight, 
in  whom  we  possess  all  things.    We  have  also  in  Him  a  position 

II. 


28  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

perfectly  presented  in  all  His  fulness;  on  the  other 
side,  we  possess  in  Him  perfection  and  completeness 
before  God.  We  are  wanting  in  nothing  as  to  our 
position  before  God.  What  a  truth  !  What  a  position ! 
God,  in  His  perfect  fulness,  in  Christ  as  man ;  we  in 
Him  before  God,  in  the  perfection  of  what  He  is — 
in  Him  who  is  head  of  all  principality  and  power, 
before  which  man  in  his  ignorance  would  incline  to 
bend  the  knee !  We  are  in  Him,  in  whom  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead  dwells  as  to  His  Person ;  in  Him,  who 
is  above  all  principality  as  to  His  position  and  His 
rights  as  Christ,  man  exalted  on  high. 

The  apostle  then  enters  into  some  details  of  applica- 
tion to  demonstrate  that  the  faithful  have  all  in 
Christ,  viewed  according  to  the  position  which  He  has 
taken  without  having  anything  to  seek  elsewhere  here 
below. 

Circumcision  (the  divine  token  of  the  covenant 
with  the  Jews,  and  of  the  putting  off  the  flesh,  which 
was  required  in  order  to  form  part  of  God's  people) 
had  its  reality  in  Him.  By  the  power  of  the  life 
which  is  in  Him,  and  which  is  theirs — being  made 
partakers  of  the  efficacy  of  His  death — Christians 
account  themselves  to  be  dead,  and  have  put  off  this 
body  of  sin  by  faith.  This  is  the  true  circumcision  of 
Christ  made  without  hands.  Circumcision  made  by 
hands  was  but  the  sign  of  this  putting  off  the  body  of 
the  flesh — the  privilege  of  the  Christian  in  Christ. 
Having  a  new  life  in  Christ,  he  has  efficaciously  put 
off  the  old  man. 

We  are  buried  with  Christ  by  baptism  (this  is  its 

above  all  creation,  in  the  perfection  which  has  placed  Christ 
there.  We  are  completed  in  Him  who  is  the  Head  of  all  prin- 
cipality and  of  all  power.  As  regards  the  phraseology,  the 
change  of  a  word,  to  one  not  however  better  in  itself,  shews  the 
mind  of  the  apostle.  In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  completeness  of 
the  Godhead  bodily ;  and  we  are  complete  in  Him. 


COLOSSIANS.  29 

meaning),  in  which  also  we  are  risen  with  Him  by 
faith  in  this  operation  of  the  power  of  God  whereby 
He  was  raised  from  among  the  dead.  Baptism  was 
the  sign  and  expression  of  this  ;*  faith  in  the  operation 
of  God  which  raised  Him,  the  means  by  which  is 
effected  in  us  this  marvellous  resurrection  with  Christ 
into  a  new  state  and  scene — this  happy  death,  or 
rather  this  precious  participation  in  the  death  of  Him 
who  has  accomplished  all  for  us.  And  when  I  say 
"  faith,"  it  is  the  power  of  God's  Spirit  working  in  us. 
But  it  is  the  power  of  God  Himself,  as  it  wrought  in 
Christ,  which  works  in  us  to  give  us  the  new  standing 
in  life.  Viewed  in  connection  with  our  resurrection 
with  Christ  it  implies — by  the  very  fact  of  our 
receiving  it — that  we  are  forgiven  perfectly  and  for 
ever.  We  were  under  the  burden  of  our  sins,  and 
dead  in  them.  This  burden  Christ  took  upon  Himself, 
and  died  for  us,  accomplishing  what  put  away  our 
sins  in  going  down  into  death.  Raised  up  with  Him, 
inasmuch  as  partaking  of  that  life  which  He  possesses 
as  risen  from  the  dead,  we  have — like  Him  and  with 
Him — left  all  that  burden  of  sin  and  condemnation 
behind  us  with  the  death  from  which  we  have  been 
delivered.  Therefore  He  says, '  Having  forgiven  you 
all  trespasses." 

Christ,  when  He  arose,  left  death  and  the  weight  of 


*  Some  do  not  connect  "risen"  with  baptism.  If  so,  1  ap- 
prehend the  passage  must  be  read  thus :  "  In  whom  also  ye  are 
circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made  without  hands,  in  put- 
ting off  the  body  of  the  flesh  by  the  circumcision  of  Christ, 
having  been  buried  with  Him  in  baptism  ;  in  whom  also  ye  are 
risen  together  [meaning  with  Christ]  through  faith,"  &c.  Bap- 
tism clearly  signifies  death,  and  it  is  not  the  baptising  but  the 
coming  out  of  the  water  which  can  be  appHed  to  resurrection. 
The  giving  of  life  is  in  no  way  the  sense  of  baptism  even  as  a 
figure,  but  leaving  the  life  of  Adam  by  death  (the  death  of 
Christ)  and  entrance  through  that  gate  into  a,  wiioliy  new  place 
jiud  position. 

XI, 


30  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

condemnation  under  which  we  were  lying,  behind 
Him — we  also  being  raised  up  with  Him.  Naturally 
God,  in  thus  raising  us  up  from  the  state  in  which  we 
were,  has  not  raised  us  up  to  condemn  us,  or  with 
condemnation  attached  to  this  new  life,  which  is 
Christ  Himself.  For  He  had  already  borne  the  con- 
demnation, and  satisfied  the  justice  of  God,  and  died 
for  the  putting  away  of  sin,  before  He  communicated 
this  life  to  us.  God  brought  us  out  of  death  and  con- 
demnation with  Christ  who  had  borne  it  for  us.  But 
this  is  connected  with  another  aspect  of  this  work  of 
grace,  spoken  of  here,  and  also  in  Ephesians,  and  even 
in  John  v.  and  2  Corinthians  v.  He  who  is  alive  in 
sins  is  dead  in  them  towards  God.  If  I  look  at  him 
as  alive  in  them,  death  must  come  in  and  has  come  in 
on  the  cross.  (See  Rom.  vi.)  This  side  is  not  brought 
forward  in  Ephesians ;  only  death  in  Romans ;  in 
Colossians  death  and  resurrection  in  Christ,  of  which 
we  have  spoken.  In  Ephesians  this  is  not  spoken  of 
at  all.  We  are  viewed  as  dead  in  sins,  dead  towards 
God,  and  all  good  is  a  new  creation  according  to  God's 
counsels.  We  are  quickened  together  with  Christ 
when  dead  in  sins.  This  also  is  taken  up  in  Colos- 
sians :  only  it  is  not  spoken  of  as  a  new  creation.  But 
in  both  a  new  life  is  given  when  we  are  dead ;  only 
Ephesians  begins  with  this  in  Christ  raised  and 
exalted,  and  by  the  same  power  in  us.  In  Colossians 
it  is  introduced  as  completing  what  is  taught  of  the  ad- 
ministration of  this  doctrine  of  death  in  baptism,  and 
our  resurrection  by  faith  of  God's  operation  in  Christ. 
In  Ephesians  grace  finds  us  dead  and  quickens  with 
Christ.  In  Colossians  it  finds  us  alive  in  sins  and 
brings  in  death  and  resurrection,  and  completes  this 
by  quickening  with  Christ. 

All  the  ordinances  likewise,  which  belonged  to  the 
rudiments  of  this  world  and  which  applied  to  man  in 
the  fleshy  and  weighed  as  an  insupportable  yoke  upoi> 


COLOSSI  ANS.  31 

the  Jews  (and  to  which  they  endeavoured  to  bring 
others  into  subjection),  which  put  the  conscience 
always  under  the  burden  of  a  service  unaccomplished 
by  man,  and  a  righteousness  unsatisfied  in  God — these 
ordinances  were  blotted  out.  In  them  the  Jew  had 
put  his  signature,  so  to  speak,  to  his  guiltiness ;  but 
the  obligation  was  destroyed  and  nailed  to  the  cross 
of  Christ.  We  receive  liberty  as  well  as  life  and 
pardon. 

This  is  not  all.  There  was  the  strength  of  princi- 
palities and  powers  against  us — the  might  of  spiritual 
wickedness.  Christ  has  vanquished  and  despoiled 
them  on  the  cross,  having  triumphed  over  them  in  it. 
All  that  was  against  us  He  has  put  aside,  in  order  to 
introduce  us,  entirely  delivered  from  it  all,  into  our 
new  position.  It  will  be  seen  here,  that  what  the 
apostle  says  of  the  work  of  Christ  does  not  go  beyond 
that  which  He  did  for  our  deliverance,  in  order  to  set 
us  in  the  heavenly  places.  He  speaks  (ver.  10)  of  the 
rights  of  Christ,  but  not  as  sitting  in  the  heavenly 
places,  nor  as  leading  the  enemy  captive ;  neither  does 
he  speak  of  us  as  sitting  in  Him  in  the  heavenlies. 
He  has  done  all  that  is  necessary  to  bring  us  into 
them ;  but  the  Colossians  are  viewed  as  on  earth, 
though  risen,  and  in  danger  at  least  of  losing  the  sense 
of  the  position  which  was  theirs  in  virtue  of  their 
union  with  Christ,  and  were  in  danger  of  slipping 
back  into  the  elements  of  the  world  and  of  flesh,  of 
the  man  alive  in  the  flesh,  not  dead,  not  risen  with 
Christ;  and  the  apostle  seeks  to  bring  them  back  to 
it,  by  shewing  how  Christ  had  accomplished  all  that 
was  requisite — had  taken  out  of  the  way  all  that  pre- 
vented their  attaining  it.  But  he  cannot  speak  of  the 
position  itself:  they  were  not  consciously  in  it.  In 
the  things  of  God  we  cannot  comprehend  a  position 
without  being  in  it.  God  may  reveal  it.  God  may 
shew  us  the  way  to  it.     Tlic  apostle  does  so  here  with 

Uf  " 


32  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

regard  to  the  Person  of  Christ,  which  alone  could 
bring  them  back  to  it ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  deve- 
lops the  efficacy  of  His  work  in  this  respect,  in  order 
to  set  them  free  from  the  shackles  that  kept  them 
back,  and  to  shew  them  that  all  obstacles  had  been 
removed.  But  in  detail  he  has  to  apply  it  to  the 
dangers  that  beset  them  rather  than  to  display  its 
glorious  results  in  heaven. 

Jewish  ordinances  were  but  shadows,  Christ  is  the 
substance.  By  bringing  in  angels  as  objects  of  homage, 
and  thus  putting  them  between  themselves  and  Christ, 
they  would  separate  themselves  from  the  Head  of  the 
body,  who  was  above  all  principalities.  The  simplicity 
of  christian  faith  held  fast  the  Head,  from  which 
the  whole  body  directly  drew  its  nourishment  and 
thus  increased  with  the  increase  of  God.  It  looked 
like  humility,  thus  to  bring  themselves  into  relation 
with  angels,  as  superior  and  exalted  beings  who  might 
serve  as  mediators.  But  there  were  two  faults  of 
inunense  importance  in  this  apparent  humility.  First, 
it  really  was  thorough  pride — this  pretension  to  pene 
trate  into  the  secrets  of  heaven  of  which  they  were 
ignorant.  What  did  they  know  of  any  position  held 
by  angels,  which  would  make  them  the  objects  of  such 
homage  ?  It  was  pretending  to  mount  up  into  heaven 
for  and  by  themselves,  and  to  measure  their  relations 
with  God's  creatures  without  Christ,  and  at  their  own 
will  to  connect  themselves  with  them.  Secondly,  it 
was  to  deny  their  union  with  Christ.  One  with  Him, 
there  could  be  nothing  between  Him  and  them  ;  if 
there  were  anything,  then  they  were  dead  and  twice 
dead.  Besides  by  this  union  they  were  one  Avith 
Him  who  was  above  the  angels.  United  to  Him, 
they  received,  as  we  have  seen,  a  communication, 
through  all  the  members  of  the  body,  of  the  treasures 
of  grace  and  life  which  were  in  the  Head.  The 
mutual  links  between  the  members  of  the  body  itself 


COLOSSIANS.  36 

were  thereby  strengthened,  and  thus  the  body  had  its 
increase. 

Two  applications  of  the  doctrine  that  they  are  dead 
with  Christ  and  risen  with  Him  follow.  (Chap.  ii.  20.) 
He  applies  the  principle  of  death  to  all  the  ordinances, 
and  to  the  asceticism  which  treated  the  body  as  a 
thing  vile  in  itself  which  ought  to  be  rejected ;  and 
(chap.  iii.  1)  he  uses  the  resurrection  to  raise  their 
hearts  into  a  higher  sphere  and  to  bring  them  back  to 
Christ  by  looking  up^  they  being  dead  as  regards  the 
old  man.* 

To  make  these  instructions  more  plain  by  shewing 
their  connection,  we  may  remark  that  the  apostle 
points  out  the  double  danger,  namely,  philosophy,  and 
human  tradition,  in  contrast  with  Christ.  (Chap.  ii.  3 ; 
see  vers.  9-15.)  While  identifying  us  with  Christ,  he 
speaks  of  the  bearing  of  the  work  of  Christ  Himself 
rather  than  of  this  identification.  In  verses  16-19  he 
applies  it  first  (ver.  16)  to  subjection  to  ordinances, 
that  is,  to  the  Jewish  side  of  their  danger ;  and  then 
(ver.  18)  to  the  Gnostic  philosophy ,f  science  falsely  so 

*  These  applications  flow  from  chapter  ii.  11,  12.  It  is  to  be 
remarked  that  Komans  from  chapter  v.  12  treats  of  death  to  sin, 
in  which  man  (as  child  of  Adam)  was  alive.  In  Ephesians  man 
is  reckoned  as  dead  in  sins  as  towards  God.  Colossians  takes 
up  both:  chapter  ii.  11,  12  follows  them  out,  adding  resurrection 
with  Christ.  Verse  13  follows  Ephesian  doctrine.  Chapters  li. 
20,  iii.  1,  follow  on  chapter  ii.  11,  12,  and  we  have  the  putting 
off  of  the  old  and  puttmg  on  of  the  new  man. 

t  Although  this  word  has  the  appearance  of  learning  and  of 
not  being  scriptural,  this  is  not  the  case.  Science,  falsely  so 
called,  of  which  the  apostle  speaks  elsewhere,  is  in  Greek 
^^  gnosis,''  whence  this  presumptuous  and  corru})ting  philosophy 
was  called  "  Gnosticism,"  and  its  votaries  "  Gnostics."  It  plays 
an  inmiense  part  in  the  history  of  the  church,  with  whicii  I 
have  nothing  to  do  here.  But  its  principles  are  fre(]ueiitly 
found  in  the  New  Testament,  brought  forward  by  the  apostle 
in  order  to  combat  them.  The  Jews  had  largely  (alien  into  the 
notion  of  a  mediatorial  work  of  angels,  though  not  in  the  fori 
exactlj  of  Gnostic  philosophy. 

VOL.  V.  XL  D 


34  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

called,  which  linked  itself  with  Judaism  (or  to  which 
Judaism  linked  itself),  reproducing  itself  under  a  new 
form.  From  verse  20  the  apostle  applies  our  death 
and  resurrection  vj'dh  Christ  to  the  same  points,  or  to 
the  deliverance  of  the  Colossi  an  s  by  raising  their 
thoughts  on  high. 

But  the  Colossians  are  not  the  only  ones  who  may 
have  been  in  this  danger.  In  the  main  these  prin- 
ciples have  been  the  ruin  of  the  church  at  all  times. 
They  are  those  of  the  mystery  of  iniquity,*  which  has 
so  much  ripened  since  then,  and  produced  effects  so 
various,  and  under  such  different  modifications,  on 
account  of  other  principles  which  have  also  acted,  and 
under  the  sovereign  providence  of  God.  We  shall 
see  the  deep,  simple,  arid  decisive  principle  which  is 
involved  in  it  in  the  verses  that  follow. 

The  verses  already  quoted,  as  far  as  the  twentieth, 
had  judged  this  whole  Jud^eo-philosophic  system  from 
the  point  of  view  of  Christ's  work,  of  His  resurrection, 
and  of  union  with  Him  in  His  heavenly  position. 

That  which  follows  judges  it  after  our  position. 
The  preceding  verses  had  demonstrated  that  the  system 
was  false,  because  Christ  and  His  work  were  such 
as  is  declared  in  them.  The  passage  we  are  going 
to  consider  shews  that  this  system  is  absurd,  cannot 
be  applied  to  us,  has  no  possible  application,  because 
of  our  position.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  a  false  system, 
null  and  void  in  all  its  parts,  if  Christ  is  true  and  is  in 
heaven ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  an  absurd  system 
in  its  application  to  us,  if  we  are  Christians.     And  for 

*  This  was  working  in  the  apostles'  days  ;  Paul  withstood  it  in 
the  energj'  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  After  his  departure  that  power 
was  gone.  The  historical  church  never  had  the  two  great  fun- 
damental principles  of  Christianity,  perfection  in  Christ  ("by 
one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever"),  and  the  presence  and 
leading  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  down  here.  These  were  sup- 
planted by  sacraments  and  the  clergy. 


COLOSSTANS.  35 

this  reason :  it  is  a  system  whicli  supposes  life  in  this 
world,  and  relationships  to  be  acquired  with  God,  hav- 
ing their  foundation  in  that  life,  while  it  pretends  to 
mortify  llesh;  and  yet  it  addresses  itself  to  persons 
who,  for  faith,  are  dead.  The  apostle  says,  that  we 
are  dead  to  the  rudiments  of  this  world,  to  all  the 
principles  on  which  its  life  acts.  Why  then,  as  though 
we  were  still  living  (alive)  in  it,  as  though  we  were  still 
alive  in  this  world,  do  we  subject  ourselves  to  ordin- 
ances which  have  to  do  with  this  life,  and  which 
suppose  its  existence  ? — ordinances  which  apply  to 
things  which  perish  in  the  use  of  them,  and  which 
have  no  connection  with  that  which  is  heavenly  and 
eternal.  They  have  indeed  a  semblance  of  humility 
and  self-denial  as  regards  the  body,  but  they  have  no 
link  with  heaven,  which  is  the  sphere  of  the  new  life 
— of  all  its  motives,  and  all  its  development ;  and  they 
do  not  recognise  the  honour  of  the  creature,  as  a  crea- 
ture come  out  of  the  hand  of  God,  which,  as  such,  has 
always  its  place  and  its  honour.  They  put  a  man  in 
and  under  the  flesh,  while  pretending  to  deliver  us 
from  it,  and  they  separate  the  believer  from  Christ  by 
putting  angels  between  the  soul  and  the  heavenly 
place  and  blessing;  whereas  we  are  united  to  Christ, 
who  is  above  all  these  powers,  and  we  in  Him. 

These  ordinances  had  to  do  with  merely  corruptible 
things — were  not  connected  with  the  new  life,  but 
with  man  living  in  his  life  of  flesh  on  the  earth,  to 
which  life  the  Christian  is  morally  dead  ;  and  as  far  as 
regarded  this  life,  they  did  not  recognise  the  body  as 
a  creature  of  God,  as  it  ouoht  to  be  recoo-nised. 

Thus  this  system  of  ordinances  had  lost  Christ,  who 
was  their  substance.  It  was  connected  with  the  pride 
that  pretended  to  penetrate  heaven,  in  order  to  put 
itself  in  relation  with  beings  whom  we  do  not  know 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  have  any  relations  with  them 
— pride  which  in  so  doing  separated  from  the  Head  of 

II. 


36  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  body,  Christ,  and  thus  disowned  .all  connection 
with  the  source  of  life,  and  with  the  only  true  position 
of  the  soul  before  God.  This  system  falsified  equally 
our  position  on  earth  by  treating  us  as  though  still 
alive  after  the  old  man,  whereas  we  are  dead ;  and  dis- 
honoured the  creature  as  such,  instead  of  recognising 
it  as  coming  from  the  hand  of  God. 

That  which  was  a  danger  to  Christians  in  the 
apostle's  days  characterises  Christianity  at  the  present 
time. 

The  Christian's  position  was  thus  set  forth,  but  in 
its  application  thus  far  rather  to  the  danger  of  Chris- 
tians than  to  their  heavenly  privileges.  Thus  grace 
has  provided  us  with  all  we  need,  using  every  privi- 
lege, using  the  faith  of  some,  giving  warnings  and 
instruction  above  all  price,  and  turning  the  faults  of 
others  to  account. 

Now  begins  the  direct  exhortations  founded  on  the 
truth  that  has  been  developed,  and  adapted  to  the 
state  in  which  the  Colossians  were ;  that  is,  viewed  as 
risen  with  Christ,  but  not  sitting  in  heavenly  places. 

Risen  w^th  Christ,  they  were  to  set  their  affections 
on  things  above,  where  Christ  sits  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,  and  not  on  things  on  the  earth.  The  two 
could  not  go  together.  To  look,  to  have  one's  motives, 
above  and  below  at  the  same  time  is  impossible.  Be 
tempted  by  things,  have  to  resist  them,  we  may ;  but 
this  is  not  to  have  them  as  our  object.  The  reason 
for  this  is  however  found  in  our  position :  we  are  dead, 
and  our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  It  does  not 
say,  "  we  must  die."  Man  cannot  do  this  by  will :  we 
cannot  deny  will  by  will.  Nor  would  the  will  of  the 
flesh  ever  do  it.  If  it  acts,  it  does  not  abdicate.  We 
are  dead:  this  is  the  precious  comforting  truth  with 
regard  to  the  Christian  by  virtue  of  Christ  having 
died  for  him.  He  has  received  the  life  of  Christ,  and 
all  that  Christ  did  for  him  in  that  life  belongs  to  him. 


COLOSSIANS.  37 

Thus  he  is  dead,  because  Christ  died  for  him.  The 
life  with  which  the  power  of  temptation,  guilt,  the 
attacks  of  sin,  are  connected,  exists  no  longer  to  faith. 
By  death  all  that  was  connected  with  it  has  come  to 
an  end.  Now  that  which  was  connected  with  the  life 
of  the  old  man  was  sin,  condemnation,  weakness,  fear, 
powerlessness  against  the  assaults  of  the  enemy — all 
that  is  past.  We  have  a  life,  but  it  is  in  Christ ;  it  is 
hidden  with  Him  in  God.  We  are  not  yet  manifested 
in  its  glory,  as  we  shall  be  manifested  iefore  the  eyes 
of  all  in  heaven  and  earth.  Our  life  is  hidden,  but 
safe  in  its  eternal  source.  It  Uas  the  portion  of  Christ, 
in  whom  we  possess  it.  He  is  hid  in  God,  so  also  is 
our  life :  when  Christ  shall  appear,  we  shall  also 
appear  with  Him. 

It  will  be  remarked,  that  the  apostle  does  not  speak 
here  of  our  union  with  Christ,  but  of  our  life,  of  the 
fact  that  we  are  dead,  and  that  our  life  is  hid  with 
Him  in  God.  He  does  not  speak  of  the  assembly 
with  regard  to  our  position ;  he  speaks,  no  doubt,  of 
Christ  as  being  its  Head,  as  to  His  personal  glory,  but 
not  of  it  as  to  us.  He  speaks  of  us  individually. 
Each  one  has  his  own  life  in  Christ  truly,  but  as  his 
own  ;  it  is  not  union  with  other  Christians.  We  have 
this  life  in  Christ,  but  it  is  not  here  our  union  as  one 
body  with  Him.  It  is  the  individual  character  of  the 
Christian,  to  whom  Christ,  the  Head,  is  everything. 

That  which  is  also  highly  important  to  observe  in 
connection  with  this  truth  is  that  in  this  epistle  there 
is  nothing  said  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  apostle  speaks 
practically  of  their  love  in  the  Spirit,  but  in  the 
instruction  of  the  epistle  he  does  not  name  Him. 
Even  when  he  says,  "  there  is  neither  Jew,  nor  Greek," 
&;c.,  it  is  in  the  new  man,  not  because  we  are  one  in 
Christ.  The  individual  was  to  cleave  to  the  Head. 
He  was  no  longer  living  in  this  world  ;  he  was  dead, 
and  his  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God.     But  this  was  for 

III. 


38  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

himself ;  he  was  to  know  it,  and  hold  it  fast  for  him- 
self, as  necessary  truth,  that  he  might  be  preserved 
from  the  wiles  of  the  enemy.  In  a  word,  it  is  life  in 
Christ.  Elsewhere  we  see  many  of  the  things  which 
the  apostle  here  mentions  spoken  of  as  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit,  by  which  communion  and  union  are  maintained ; 
but  here  it  is  simply  in  the  nature  of  the  life  that 
these  fruits  have  their  source.  It  is  quite  natural 
consequently,  that  the  compass  and  the  assemblage  of 
all  spiritual  relationships  in  one,  in  Christ,  which  we 
find  in  the  divine  instruction  when  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
introduced,  are  wanting  here. 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  this  operation  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  found  everywhere,  and  characterises 
the  whole  of  that  which  is  developed  in  communion 
with  the  Head,  Christ,  with  whom  we  are  united  in 
one  body  by  the  Spirit.  Thus  we  are  individually 
sealed  by  the  Spirit  of  promise,  the  earnest  of  our 
inheritance ;  we  all  have  access  to  the  Father  by  one 
Spirit;  we  are  also  builded  together  for  a  habitation 
of  God  through  the  Spirit ;  the  union  of  the  Gentiles 
in  one  body  is  now  revealed  by  the  Spirit ;  saints  are 
strengthened  by  the  Spirit  in  the  inner  man ;  there  is 
one  body  and  one  Spirit;  we  are  not  to  grieve 
the  Spirit;  we  are  to  be  filled  with  Him;  the  word 
itself  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  The  union  of  the 
body  with  Christ,  our  resurrection  with  Him,  that  we 
are  sitting  in  the  heavenlies  in  Him — all  that  flows 
from  this  union,  is  fully  developed ;  but  at  the  same 
time  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  unites  us  to  Him,  and  unites 
us  all  together  as  one  body,  and  who  here  below  cha- 
racterises the  presence  of  God  in  the  church,  who  acts 
in  us,  secures  our  future,  and  becomes  our  strength  in 
the  present — the  Holy  Ghost,  I  repeat,  is  foimd  every- 
where, to  complete  the  truth  and  to  give  it  its  present 
force  for  us  here  below. 

Many  of  the  exhortations  in  the  Epistle  to  the 


COLOSSIANS.  3D 

Ephesians  are  nearly  the  same  as  those  to  the  Colos- 
siaiis.  But  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  they  are 
connected  with  the  Spirit ;  in  that  to  the  Colossians, 
with  the  action  of  the  word  and  of  grace  in  the  heart. 
This  gives  an  immense  range  and  a  connectedness  to 
the  doctrine  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  in  that 
which  regards  our  position  here  below,  because  it 
brings  in  God  Himself,  and  as  dwelling  in  us  by  the 
Spirit,  and  filling  us,  whether  as  in  the  individual  or 
in  the  oneness  of  the  body ;  and  gives  the  full  scope  of 
the  counsels  of  God. 

Yet  the  possession  of  life  is  in  its  way  as  important 
as  the  presence  and  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It 
makes  the  blessing  ourselves,  not  merely  an  operation 
in  us,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  the  character  of  divine  life 
is  far  more  fully  developed ;  whereas  in  Ephesians  it 
is  more  contrast  with  the  previous  state. 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  we  have  (chap,  viii.) 
this  action  and  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  presented 
in  a  very  remarkable  way  as  to  the  individual.  He 
characterises  us  vitally  in  the  principle  of  our  resur- 
rection, is  the  witness  in  us  that  we  are  children, 
filling  us  with  joy  and  with  the  hope  of  glory  as  heirs, 
the  support  of  our  weakness  and  the  source  of  our 
petitions  and  our  groans.  In  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  it  is  in  connection  with  our  personal  rela- 
tionship to  God ;  in  that  to  the  Ephesians,  as  the 
presence  of  God  in  us  in  connection  with  our  union  to 
Christ  as  one  body. 

There  is  another  thing  to  be  noticed  here  which 
throws  light  on  the  purpose  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
these  epistles.  The  starting-point  in  that  to  the  Ephe- 
sians is  the  counsels  of  God.  Man  is  looked  at  as  he 
is,  without  one  pulse  of  life  as  regards  God ;  he  is  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins,  by  nature  the  child  of  wrath. 
God  is  rich  in  mercy;  He  raises  him  up  with  Christ  who 
in  grace  went  down  into  death,  and  places  him  accord- 

III. 


40  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

ing  to  His  counsels  in  the  same  position  as  that  Christ 
is  in.  We  are  His  workmanship,  created  anew  in 
Christ  Jesus.  God  is  pleased  to  bring  us  into  His 
presence  according  to  His  own  counsels  and  His 
nature.  It  is  not  said  that  we  are  dead  with  Christ. 
Man  is  not  viewed  as  living  in  the  flesh,  so  that  in 
one  way  or  in  another  he  had  to  die.  This  was  not 
necessary.  The  Ephesians  were  to  apprehend,  on  the 
one  hand,  the  full  contrast  between  God  and  man 
according  to  His  counsels ;  and,  on  the  other,  man's 
sinful  state  according  to  nature.  In  their  epistle  all  is 
the  work  of  God  Himself  according  to  the  original 
purpose  of  His  own  heart,  of  His  nature,  and  of  His 
will;*  man  is  already  dead,  and  even  Christ  is  not 
brought  in  as  to  His  place  till  viewed  as  dead,  and 
thereon  risen  and  exalted  on  high. 

The  Colossians  were  in  danger  of  subjecting  them- 
selves to  ordinances,  and  thereby  were  in  a  position  to 
consider  man  as  living  in  the  world ;  and  the  apostle 
makes  them  feel  that  they  are  dead  with  Christ.  He 
was  obliged  in  grace  to  follow  them  where  they  were, 
for  their  danger  was  to  take  man  into  consideration  as 
living  on  the  earth  ;  in  order,  nevertheless,  to  shew 
that  the  Christian  had  already  died  with  Christ,  and 
his  life  on  earth  was  as  risen  with  Him. 

In  the  letter  to  the  Ephesians  man  is  not  said  to 
die  with  Christ.  He  is  dead  in  his  sins  when  God 
begins  to  act  towards  him.  No  man  is  alive  to  God. 
The  Christian  is  quickened  together  with  Christ, 
Christ  Himself  first  viewed  as  dead. 

This  character  of  the  Colossians  however,  the  dwell- 
ing on  life  or  the  new  man,  has  its  value  for  us  all, 
and  a  great  value,  because  the  life,  the  new  nature, 
and  grace  working  in  it,  are  much  less  brought  for- 

*  Hence  we  have  no  justification  in  Ephesians.  It  treats  of 
a  new  creation. 


COLOSSI  ANS.  41 

ward  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  where  the  sub- 
ject is  the  energy  of  God,  who  creates  men  in  Christ 
and  unites  them  to  Him,  fills  the  believer  and  the 
assembly  here  with  the  nature  and  the  character  of  the 
new  man,  and  thereby  of  Christ,  yea,  of  God  Himself.* 
One  might  suppose  that  there  was  only  the  Holy 
Ghost  acting  in  the  fulness  of  His  power,  and  filling 
the  individual  and  the  assembly.  But  in  this  Epistle 
to  the  Colossians  we  find  that  there  is  a  new  nature, 
an  intrinsic  change,  not  of  the  flesh  indeed,  but  of  the 
man.  For  we  are  viewed,  not  merely  as  quickened  by 
the  Son,  but  as  dead  and  risen  with  Christ,  the  Man 
who  had  died,  so  as  to  have  passed  out  of — put  off — 
the  old  standing  of  a  child  of  Adam,  and  into  a  risen 
one  with  Christ — put  on  the  new  man.  This  is  at 
once  a  standing  and  a  state  before  God,  a  source  of 
tastes,^  of  sentiments,  of  desires,  of  arguments,  and  of 
moral  capacities,  which  are  in  connection  with  the 
very  nature  of  God,  who  has  caused  it  to  spring  up  in 

*  This  difference  is  of  deep  interest,  and  brings  out  the  cha- 
racter of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  in  a  remarkable  way — an 
epistle  in  which  everything  is  influenced  by  the  high  point  of 
view  taken  by  the  Spirit,  and  flows  from  the  original  and  eter- 
nal counsels  of  God,  and  from  His  operation  to  bring  those 
counsels  to  perfection — the  settled  purposes  of  His  own  heart. 
He  desires  to  have — He  creates — something  in  order  to  shew 
forth  the  immense  riches  of  His  grace.  He  has  taken  the  dead 
and  the  lost :  but  they  are  only  the  objects  of  His  operations, 
suited  to  make  these  manifest  on  account  of  their  own  condition. 
He  does  not  work  upon  the  nature  of  man,  because  it  is  contrary 
to  His  own,  in  order  to  destroy  this  contrariety.  He  quickens 
from  the  dead,  and  creates.  In  Colossians  the  death  of  the  old 
man  is  spoken  of,  which  it  was  necessary  to  take  into  considera- 
tion. God  be  praised,  we  are  entitled  to  view  it  as  already  dead, 
because  Christ  has  died  for  us. 

I  may  add  here  to  that  which  I  have  said  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
that,  when  the  apostle  speaks  in  Colossians  of  the  power  of  hope 
in  us,  he  does  not  mention  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  still 
Christ  in  us,  the  hope  of  glory.  Throughout  it  is  Christ,  and 
Christ  as  life. 

III. 


42  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  heart.  We  are  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the 
hnage  of  Him  that  created  us.  But  this  source  is  a 
life,  which  needs  that  the  Holy  Ghost  should  reveal  to 
it  the  objects  that  are  suited  to  it,  and  that  awaken 
these  tastes  and  feelings,  which  satisfy  them  and 
cause  them  to  gi'ow.  It  needs  that  the  Spirit  of  God 
should  act  in  it  to  give  it  strength ;  but  it  is  a  real 
life,  a  nature  which  has  its  tastes  attached  to  its  very 
existence;*  which,  being  enlightened  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  is  conscious  of  its  own  existence  ;  and  in  which 
we  are  the  children  of  God,  being  born  of  Him. 

Neither  is  it  unimportant  that  we  should  learn, 
with  regard  to  the  life  of  the  tlesh,  and  when  thinking 
of  it,  although  it  be  on  the  negative  side,  that  we  are 
dead:  that  God  recoo-nises  nothino^  belono-ino-  to  the 
old  man;  that  He  takes  pleasure  in  a  new  nature, 
which  is  indeed  ours  by  grace,  but  which  is  of  God 
Himself,  and  which  is  the  moral  reflection  of  His  own. 

We  are  dead  then,  and  our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God.  We  have  membjrs  on  earth — no  recognised 
life ;  and  we  have  to  put  to  death"f-  all  these  members 


*  With  this  difference  between  the  actings  of  the  Spirit,  and 
the  existence  of  the  new  hfe,  is  connected  the  liberty  of  the  soul. 
When  we  are  born  of  God,  we  have  necessarily  a  taste  for  holi- 
ness ;  love  acts  in  us ;  we  take  pleasure  in  the  righteousness  of 
God.  But,  by  virtue  of  these  sentiments,  although  my  heart 
appreciates  love  in  God,  and  this  love  attracts  me  and  inspires 
me  with  a  measure  of  confidence,  yet  my  conscience  condemns 
me,  I  feel  that  I  am  not  that  which  I  love.  I  am  under  the 
law,  and  uncertain  of  my  relationship  with  God.  When  I  have 
learnt  the  value  of  Christ's  blood,  that  He  is  my  righteousness, 
the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  and  acting  in  me  gives  me  the  sense 
of  my  relationship  with  God.  I  have  thiB  consciousness  of  it  in 
my  soul,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  bears  witness  of  it.  There  is 
liberty. 

f  It  is  a  very  different  thing  from  dying  to  sin.  This  sup- 
poses evil  in  the  thing  that  dies  (save  of  course  in  the  case  of 
Christ  who  did  it  for  those  who  had);  whereas  putting  to  death 
is  an  act  of  power  in  that  which  is  good — the  new  man. 


COLOSSI  ANS.  43 

of  the  old  man.  The  Christian  has  to  deny  them 
practically  as  belonging  to  the  old  man,  while  his  life 
is  there  where  Christ  is.  They  bring  down  the  wrath 
of  God  upon  the  children  of  disobedience.  Christians 
walked  in  these  things  when  they  had  their  life  in 
them ;  but  this  is  no  longer  the  case ;  and  they 
deny  not  only  gross  sins,  the  fruit  of  positive  lusts 
(chap.  iii.  5,  6),  but  all  the  workings  of  an  unbroken 
will  and  an  unsubdued  heart,  every  indication  of  the 
actings  of  the  will  of  that  nature  which  knows  not 
God,  and  is  not  ruled  by  His  fear,  all  anger  and 
malice  and  falsehood  flowing  from  selfishness  or  the 
fear  of  man.  (Yer.  8.)  Truth  reigns  in  the  heart 
which  has  put  off  the  old  man,  according  to  the  sim- 
plicity of  the  new  man,*  which  is  renewed  also  in 
knowledge  after  the  image  of  Him  who  created  it. 
(Vers.  9,  10.)  The  new  man  walks  in  the  light.  It  is 
not  only  that  there  is  a  conscience  which  judges  good 
and  evil  according  to  that  which  man  ought  to  be 
according  to  his  nature  as  a  responsible  being ;  there 
is  a  new  man  who  judges  the  old  man  altogether, 
judging  good  and  evil  according  to  the  knowledge  of 
God.     Such  is  the  putting  oflT. 

Before  Christianity,  which  is  the  full  revelation  of 
God,  there  were  indeed,  as  need  not  be  said,  souls 
born  anew ;  but  their  rule,  when  a  rule  was  definitely 
given,  was  man's  responsibility  (whatever  piety  and 
grace  might  inspire),  and  the  law,  which  was  the  per- 
fect measure  of  that  which  man,  as  a  being  responsible 
to  God,  ought  to  be.     Saints  then  did  not  distinguish 

*  These  three  form  the  whole  character  of  evil  in  man : 
generally,  violence  and  corruption,  the  last  takinf]^  the  twofold 
form  of  lust  and  falsehood.  So,  before  the  flood,  the  earth  was 
corrupt  before  God,  and  the  earth  was  filled  with  violence. 
Falsehood  is  Satan's  form  of  corruption,  and  violence  also  cha- 
racterises him.  The  Lord  declares  him  to  be  a  liar  and  a 
murderer.    (John  viii.  44.)     Man  adds  the  lust  because  of  flesh. 

III. 


44  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

between  a  new  and  an  old  man,  altliough  of  necessity 
they  liad  the  conscience  of  the  old  man  and  the  tastes 
of  the  new  in  measure  in  many  respects.  The  sense, 
for  instance,  of  the  evil  of  falsehood  had  not  at  all  tho 
same  place  as  with  the  C'hristian.  Now  the  new  man 
is  renew^ed  in  knowledge  after  the  image  of  Him  who 
created  him*  God  Himself  in  His  nature  is  the 
standard  of  good  and  evil,  because  the  new  man  has 
the  knowledge  of  wdiat  that  nature  is ;  he  is  made  a 
partaker  of  it,  and  he  has  the  light  of  God.  It  is  an 
intelligent  participation  by  grace  in  the  nature  of 
God,  which  is  the  marvellous  and  precious  privilege 
of  the  Christian.  God  works  in  this  nature  ;  but  by 
communicating  it  He  has  placed  man  in  this  position. 
Christ  is  the  perfect  model  of  this  image,  the  type  of 
the  new  man. 

Other  differences  have  disappeared  :  there  remains 
but  the  old  man,  which  we  only  acknowledge  as  dead, 
and  the  new  man.  To  the  latter  Christ  is  all ;  so  that 
there  is  none  but  He  whom  they  see  and  whom  they 
acknowledge,  and  He  is  in  all  believers.  They  put  on 
therefore  as  such,  as  elect,  holy,  beloved  (Christ  being 
their  life),  the  character  of  Christ,  mercies,  kindness, 
humility,  meekness,  patience,  forbearing  one  another, 
and  forgiving  one  another  if  otience  has  been  given, 
even  as  Christ  has  done  to  us.f     Finally  they  put  on 

*  Note  here  the  difference  of  the  corres])onding  phrase  in 
Ephesians.  There  the  Christian  is  created  after  God  in  right 
eousness  and  true  holiness.  Here  it  is  the  new  apprehensions 
of  the  divine  life  which  knows  God.  It  is  our  state,  not  God's 
creative  act.  Not  that  this  contradicts  the  Epbesian  view ;  on 
the  contrary,  "renewed"  here  is  another  word  from  Ephesians. 
It  is  that  which  is  wholly  new,  never  was  there  before  iavaKoivov- 
fitvoi).   In  Ephesians  "  renewed  "  is  what  is  kept  fresh  and  new. 

t  Eemark  here  how  patience  and  graciousness  and  long- 
suffering  characterise  the  Christian.  It  is  remarkable  how  this 
is  the  case  everywhere.  So  must  it  be  in  a  world  like  this. 
So  was  it  in  Christ.      So  in  1  Corinthians  xiii.  the  traits  of 


COLOSSIANS.  45 

love,  the  bond  of  perfectness,  that  which  gives  a 
divine  character  to  all  the  qualities  that  have  been 
enumerated,  and  that  were  manifested  in  Christ,  and 
a  divine  check  on  taking  amiable  nature  for  divine 
grace,  for  divine  love  is  holy. 

And  note  here,  that  the  putting  on  of  these  qualities 
is  in  the  consciousness  of  the  blessed  place  before  God 
expressed  in  the  words  "  elect  of  God,  holy  and  be- 
loved." It  is  as  such.  Nor  can  we  do  it  otherwise. 
It  is  in  the  sense  of  this  wondrous  favour  that  grace 
develops  itself  in  our  hearts.  So  in  Ephesians,  "  as 
dear  children." 

Several  of  these  qualities  may  be  resembled  by 
things  in  nature ;  but  the  energy,  the  features,  the 
bond  of  divine  love,  which  acts  in  the  sense  of  com- 
munion with  God,  are  totally  wanting  in  the  latter ; 
and  this  gives  a  character,  a  completeness,  a  righteous- 
ness of  application,  a  perfection,  a  propriety,  and  an 
energy  to  the  manifestation  of  these  qualities,  which 
love  alone  can  give.  For  it  is  indeed  God  Himself 
who  is  there,  acting  in  His  nature  which  He  has  im- 
parted to  us.  For  He  who  dwells  in  love  dwells  in 
God,  and  God  in  him.  With  regard  to  the  state  of  the 
soul,  there  is  a  crown  to  this  walk,  wherewith  they 
who  follow  it  constantly  are  adorned.  The  peace  of 
Christ  reigns  in  the  heart,  that  sweet  and  ineffable 
peace  which  nothing  could  disturb,  though  His  spirit 
passed  through  everything  to  try  it,  for  He  walked 
ever  with  God.  God  has  also  called  us  to  this  ;  He  is 
the  God  of  peace.  And  here  the  apostle  introduces 
the  oneness  of  the  body,  not  as  to  its  privileges  in 
Christ,  but  as  to  the  fact  that  Christians  are  called  to 
be  together  in  the  unity  of  which  peace  is  the  seal  and 
the  bond.     And  then  there  will  be  thanksgiving ;  for 

charity  are  all  subjective  and  of  this  character.  Not  that  that  is 
a  definition  of  charity,  but  it  is  characteristic  of  it.  Where 
these  traits  are  wanting,  charity  is. 

III. 


46  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE  BIBLE. 

the  soul  is  conscious  of  the  love  and  the  activity  of 
God,  and  everything  flows  to  it  from  that  love. 

But,  besides  peace  and  thanksgiving  towards  God, 
there  is  the  development  of  life  in  the  knowledge  of 
what  is  revealed,  its  food  and  joy.  This  too  is  en- 
joyed in  the  activity  of  life  and  love  towards  others. 
The  enjoyment  of  God  and  of  that  which  is  in  His 
presence  leads  to  this  activity  of  the  soul.  When  the 
latter  is  real,  it  is  the  joyful  liberty  of  a  nature  that  is 
is  itself  in  health,  the  activity  of  love  that  is  natural 
to  it,  and  which  receives  its  energy  from  communion 
with  God,  according  to  His  nature.  The  word  of 
Christ  unfolds  all  that  is  revealed  to  the  soul  as  that 
in  which  it  lives,  and  in  which  it  expands  itself,  and  is 
thus  the  rule,  and  active  and  directing  power,  because 
it  is  the  expression  of  that  nature,  and  the  revelation 
of  all  its  ways,  and  of  its  active  energy  in  love  in 
Him. 

The  apostle  therefore  exhorts  that  the  word  of 
Christ  may  dwell  in  them  richly.  This  is  the  develop- 
ment, according  to  the  perfection  of  God,  of  the  new 
man,  and  the  wisdom  of  God  to  form  and  direct  him. 
Paul  desires  that  Christians  may  fully  realise  this.  It 
is  by  communion  with  the  Lord,  holding  intercourse 
with  Him,  that  it  is  done.  The  word  being  that  in 
which  the  wisdom  is  found ;  also  according  to  this 
development  the  saints  can  teach  and  admonish  each 
other.*  But  in  this  case  it  is  not  only  wisdom  that 
we  learn,  and  that  is  displayed  in  us,  but  affections  in 
connection  with  Him  in  whom  we  have  found  this 
wisdom,  so  that  these  expi-essions  of  the  life  of  Christ, 
as  true  wisdom  in  the  world,  find  their  voice  in  our 
hearts  in  praise,  in  thank.soivinor  in  sinoincr  His 
excellency.      All    the    intimate    affections    in    which 

*  It  is  simpler  to  put  the  stop  after  "  one  another,"  and  only 
a.  comma  before  "  teaching." 


COLOSSIANS.  47 

spiritual  life  develops  itself  express  themselves,  ac- 
cording to  what  we  have  learned  :  they  flow  from  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,  and  are  the  expression  of  the  soul's 
connection  with  Him,  and  of  the  feelings  this  produces 
in  the  heart.  Christ  in  His  Person,  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  His  presence,  as  the  object  of  our  thoughts, 
and  in  the  moral  fruits  proceeding  thence,  sustains  the 
intercourse  and  the  communications  of  the  soul  that  is 
occupied  with  His  praises. 

But  this  consciousness  of  relationship  with  Christ, 
in  the  life  which  is  of  Him  in  us,  applies  to  every- 
thing. Nothing  is  done  without  Him.  If  He  is  the 
life,  all  which  that  life  does  has  Him  for  its  end 
and  object,  as  far  as  the  heart  is  concerned.  He  is 
present  as  that  which  is  the  governing  motive,  and 
gives  its  character  to  our  actions,  and  which  pre- 
occupies our  heart  in  performing  them.  Everything 
relates  to  Him :  we  do  not  eat  without  Him ;  (how  can 
we  when  He  is  our  very  life  ?)  we  do  not  drink  with- 
out Him  ;  what  we  say,  what  we  do,  is  said  and  done 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  There  is  the  sense  of  His 
presence ;  the  consciousness  that  everything  relates  to 
Him,  that  we  can  do  nothing — unless  carnally — with- 
out Him,  because  the  life  which  we  have  of  Him  acts 
with  Him  and  in  Him,  does  not  separate  from  Him, 
and  has  Him  for  its  aim  in  all  things,  even  as  water 
rises  to  the  height  from  which  it  descended.  This  is 
what  characterises  the  life  of  the  Christian.  And 
what  a  life !  Through  Him,  dwelling  in  the  con- 
sciousness of  divine  love,  we  give  thanks  to  our  God 
and  Father. 

Observe  here  that  the  christian  life  is  not  only  cha- 
racterised by  cei-tain  subjective  qualities  which  How 
from  Christ,  but  by  its  having  Christ  Himself  for  the 
aim  and  object  of  the  heart  and  mind  in  al]  that  w^e  do 
in  every  respect.  Christ  personally  reigns  in,  and  is 
present  to,  the  heart  in  everything. 

III. 


48  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

To  the  inexperienced  eye  of  man  nature  is  often 
confounded  with  grace ;  but  the  intelligent  conscious- 
ness  of  Christ  as  the  heart's  object,  of  His  presence,  of 
the  seal  of  His  approval  when  one  thinks  of  Him, 
cannot  be  confounded  with  anything.  There  is  nothing 
that  resembles  it,  nothing  that  can  appear  to  take  its 
place.  When  He  reveals  Himself  to  our  heart,  and 
the  heart  walks  with  Him,  and  communes  with  Him 
in  all  things,  and  seeks  only  the  light  of  His  counten- 
ance, the  seal  of  His  favour  on  the  soul  in  all  things, 
then  He  is  known,  well  known.  There  is  none  but 
He  who  thus  communicates  Himself  to  the  soul  when 
it  walks  in  the  way  of  His  will,  as  expressed  in  the 
word. 

After  these  great  and  important  principles  of  the 
new  life  the  apostle  enters  into  the  diverse  relation- 
ships of  life,  giving  warnings  against  that  which 
would  endanger  them,  by  shewing  what  the  christian 
character  of  each  one  of  them  is.  To  the  wife,  obedi- 
ence— affection  was  natural  to  her.  "  Thy  desire  shall 
be  to  thy  husband."  To  the  husband,  affection  and 
kindness — his  heart  may  be  indifferent  and  hard. 
Children  are  to  be  obedient ;  fathers,  gentle,  in  order 
that  the  children's  affections  may  not  be  estranged 
from  them,  and  that  they  may  not  be  induced  to  seek 
that  happiness  in  the  world  which  they  ought  to  find 
in  the  sanctuary  of  the  domestic  circle,  which  God  has 
formed  as  a  safeguard  for  those  who  are  growing  up 
in  weakness ;  the  precious  home  (if  Christ  is  acknow- 
ledged) of  kind  affections,  in  which  the  heai't  is  trained 
in  the  ties  which  God  Himself  has  formed ;  and  that 
in  connection  with  the  Lord,  and  which,  by  cherishing 
the  affections,  preserves  from  the  passions  and  from 
self-will ;  and  which,  where  its  strength  is  rightly 
developed,  has  a  power  that,  in  spite  of  sin  and  dis- 
order, awakens  the  conscience  and  engages  the  heart, 


COLOSSIANS.  49 

keeping  it  away  from  evil  and  the  direct  power  of 
Satan.     For  it  is  God's  appointment. 

I  know  indeed  that  another  power  is  required  to 
deliver  the  heart  from  sin  and  to  keep  it  from  sin. 
Nature,  even  as  God  created  it,  does  not  give  eternal 
life,  nor  does  it  restore  innocence  or  purify  the  con- 
science. We  may,  by  the  energy  of  the  Spirit,  conse- 
crate ourselves  to  God  outside  these  relationships, 
renounce  them  even,  if  God  should  call  us  by  more 
powerful  obligations,  as  Christ  teaches  us  in  the 
gospel.  The  rights  of  Christ  over  man  lost  by  sin  are 
sovereign,  absolute,  and  complete.  He  has  redeemed 
him ;  and  the  redeemed  one  is  no  longer  his  own,  but 
belongs  to  Him  who  gave  Himself  for  him.  Where 
relationships  exist,  sin  indeed  has  perverted  every- 
thing, and  corrupted  the  will ;  passions  come  in ;  but 
the  relationships  themselves  are  of  God :  woe  to  him 
who  despises  them  as  such  !  If  grace  has  wrought 
and  the  new  life  exists,  it  acknowledges  that  which 
God  has  formed.  It  well  knows  that  there  is  no  good 
in  man,  it  knows  that  sin  has  marred  everything,  but 
that  which  sin  has  marred  is  not  itself  sin.  And 
where  these  relationships  exist,  the  renunciation  of 
self-will,  death  to  sin,  the  bringing  in  of  Christ,  the 
operation  of  life  in  Him,  restore  their  power;  and  if 
they  cannot  give  back  the  character  of  innocence  (lost 
for  ever),  they  can  make  them  a  scene  for  the  opera- 
tions of  grace,  in  which  meekness,  tenderness,  mutual 
help,  and  self-denial,  in  the  midst  of  the  diflBculties 
and  sorrows  which  sin  has  introduced,  lend  them  a 
charm  and  a  depth  (even  as  Christ  did  in  every  rela- 
tionship) which  innocence  itself  could  not  have  pre- 
sented. It  is  grace  acting  in  the  life  of  Christ  in  us 
which  develops  itself  in  them. 

To  be  without  natural  affection  is  a  sign  of  hopeless 
apostasy  and  estrangement  from  God,  of  the  complete 
selfishness  of  the  last  days. 

VUL    V.  III.  JB 


60  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

I  am  not  drawing  a  false  picture,  or  speaking 
poetically,  as  though  the  bright  side  were  all ;  I  only- 
say  that  God  has  formed  these  relationships,  and  that 
whosoever  fears  God  will  respect  them.  Grace  is 
requisite.  They  give  occasion,  through  their  intimacy 
itself,  to  all  that  is  most  painful,  if  grace  do  not  act  in 
them.  The  apostle  warns  us  here  of  this  danger.  If 
the  Lord  is  the  bond  in  them,  if  our  still  closer  union 
with  Him  forms  the  strength  of  our  natural  relation- 
ships, then  grace  reigns  here  as  elsewhere;  and,  to 
those  who  stand  in  these  relationships,  they  become  a 
scene  for  the  lovely  display  of  the  life  of  Christ. 

It  will  be  observed  how  the  apostle  consequently 
introduces  Christ  into  them,  and  especially  in  regard 
to  those  who  are  subject  in  them,  wives  and  children; 
in  order  to  sanctify,  by  so  exalted  a  motive,  the  obedi- 
ence suited  to  their  position.  He  does  this  still  more 
where  the  tie  is  not  of  nature  but  one  which  has  its 
origin  in  a  sinful  world — and  from  sin  itself — that 
between  slaves  and  their  masters.  Grace  does  not  set 
itself  to  change  the  state  of  the  world  and  of  society, 
but  to  lead  souls  to  heaven  by  renewing  them  after 
the  image  of  God.  I  doubt  not  that  it  has  very  much 
altered  for  the  better  the  social  condition  of  man ; 
because,  through  bringing  the  conscience  immediately 
before  the  only  true  God  whom  it  has  revealed  in  His 
own  perfections,  and  establishing  by  its  authority  that 
of  the  natural  relationships  in  the  human  family,  grace 
has  had  its  effect  upon  that  conscience  even  where 
the  heart  was  not  converted,  and  has  furnished  it  with 
a  rule  in  that  which  regards  morality.  But  Christianity, 
as  to  its  own  doctrine,  treats  the  world  as  alienated 
from  God,  and  lying  in  evil — man  as  the  child  of 
wrath,  and  lost. 

Christ,  the  Son  of  God  (who  if  He  had  been  received 
could  have  put  all  things  right,  and  who  will  here- 
after by   His  kingdom   establish  righteousness  and 


COLOSSI  ANS.  51 

peace),  was  rejected  by  the  world,  and  the  friendship 
of  the  world  is  enmity  against  God.  The  state  of  man 
is  treated  in  the  gospel  in  a  deeper  way  than  in  regard 
to  his  social  condition.  It  is  viewed  with  reference  to 
the  soul's  connection  with  God,  and  consequently  with 
that  which  is  eternal.  God  imparts  a  new  life  unto 
us,  in  order  that  we  may  enjoy  those  new  relationships 
with  Himself  which  redemption  has  gained  for  us.  Now 
as  Christ,  while  living,  was  the  expression  of  the  love 
and  the  omnipotent  goodness  of  God  in  the  midst  of  a 
fallen  creation,  so,  being  now  rejected  by  the  world 
(which  thus  condemned  itself),  Christ,  who  dwells  by 
His  grace  in  the  heart  of  one  who  has  received  life, 
becomes  to  that  heart  a  source  of  happiness  in  com- 
munion with  the  love  of  God,  which  lifts  it  up  and 
sets  it  above  circumstances,  be  they  what  they  may. 
The  slave,  in  possessing  Christ,  is  free  in  heart ;  he  is 
the  freed  man  of  God  Himself.  The  master  knows 
that  he  himself  has  a  Master,  and  the  relationship  in 
which  he  finds  himself  takes  the  form  of  the  grace 
and  love  that  reigns  in  the  heart  of  him  who  in  it 
exercises  his  authority. 

But,  as  I  have  said,  to  the  poor  slave  Christ  is  espe- 
cially presented  as  a  resource.  He  may  serve  his 
master,  whether  a  good  or  bad  one,  with  faithfulness, 
meekness,  and  devotedness  ;  because  in  so  doing  he 
serves  the  Lord  Himself,  and  is  conscious  that  he  does 
so.  He  will  have  his  rew^ard  there  where  nothing  is 
forgotten  that  is  done  to  glorify  Christ,  and  where 
masters  and  slaves  are  all  before  Him  who  has  no 
respect  of  persons. 

Two  principles  act  in  the  heart  of  the  christian 
slave :  his  conscience  in  all  his  conduct  is  before  God ; 
the  fear  of  God  governs  him,  and  not  his  master's  eye. 
And  he  is  conscious  of  his  relationship  to  Christ,  of 
the  presence  of  Christ,  which  sustains  and  lifts  him 
above  everything.     It  is  a  secret  which  nothing  can 

IV. 


52  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

take  from  him,  and  which  has  power  over  everything, 

because  it  is  within  and  on  high — Christ  in  him,  the 
hope  of  glory.  Yes,  how  admirably  does  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ  exalt  everything  that  it  pervades ;  and 
with  what  consoling  power  does  it  descend  into  all 
that  is  desolate  and  cast  down,  all  that  groans,  all  that 
is  humbled  in  this  world  of  sin ! 

Three  times  in  these  two  verses,  while  holding  their 
conscience  in  the  presence  of  God,  the  apostle  brings 
in  the  Lord,  the  Lord  Christ,  to  fill  the  hearts  of  these 
poor  slaves,  and  make  them  feel  who  it  was  to  whom 
they  rendered  service.     Such  is  Christianity. 

The  apostle  ends  his  epistle  with  some  important 
general  exhortations. 

He  desires  that  the  saints  should  continue  through 
prayer  in  communion  with  God,  and  in  the  sense  of 
their  dependence  on  Him,  conscious  of  His  nearness  to 
them,  and  of  His  readiness  to  hear  them.  For  that 
which  speaks  to  the  heart  for  our  walk  is  not  enough; 
the  soul  must  know  its  own  relations  with  God, 
exercising  itself  in  those  relations ;  and  it  must  receive 
directly  from  Him  that  which  assures  it  of  His  love. 
There  must  be  perseverance  in  this.  We  are  in  con- 
flict with  evil,  which  has  a  hold  upon  our  own  hearts 
if  we  are  without  the  strength  of  God.  We  must 
therefore  commune  with  God.  We  must  watch  therein 
with  settled  purpose  of  heart,  not  merely  as  an  occa- 
sional thing :  any  one  can  cry  out  when  he  is  in  need. 
But  the  heart  separated  from  the  world  and  all  that  is 
of  it  occupies  itself  with  God,  with  all  that  regards 
the  glory  of  His  name,  according  to  the  measure  in 
which  we  are  concerned  in  it.  The  conflict  is  carried 
on  with  a  tender  and  freed  spirit,  having  only  His  glory 
as  the  object,  both  in  the  assembly  and  in  the  indi- 
vidual walk.  But  thus  one  understands  that  God  works, 
and  that  He  does  not  forsake  us,  and  thanksgiving  is 
always  mingled  with  the  prayers  we  address  to  Him. 


COLOSSIANS.  53 

Paul  felt  his  dependence  on  this  blessing,  and  he 
asked  for  a  share  also  in  their  prayers,  that  God  might 
open  his  mouth,  and  that  he  might  proclaim  the  gospel 
as  he  ought  to  do. 

Now  we  are  in  a  hostile  world,  in  which  hostility  is 
easily  awakened  where  it  does  not  already  exist  openly, 
and  in  which  offence  is  quickly  taken  at  things  wherein 
perhaps  we  neither  saw  nor  intended  evil.  We  must  take 
away  the  occasion  even  from  those  that  seek  it,  and 
walk  in  wisdom  with  respect  to  them  that  are  without. 

How  clearly  the  within  and  the  without  are  here 
distinguished !  Those  within,  whom  God  acknow- 
ledges, His  family,  His  assembly — they  are  His  own. 
Those  without,  they  are  the  world,  those  who  are  not 
joined  to  the  Lord.  The  distinction  is  plainly  marked, 
but  love  is  active  towards  them  that  are  without,  and, 
being  itself  in  the  enjoyment  of  communion  with  God, 
it  is  careful  to  do  nothing  that  might  prevent  others 
from  enjoying  it. 

But  there  was  something  more :  they  were  to  re- 
deem the  time.  The  natural  man,  taken  up  with  his 
own  affairs,  and  disinclined  to  serious  things,  gave 
christian  love  little  opportunity  to  set  grace  and  truth 
before  him  and  make  him  care  for  his  own  soul,  thus 
serving  the  Lord  and  using  time  in  His  name.  The 
heart  of  man  cannot  always  escape  the  influence  of 
surrounding  circumstances,  which  bear  witness  to  his 
heart  and  conscience  that  he  is  under  the  dominion  of 
sin,  and  already  eating  its  bitter  fruits  here  below— 
circumstances  which  bring  to  his  conscience  the  re- 
membrance of  a  too-much  forgotten  God,  which  speak 
with  the  mighty  voice  of  sorrow  to  a  broken  heart, 
glad  at  least  to  have  a  resource  in  God  when  his  hand 
is  pierced  by  the  broken  reed  on  which  he  leaned. 
God  Himself  acts  upon  man  by  these  circumstances, 
and  by  every  circumstance  of  life.  One  who  is  walk- 
ing with  the  Lord  knows  how  to  avail  himself  of 

IV. 


54  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

them.  Satan  may  indeed  deceive  a  man,  but  he 
cannot  prevent  God  at  all  times  from  speaking  to  the 
heart.  It  is  a  happy  thing  so  to  walk  with  God  that 
He  can  use  us  as  His  voice,  when  He  would  thus 
speak  to  poor  sinners.  Our  speech  ought  always  to 
be  the  expression  of  this  separation  from  evil,  this 
power  of  the  presence  of  God  which  keeps  us  inwardly 
apart  from  it,  so  as  to  make  that  power  felt  by  others; 
and  that,  in  all  the  questionings  which  arise  in  the 
heart  of  man,  wandering  out  of  the  way  in  confusion 
and  darkness,  and  even  leading  others  astray  thereby, 
we  may  know  how  to  give  an  answer  which  comes 
from  the  light  and  conveys  light. 

Tychicus  was  to  carry  the  testimony  of  the  interest 
which  the  apostle  took  in  the  welfare  of  the  Colossians, 
and  of  his  confidence  in  their  interest  in  him.  Paul 
bears  witness  to  the  love  of  others,  and  to  their  concern 
also  in  the  progress  of  the  gospel  and  the  prosperity  of 
the  faithful. 

Marcus,  who  had  formerly  drawn  back  from  the 
toils  of  the  work,  receives  a  testimony  here  on  the 
apostle's  part  and  a  still  better  one  later  (2  Tim.  iv. 
11),  for  he  had  made  himself  useful  to  the  apostle 
himself.  Such  is  grace.  The  secret  of  the  interest 
Barnabas  took  in  him  comes  out  here :  he  was  nearly 
related  to  him.  This  dear  servant  of  God  was  from 
Cyprus  too.  He  went  there  and  took  Mark  with  him. 
The  flesh  and  Judaism  find  their  way  everywhere. 
The  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  requisite  to  raise  us 
above,  and  set  us  beyond,  their  influence. 

Demas  receives  no  especial  testimony.  The  apostle 
conveys  his  greetings,  but  is  silent  as  to  himself. 
Only  in  the  Epistle  to  Philemon  is  he  named  as  a 
fellow-labourer  of  the  apostle.  Afterwards  he  forsook 
Paul.  He  was  a  brother  :  the  apostle  admits  his  claim 
but  says  nothing;  he  had  nothing  to  say.  "And 
Demas,"  for  Paul's  style  is  terribly  cold. 


COLOSSI  ANS.  55 

We  may  observe  that  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians 
was  written  at  the  same  time,  and  sent  by  this  same 
Tychieus.  The  one  "  from  Laodicea  "  is,  I  doubt  not, 
one  that  they  were  to  receive  from  that  assembly, 
written  by  Paul,  and  by  which  the  saints  at  Colosse 
were  to  profit ;  possibly  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians, 
which  he  may  have  had  communicated  to  the  Laodi- 
ceans.  Be  this  as  it  may,  all  that  is  said  is  that  it 
was  one  of  which  the  assembly  at  Laodicea  were  in 
possession,  and  by  no  means  that  it  was  directly  ad- 
dressed to  them:  rather  the  contrary.  It  is  very 
possible  that  a  letter,  or  a  hundred  letters,  may  have 
been  written  by  Paul  to  others,  which  it  was  not  in 
the  purposes  of  God  to  preserve  for  the  universal  as- 
sembly :  but  here  there  is  no  proof  that  a  letter  had 
been  written  to  the  Laodiceans.  Tychieus  was  the 
bearer  of  two ;  he  ffiay  have  been  the  bearer  of  three, 
one  of  which  differed  only  in  some  details  of  applica- 
tion which  might  serve  to  confirm  the  Colossians 
without  being  in  the  main  another  divine  communica- 
tion for  other  days ;  but,  I  repeat,  it  does  not  appear 
to  be  so  from  that  which  is  said  here.  It  might  be 
said,  a  letter  "from  Laodicea,"  because  it  was  there, 
instead  of  a  letter  to  Laodicea  ;  but  it  is  not  the  usual 
mode  of  expression.  We  have  seen  that  the  letter  to 
the  Ephesians  is  another  communication  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  It  has  been  preserved  for  us.  We  do  not 
know  whether  that  from  Laodicea  was  the  same, 
communicated  by  them  to  the  Christians  of  that  city ; 
or  another,  which  they  were  to  send  to  the  Colossians 
(an  assembly  in  their  vicinity),  and  which — adding 
nothing  to  the  divine  relations — has  not  been  preserved 
for  us. 

It  appears  that  Christians  were  not  very  numerous 
at  Laodicea.  The  apostle  salutes  the  brethren  there. 
There  were  some  who  assembled  in  the  house  of  one 
Nymphas ;  they  were  not  in  a  case  to  have  a  letter 


66  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

addressed  to  them  in  particular :  still  the  apostle  does 
not  forget  them.  But  that  which  he  says  here  is  an 
almost  certain  proof  that  the  apostle  had  not  ad- 
dressed any  epistle  to  them.  He  would  not  have  sent 
greetings  through  the  Colossians  to  the  brethren  in 
Laodicea,  if  at  the  same  time  he  had  written  a  special 
epistle  to  the  latter.  The  case  is  plain  enough  :  there 
were  brethren  at  Laodicea,  but  not  in  great  numbers, 
and  not  in  that  distinct  position  which  gave  rise  to  an 
epistle.  But  this  little  assembly  in  the  house  of 
Nymphas  was  not  to  be  forgotten ;  it  should  profit 
by  the  epistles  addressed  to  other  assemblies  more  con- 
siderable than  itself,  and  whose  condition  required  an 
epistle,  or  gave  occasion  to  write  one,  which  epistles 
were  transmitted  to  Laodicea,  according  to  the  apostle's 
order. 

With  regard  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  it  is 
not  a  supposition.     The  apostle  commands  them  ex- 

?ressly  to  have  it  read  in  the  assembly  at  Laodicea. 
he  latter  had  also  received  another  epistle  from  some 
other  assembly,  and  the  Colossians  were  to  profit  by  it 
in  the  same  manner.  The  two  assemblies,  which  were 
near  each  other,  were  mutually  to  enjoy  the  spiritual 
favours  that  were  granted  them. 

The  apostle  does  not  forget  individuals  even.  Archip- 
pus  receives  a  solemn  exhortation  to  take  heed  to  the 
ministry  which  the  Lord  had  committed  to  him,  and 
to  fulfil  his  service. 

The  apostle  had  not  seen  these  assemblies.    (Chap. 

ILL) 


>  •  ♦  *  <■ 


I  THESSALONIANa 

We  find  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,  and  espe- 
cially in  the  first  (for  in  the  second  it  was  already 
needful  to  guard  that  freshness  from  the  perfidious 
attacks  of  the  enemy),  the  condition  and  the  hope  of 
the  Christian  as  such  in  this  world  in  all  its  freshness. 
These  two  epistles  are  the  first  that  Paul  wrote,  unless 
we  except  that  to  the  Galatians,  the  date  of  which  is 
uncertain.  Already  long  occupied  with  the  work,  it 
is  only  when  this  work  was  considerably  advanced, 
that  in  watching  over  it  he  guards  it  by  means  of  his 
writings — writings,  as  we  have  seen,  various  in  cha- 
racter, according  to  the  state  of  the  churches,  and 
according  to  the  divine  wisdom  which,  by  this  means, 
deposited  in  the  scriptures  that  which  would  be 
necessary  for  all  ages. 

Newly  converted,  the  Christians  at  Thessalonica 
suffered  much  from  the  persecution  of  the  world — a 
persecution  which  the  Jews  of  that  place  had  already 
previously  stirred  up  against  Paul  himself.  Happy  at 
the  gracious  work  there,  and  rejoicing  in  the  state  of 
his  dear  children  in  the  faith  (a  testimony  to  which 
was  borne  everywhere,  even  by  the  world),  the  apostle 
opens  his  heart ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  sets  forth  by  his 
mouth  what  that  christian  condition  was  upon  the 
earth  which  was  the  source  of  his  joy  in  the  case  of 
the  Thessalonians ;  and  what  the  hope  which  threw  its 
light  upon  the  believer's  existence,  shining  around  him 
through  his  whole  life,  and  illumining  his  path  in  the 
wilderness.  In  a  word  the  christian  character  is 
unfolded  to  our  eyes  with  all  its  motives  and  its  joys, 


58  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

and  that  in  connection  with  the  testimony  of  God  and 
the  hope  which  is  our  strength  in  bearing  it. 

We  all  know  that  the  doctrine  of  the  coming  of 
Christ,  which  universally  accompanies  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  that  attaches  our  hearts  to  Him  in  the  first 
spring  of  a  new  life,  is  specially  presented  to  us  in 
these  two  epistles.  And  it  is  not  merely  formally 
taught  as  a  doctrine ;  it  is  linked  with  every  spiritual 
relationship  of  our  souls,  it  is  displayed  in  all  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  Christian's  life.  We  are  converted 
in  order  to  wait  for  Him.  The  joy  of  the  saints  in 
the  fruits  of  their  labours  is  realised  in  His  presence. 
It  is  at  the  coming  of  Christ  that  holiness  has  all  its 
value,  its  measure  being  seen  in  that  which  is  then 
manifested.  It  is  the  consolation  when  Christians  die. 
It  is  the  unexpected  judgment  of  the  world.  It  is 
unto  the  coming  of  Christ  that  God  preserves  His 
own  in  holiness,  and  blameless.  We  shall  see  these 
points  set  forth  in  detail  in  the  different  chapters  of 
the  first  epistle.  We  only  point  them  out  here.  In 
general  we  shall  find  that  personal  relationships,  and 
the  expectation  of  His  appearing,  have  a  remarkable 
and  enlivening  freshness  in  this  epistle  in  every 
respect.  The  Lord  is  present  to  the  heart — is  its 
object;  and  christian  affections  spring  up  in  the  soul, 
causing  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  to  abound. 

In  these  two  epistles  only  is  an  assembly  said  to  be 
"in  God  the  Father,"  that  is  to  say,  planted  in  this 
relationship,  having  its  moral  existence — its  mode  of 
being — in  it.  The  life  of  the  assembly  developed 
itself  in  the  communion  that  flowed  from  this  relation- 
ship. The  Spirit  of  adoption  characterises  it.  With 
the  affection  of  little  children  the  Thessalonians  knew 
the  Father.  Thus  John  says,  when  speaking  of  the  little 
children  in  Christ,  "  I  write  unto  you  because  ye  have 
known  the  Father."  It  is  the  first  introduction  into 
the  position  of  liberty  in  which  Christ  has  placed  us 


I  THESSALONIANS.  59 

— ^liberty  before  God  and  in  communion  with  Him. 
Precious  position !  to  be  as  children  to  One  who  loves 
as  a  Father,  with  all  the  liberty  and  tender  affection 
of  that  relationship,  according  to  divine  perfection. 
For  here  it  is  not  the  adaptation  of  Christ's  human 
experience  to  the  wants  in  which  He  acquired  it 
(precious  as  that  grace  is) ;  it  is  our  introduction  into 
the  unmingled  enjoyment  of  the  light,  and  of  the 
divine  affections  displayed  in  the  character  of  the 
Father.  It  is  our  communion,  tender  and  confiding 
but  pure,  with  Him  whose  love  is  the  source  of  all 
blessing.  Nor  do  I  doubt  that,  freshly  brought  out  of 
heathenism  as  the  Thessalonians  were,  the  apostle 
refers  to  their  knowledge  of  the  one  true  God  the 
Father  in  contrast  with  their  idols. 

The  apostle,  in  declaring  (as  was  his  custom)  that 
which  he  felt  respecting  them — the  aspect  in  which 
they  appeared  to  his  heart  and  mind,  speaks  neither 
of  gifts,  as  to  the  Corinthians,  nor  of  the  grand  fea- 
tures of  an  exaltation  that  embraced  the  Lord  and  all 
saints,  as  to  the  Ephesians  and  even  to  the  Colossians 
(with  the  addition  of  that  which  their  state  required) ; 
nor  of  the  brotherly  affection  and  fellowship  of  love 
which  the  Philippians  had  manifested  in  their  connec- 
tion with  himself;  nor  of  a  faith  that  existed  apart 
from  his  labours,  and  in  communion  with  which  he 
hoped  to  refresh  himself,  adding  to  it  that  which  his 
abundant  gifts  enabled  him  to  impart  to  them,  as  he 
writes  to  the  Romans  whom  he  had  not  yet  seen. 

Here  it  is  the  life  itself  of  the  Christian  in  its  first 
fresh  impressions,  in  its  intrinsic  qualities,  as  it  deve- 
loped itself  by  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  earth, 
the  life  of  God  here  below  in  them,  which  he  re- 
members in  his  prayers  with  so  much  satisfaction  and 
joy.  Three  great  principles,  he  tells  the  Corinthians 
(1  Cor.  xiii.)  form  the  basis,  and  ever  abide  as  the 
foundation  of  this  life — faith,  hope,  and  love.     Now 

I. 


60  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

these  three  were  the  powerful  and  divine  motives  of 
the  life  of  the  Thessalonians.  This  life  was  not  merely 
a  habit ;  it  flowed,  in  its  outward  activities,  from  im- 
mediate communion  with  its  source.  These  activities 
were  quickened  and  maintained  by  divine  life,  and  by 
keeping  the  eye  constantly  fixed  upon  the  object  of 
faith.  There  was  work,  and  labour,  and  endurance. 
There  were  the  same  in  Ephesus,  as  we  see  it  in  Reve- 
lation ii.  But  here  it  was  a  work  of  faith,  labour 
undertaken  by  love,  endurance  fed  by  hope.  Faith, 
hope,  and  love  are,  we  have  seen,  the  springs  of 
Christianity  in  this  world.  The  work,  the  labour,  the 
endurance  continued  at  Ephesus,  but  ceased  to  be  cha- 
racterised by  these  great  and  mighty  principles.  The 
habit  continued,  but  the  communion  was  wanting. 
They  had  forsaken  their  first  love. 

The  first  to  the  Thessalonians  is  the  expression  of 
the  living  power  in  which  the  assembly  is  planted : 
Ephesus,  in  Revelation  ii.,  of  its  first  departure  from 
that  state. 

May  our  work  be  a  work  of  faith,  drawing  its 
strength,  its  existence  even,  from  our  communion  with 
God  our  Father !  May  it  be,  each  moment,  the  fruit 
of  the  realisation  of  that  which  is  invisible,  of  the  life 
which  lives  in  the  certainty,  the  immutable  certainty, 
of  the  word !  May  it  thus  bear  the  impress  of  the 
grace  and  truth  that  came  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  be  a 
testimony  to  it. 

May  our  labour  in  service  be  the  fruit  of  love,  not 
performed  merely  as  duty  and  obligation,  although  it 
is  this,  if  we  know  that  it  is  before  us  to  be  done ! 

May  the  patience  that  we  must  have,  in  order  to  go 
through  this  wilderness,  be,  not  the  necessity  we  feel 
because  the  path  is  before  us,  but  an  endurance  sus- 
tained by  the  hope  that  belongs  to  our  view  of  Jesus 
by  faith,  and  that  is  waiting  for  Him ! 

These  principles,  faith,  hope,  and   love,  form  our 


I  THESSALONIANS.  61 

character  as  Christians  :*  but  it  cannot,  and  ought  not 
to,  be  formed  in  us  without  having  objects.  Accord- 
ingly the  Spirit  presents  them  here.  They  have  a 
twofold  character.  The  heart  rests  by  faith  on  Jesus, 
waits  for  Him,  counts  upon  Him,  links  itself  with  Him 
in  its  walk.  He  has  walked  here  below,  He  represents  us 
in  heaven,  He  watches  over  us  as  the  good  Shepherd. 
He  loves  His  own ;  He  nourishes  and  cherishes  them : 
our  faith  and  our  hope  keep  Him  always  in  view. 
The  conscience  is  before  God  our  Father ;  it  is  not  in 
the  spirit  of  fear:  there  is  no  uncertainty  as  to  our 
relationship.  We  are  the  children  of  a  Father  who 
loves  us  perfectly ;  but  we  are  before  God.  His  light 
has  authority  and  power  in  the  conscience :  we  walk 
in  the  sense  that  His  eye  is  upon  us,  in  love  but 
ujpon  us.  And  light  makes  everything  manifest.  It 
judges  all  that  might  weaken  the  sweet  and  peaceful 
realisation  of  the  presence  of  God,  and  our  communion 
with  Jesus,  and  our  confidence  in  Him,  the  intimacy 
of  the  intercourse  between  our  souls  and  the  Lord. 
These  two  principles  are  of  all  importance  for  abiding 
peace,  for  the  progress  of  our  souls.  Without  them 
the  soul  flags.  The  one  sustains  confidence,  the 
other  keeps  us  in  the  light  witJi  a  good  conscience. 
Without  the  latter,  faith  (not  to  say  more)  loses  its 
liveliness;  without  the  former,  the  conscience  be- 
comes legal,  and  we  lose  spiritual  strength,  light  and 
ardour. 

The  apostle  reminds  them  also  of  the  means  used  by 
God  to  produce  this  condition,  that  is,  the  gospel,  the 
word,  brought  in  power  and  in  much  assurance  to 
the  soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  word  had  power  in 
their  heart — came  to  it  as  the  word  of  God  ;  the  Spirit 

*  They  are  fou^i  oftener  in  Paul's  writings  than  is  thought ; 
as  1  Thessalonians  v.  8,  and  Colossians  i.  4,  5.  In  2  Thessa- 
lonians  i.  3  we  have  faith  and  love,  but  he  has  to  clear  up  their 
thoughts  as  to  hope. 

L 


62  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Himself  revealed  Himself  in  it,  giving  the  conscious- 
ness of  His  presence ;  and  the  consequence  of  this  was 
the  full  assurance  of  the  truth  in  all  its  power,  in  all 
its  reality.  The  apostle's  life,  his  whole  conduct,  con- 
firmed the  testimony  which  he  bore — formed  a  part  of 
it.  Accordingly  (it  is  always  the  case)  the  fruit  of 
his  labours  answered  in  character  to  him  who  laboured; 
the  Christianity  of  the  Thessalonians  resembled  that 
of  Paul.  It  was  like  the  walk  of  the  Lord  Himself 
whom  Paul  followed  so  closely.  It  was  "in  much 
affliction,"  for  the  enemy  could  not  bear  so  plain  a 
testimony,  and  God  granted  this  grace  to  such  a 
testimony,  and  "  with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 

Happy  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  Spirit  work- 
ing in  the  heart !  When  this  is  so,  everything  becomes 
testimony  to  others.  They  see  that  there  is  in  Chris- 
tians a  power  of  which  they  are  ignorant,  motives 
which  they  have  not  experienced,  a  joy  which  they 
may  scoff  at  but  which  they  do  not  possess ;  a  conduct 
which  strikes  them,  and  which  they  admire,  although 
they  do  not  follow  it;  a  patience  which  shews  the 
impotence  of  the  enemy  in  striving  against  a  power 
that  endures  everything,  and  that  rejoices  in  spite  of 
all  his  efforts.  What  can  we  do  with  those  who  allow 
themselves  to  be  killed  without  becoming  less  joyful, 
nay,  whom  it  makes  more  so ;  who  are  above  all  our 
motives  when  left  to  themselves,  and  who,  if  oppressed, 
possess  their  souls  in  perfect  joy  in  spite  of  all  our 
opposition;  and  who  are  unconquered  by  torments, 
finding  in  these  only  an  occasion  for  bearing  a 
stronger  testimony  that  Christians  are  beyond  our 
power  ?  At  peace,  life  is  all  of  it  a  testimony ;  death, 
even  in  torture,  is  still  more  so.  Such  is  the  Christian, 
where  Christianity  exists  in  its  true  power,  in  its 
normal  condition  according  to  God — the  word  (of  the 
gospel)  and  the  presence  of  the  Spirit,  reproduced  in 
the  life,  in  a  world  estranged  from  God. 


I  THESSALONIANS.  63 

Thus  it  was  with  the  Thessalonians ;  and  the  world, 
in  spite  of  itself,  became  an  additional  witness  to  the 
power  of  the  gospel.  An  ensample  to  believers  in 
other  places,  they  were  the  subject  of  report  and  con- 
versation to  the  world,  which  was  never  weary  of 
discussing  this  phenomenon,  so  new  and  so  strange,  of 
people  who  had  given  up  all  that  governed  the  human 
heart,  all  to  which  it  was  subject,  and  worshipped  one 
only  living  and  true  God,  to  whom  even  the  natural 
conscience  bore  testimony.  The  gods  of  the  heathen 
were  the  gods  of  the  passions,  not  of  the  conscience. 
And  this  gave  a  living  reality,  an  actuality,  to  the 
position  01  Christians  and  to  their  religion.  They 
waited  for  His  Son  from  heaven. 

Happy  indeed  were  those  Christians  whose  walk  and 
whole  existence  made  of  the  world  itself  a  witness  for 
the  truth,  who  were  so  distinct  in  their  confession,  so 
consistent  in  their  life,  that  an  apostle  did  not  need  to 
speak  of  that  which  he  had  preached,  of  that  which  he 
had  been  among  them.  The  world  spoke  of  it  for  him 
and  for  them. 

A  few  words  on  the  testimony  itself,  which,  simple 
as  it  may  be,  is  of  great  importance,  and  contains 
principles  of  great  moral  depth.  It  forms  the  basis  of 
the  whole  life,  and  of  all  the  christian  affections  also, 
that  are  unfolded  in  the  Epistle,  which,  besides  this 
development,  contains  only  a  special  revelation  of  the 
circumstances  and  the  order  of  the  coming  of  Christ 
to  call  His  people  to  Himself,  and  of  the  diiference 
between  that  event  and  the  day  of  the  Lord  to 
judge  the  world,  although  this  latter  follows  on  the 
former. 

That  which  the  apostle  points  out,  as  the  testimony 
borne  by  the  faithful  walk  of  the  Thessalonians, 
contained  three  principal  subjects :  1st,  they  had  for- 
saken their  idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God; 

L 


64  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

2nd,  they  were  waiting  for  His  Son  from  heaven, 
whom  He  had  raised  from  among  the  dead ;  3rd,  the 
Son  was  a  safeguard  from  the  wrath  which  was  to  be 
revealed. 

An  immense  fact — simple  but  of  vast  import — cha- 
racterises Christianity.  It  gives  us  a  positive  object ; 
and  this  object  is  nothing  less  than  God  Himself. 
Human  nature  may  discover  the  folly  of  that  which 
is  false.  We  scorn  false  gods  and  graven  images;  but 
we  cannot  get  beyond  ourselves,  we  cannot  reveal 
anything  to  ourselves.  One  of  the  most  renowned 
names  of  antiquity  is  pleased  to  tell  us,  that  all  would 
go  well  if  men  followed  nature  (it  is  manifest  that 
they  could  not  rise  above  it) ;  and,  in  fact,  he  would 
be  in  the  right  if  man  were  not  fallen.  But  to  require 
man  to  follow  nature  is  a  proof  that  he  is  fallen,  that 
he  has  degraded  himself  below  the  normal  state  of 
that  nature.  He  does  not  follow  it  in  the  walk  that 
suits  its  constitution.  All  is  in  disorder.  Self-will 
carries  him  away,  and  acts  in  his  passions.  Man  has 
forsaken  God,  and  has  lost  the  power  and  centre  of 
attraction  that  kept  him  in  his  place  and  everything 
in  his  own  nature  in  its  place.  Man  cannot  recover 
himself,  he  cannot  direct  himself;  for,  apart  from 
God,  there  is  nothing  but  self-will  that  guides  man. 
There  are  many  objects  that  furnish  occasion  for  the 
acting  of  the  passions  and  the  will;  but  there  is  no 
object  which,  as  a  centre,  gives  him  a  regular,  constt^^nt, 
and  durable  moral  position  in  relationship  with  that 
object,  so  that  his  character  should  bear  its  stamp  and 
value.  Man  must  either  have  a  moral  centre,  capable 
of  forming  him  as  a  moral  being,  by  attracting  him  to 
itself  and  filling  his  affections,  so  that  he  shall  be  the 
reflex  of  that  object ;  or  he  must  act  in  self-will,  and 
then  he  is  the  sport  of  his  passions ;  or,  which  is  the 
necessary  consequence,  he  is  the  slave  of  any  object 
that  takes  possession  of  his  will.     A  creature,  who  is  a 


I  THESSALONTANS.  66 

moral  being,  cannot  subsist  witbout  an  object.  To  be 
self-sufficing  is  tbe  characteristic  of  God. 

The  equilibrium  which  subsisted  in  the  unconscious- 
ness of  s^ood  and  evil  is  lost.  Man  no  lonfjcr  walks  as 
man,  having  nothing  in  his  mind  outside  his  normal 
condition,  outside  that  which  he  possessed  ;  not  having 
a  will,  or,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  having  a 
will  that  desired  nothing  more  than  it  possessed,  but 
that  gratefully  enjoyed  all  that  was  already  appro- 
priated to  its  nature,  and  especially  the  companion- 
ship of  a  being  like  himself,  a  help  who  had  his  own 
nature,  and  who  answered  to  his  heart — blessing  God 
for  everything. 

Now  man  ivills.  While  he  has  lost  that  which 
formed  the  sphere  of  his  enjoyment,  there  is  in  him 
an  activity  which  seeks,  which  is  become  unable  to 
rest  without  aimino-  at,  somethino-  farther ;  which  has 
already,  as  will,  thrown  itself  into  a  sphere  that  it 
does  not  fill,  in  which  it  lacks  intelligence  to  appre- 
hend all  that  is  there  and  power  to  realise  even  that 
which  it  desires.  Man,  and  all  that  has  been  his,  no 
longer  suffices  man  as  enjoyment.  He  still  needs  an 
object.  This  object  will  either  be  above  or  below  the 
man.  If  it  be  below,  he  degrades  himself  below  him- 
self ;  and  it  is  this  indeed  which  has  taken  place.  He 
no  longer  lives  according  even  to  nature  (as  he  to 
whom  I  have  alluded  says),  a  state  which  the  apostle 
has  described  in  the  beginning  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  with  all  the  horrors  of  the  plain  truth.  If 
this  object  be  above  himself  and  below  God,  there  is 
still  nothing  to  govern  his  nature,  nothing  that  puts 
him  morally  in  his  place.  A  good  being  could  not 
take  this  place  to  exclude  God  from  it.  If  a  bad 
object  gains  it,  he  becomes  to  the  man  a  god,  who 
shuts  out  the  true  God,  and  degrades  man  in  his 
highest  relationship — the  worst  of  all  degradations. 
This  too  has  taken  place.     And  since  these  beings  are 

VOL.  V.  L  F 


66  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

but  creatures,  they  only  can  govern  man  by  that 
which  exists,  and  by  that  which  acts  upon  him.  This 
is  to  say,  they  are  the  gods  of  his  passions.  They 
degrade  the  idea  of  the  Divinity:  they  degrade  the 
practical  life  of  humanity  into  slavery  to  the  passions 
(which  are  never  satisfied,  and  which  invent  evil 
when  they  are  surfeited  with  excess  in  that  which 
is  natural  to  them)  and  are  thus  left  without  re- 
source. Such  in  fact  was  the  condition  of  man  under 
Paganism. 

Man,  and  above  all,  man  having  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil,  should  have  God  for  his  object;  and  as  an 
object  that  his  heart  can  entertain  with  pleasure,  and 
on  which  his  affections  can  be  exercised :  otherwise  he 
is  lost.  The  gospel — Christianity — has  given  him 
this.  God,  who  fills  all  things,  who  is  the  source  of, 
in  whom  is  centred,  all  blessing,  all  good — God,  who 
is  all  love,  who  has  all  power,  who  embraces  every- 
thing in  His  knowledge,  because  everything  (except 
the  forsaking  of  Himself)  is  but  the  fruit  of  His  mind 
and  will — God  has  revealed  Himself  in  Christ  to  man, 
in  order  that  his  heart,  occupied  with  Him,  with  per- 
fect confidence  in  His  goodness,  may  know  Him,  may 
enjoy  His  presence,  and  reflect  His  character. 

The  sin  and  misery  of  man  have  but  lent  occasion 
to  an  infinitely  more  complete  development  of  what 
this  God  is,  and  of  the  perfection  of  His  nature,  in 
love,  in  wisdom,  and  in  power.  But  we  are  here  con- 
sidering only  the  fact,  that  He  has  given  Himself  to 
man  for  an  object.  Nevertheless,  although  the  misery 
of  man  has  but  given  room  for  a  much  more  admir- 
able revelation  of  God,  yet  God  Himself  must  have  an 
object  worthy  of  Himself  to  be  the  subject  of  His 
purposes,  and  in  order  to  unfold  all  His  afiections. 
This  object  is  the  glory  of  His  Son — His  Son  Him- 
self. A  being  of  an  inferior  nature  could  not  have 
l.een  this  to  Him,  although  God  can  glorify  Himself 


I  THESSALONIANS.  67 

in  His  grace  to  such  a  one.  The  object  of  the  affec- 
tions, and  the  affections  that  are  exercised  with  regard 
to  it,  are  necessarily  correlative.  Thus  God  has  dis- 
played His  sovereign  and  immense  grace  with  regard 
to  that  which  was  the  most  wretched,  the  most  un- 
worthy, the  most  necessitous;  and  He  has  displayed 
all  the  majesty  of  His  being,  all  the  excellence  of  His 
nature,  in  connection  with  an  object  in  whom  He 
could  find  all  His  delight,  and  exhibit  all  that  He  is 
in  the  glory  of  His  nature.  But  it  is  as  man — mar- 
vellous truth  in  the  eternal  counsels  of  God  ! — that 
this  object  of  God  the  Father's  delight  has  taken  His 
place  in  this  glorious  revelation  by  which  God  makes 
Himself  known  to  His  creatures.  God  has  ordained 
and  prepared  man  for  this.  Thus  the  heart  that  is 
taught  by  the  Spirit  knows  God  as  revealed  in  this 
immense  grace,  in  the  love  that  comes  down  from  the 
throne  of  God  to  the  ruin  and  misery  of  the  sinner ; 
he  finds  himself,  in  Christ,  in  the  knowledge  and  in 
the  enjoyment  of  the  love  which  God  has  for  the 
object  of  His  eternal  delight,  who  also  is  worthy  of 
being  so ;  of  the  communications  by  which  He  testifies 
that  love  (John  xvii.  7,  8) ;  and,  finally,  of  the  glory 
which  is  its  public  demonstration  before  the  universe. 
This  latter  part  of  our  iiiefial)le  blessedness  is  the 
subject  of  Christ's  communications  at  the  end  of 
John's  Gospel.  (Chaps,  xiv.,  xvi.,  and,  in  particu- 
lar xvii.)* 

From  the  moment  that  the  sinner  is  converted  and 

"-  Compare  Proverbs  viii.  30,  31  and  Luke  ii.  14,  where  read, 
"good  pleasure  in  men."  It  is  beautiful  to  see  the  angels 
unjealously  celebrating  it.  Love  downwards  in  grace  is  great 
according  to  the  misery  and  unworthiness  of  the  object ;  upwards 
as  the  affection  of  the  soul  according  to  the  worthiness ;  see  both 
in  Christ,  Ephesians  v.  2.  In  both  in  Christ  self  is  wholly 
given  up.  He  gave,  not  sought,  Himself.  The  law  takes  self 
as  measure  as  to  the  neighbour,  and  supposes  him  on  the  samo 
footing.     There  is  no  love  downwards. 

I. 


68  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

believes  the  gospel,  and  (to  complete  his  state,  I  must 
add)  is  sealed  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  that  the 
blessed  Lord  has  wrought  redemption,  he  is  introduced 
• — as  to  the  principle  of  his  life — into  this  position, 
into  these  relationships  with  God.  He  is  perhaps  but 
a  child ;  but  the  Father  whom  he  knows,  the  love  into 
which  he  has  entered,  the  Saviour  on  whom  his  eyes 
are  opened,  are  the  same  whom  he  will  enjoy  when  he 
shall  know  as  he  is  known.  He  is  a  Christian  ;  he  is 
turned  from  idols  to  God,  and  to  wait  for  His  Son 
from  heaven. 

We  may  observe,  that  the  subject  here  is  not  the 
power  which  converts,  nor  the  source  of  life.  Of 
these  other  passages  speak  clearly.  Here  it  is  the 
character  of  the  life  in  its  manifestation.  Now  this 
depends  on  its  objects.  Life  is  exercised  and  unfolded 
in  connection  with  its  objects,  and  thus  characterises 
itself.  The  source  from  which  it  flows  makes  it 
capable  of  enjoying  it ;  but  an  intrinsic  life  which  has 
no  object  on  which  it  depends  is  not  the  life  of  a 
creature.  Such  life  as  that  is  the  prerogative  of  God. 
This  shews  the  folly  of  those  who  would  have  a 
subjective  life,  as  they  say,  without  its  having  a  posi- 
tively objective  character;  for  this  subjective  state 
depends  on  the  object  with  which  it  is  occupied.  It  is 
the  characteristic  of  God  to  be  the  source  of  His  own 
thoughts  without  an  object — to  be,  and  to  be  self- 
sufficing  (because  He  is  perfection,  and  the  centre  and 
source  of  everything),  and  to  create  objects  unto  Him- 
self, if  He  would  have  any  without  Himself.  In  a 
word,  although  receiving  a  life  from  God  which  is 
capable  of  enjoying  Him,  the  moral  character  of  man 
cannot  be  formed  in  him  without  an  object  that 
imparts  it  to  him. 

Now  God  has  given  Himself  to  us  for  an  object, 
and  has  revealed  Himself  in  Christ.  If  we  occupy 
ourselves  with  God  in  Himself  (supposing  always  that 


T  THESSALONIANS.  69 

He  had  thus  revealed  Himself),  the  subject  is  too  vast. 
It  is  an  infinite  joy;  but  in  that  which  is  simply 
infinite  there  is  something  wanting  to  a  creature, 
although  it  is  his  highest  prerogative  to  enjoy  it.  It 
is  necessary  to  him  on  the  one  hand,  in  order  that  he 
may  be  in  his  place,  and  that  God  may  have  His  place 
in  regard  to  him,  and  on  the  other  hand  that  which 
exalts  him  so  admirably.  It  must  be  so ;  and  it  is  the 
privilege  given  unto  us,  and  given  unto  us  in  a  price- 
less intimacy,  for  we  are  children,  and  we  dwell  in 
God,  and  God  in  us ;  but  with  this  in  itself  there  is  a 
certain  weight  upon  the  heart  in  the  sense  of  God 
alone.  We  read  of  "  a  far  more  exceeding  and  abun- 
dant weight*  of  glory."  It  must  be  so :  His  majesty 
must  be  maintained  when  we  think  of  Him  as  God, 
His  authority  over  the  conscience.  The  heart — God 
has  so  formed  it — needs  something  which  will  not 
lower  its  aflfections,  but  which  may  have  the  character 
of  companion  and  friend,  at  least  to  which  it  has 
access  in  that  character. 

It  is  this  which  we  have  in  Christ,  our  precious 
Saviour.  He  is  an  object  near  to  us.  He  is  not 
ashamed  to  call  us  brethren.  He  has  called  us  friends; 
all  that  He  has  heard  from  His  Father  He  has  made 
known  to  us.  Is  He  then  a  means  of  our  eyes  being 
turned  away  from  God  ?  On  the  contrary,  it  is  in 
Him  that  God  is  manifested,  in  Him  that  even  the 
angels  see  God.  It  is  He  who,  being  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father,  reveals  to  us  His  God  and  Father  in  this 
sweet  relationship,  and  as  He  knows  Him  Himself. 
And  not  only  this,  but  He  is  in  the  Father,  and  the 
Father  in  Him,  so  that  He  who  has  seen  Him  has 
seen  the  Father.  He  reveals  God  to  us,  instead  of 
turning  us  away  from  Him.  In  grace  He  has  already 
revealed  Him,  and  we  wait  for  the  revelation  of  glory 

*  Weight  and  glory  are  the  same  word  in  Hebrew — Cahod. 

L 


70  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

in  Him.  Already  also  on  the  earth,  from  the  moment 
that  He  was  born,  the  angels  celebrated  the  good  plea- 
sure of  God  in  man,  for  the  object  of  His  eternal 
delight  had  become  a  man.  And  now  He  has  accom- 
plished the  work  which  makes  possible  the  introduc- 
tion of  others,  of  sinners,  into  the  enjoyment  with 
Himself  of  this  favour  of  God.  Once  enemies,  "  we 
are  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His  Son.  " 

It  is  thus  that  God  has  reconciled  us  to  Himself. 
By  faith  thus  knowing  God,  we  "turn  from  idols  to 
serve  the  living  and  true  God,  and  to  wait  for  his  Son 
from  heaven."  The  living  and  true  God  is  the  object 
of  our  joyful  service.  His  Son,  whom  we  know,  who 
knows  us,  who  will  have  us  to  be  where  He  is,  who  has 
identified  us  witii  His  own  glory  and  His  glory  with 
us,  He  who  is  a  glorified  nwin  for  ever  and  firstborn 
among  many  brethren,  is  the  object  of  our  expectation. 
We  expect  Him  from  heaven,  for  our  hopes  are  there, 
and  there  the  seat  of  our  joy. 

We  have  the  infinity  of  a  God  of  love,  the  intimacy 
and  the  glory  of  Him  who  has  taken  part  in  all  our 
infirmities,  and,  without  sin,  has  borne  all  our  sins. 
What  a  portion  is  ours  ! 

But  there  was  another  side  of  the  truth.  Creatures 
are  responsible  ;  and,  however  great  His  love  and  His 
patience,  God  cannot  allow  evil  nor  contempt  of  His 
authority:  if  He  did,  all  would  be  confusion  and 
misery.  God  Himself  would  lose  His  place.  There  is 
a  judgment ;  there  is  wrath  to  come.  We  were  respon- 
sible ;  we  have  failed.  How  then  shall  we  enjoy  God 
and  the  Son  in  the  way  that  I  have  spoken  of  ? 

Here  comes  in  the  application  of  the  third  truth  of 
which  the  apostle  speaks :  "  Which  delivered  us  from 
the  wrath  to  come."  The  work  of  Christ  has  perfectly 
sheltered  us  from  this  wrath;  He  took  our  place  in 
responsibility  on  the  cross  to  put  away  sin  for  us  by 
the  sacrifice  of  Himself, 


I   THESSALONIANS.  71 

These  then  are  the  three  great  elements  of  christian 
life.  We  serve  the  living  and  the  true  God,  having 
forsaken  our  idols  outward  or  inward.  We  expect 
Jesus  for  glory ;  for  this  sight  of  God  makes  us  feel 
what  this  world  is,  and  we  know  Jesus.  As  to  our 
sins  and  our  conscience,  we  are  perfectly  cleansed  ;  we 
fear  nothing.  The  life  and  walk  of  the  Thessalonians 
was  a  testimony  to  these  truths. 

Having  established  these  great  principles,  the  apos- 
tle, with  an  open  and  overflowing  heart,  appeals  to  his 
whole  walk  among  them  as  a  proof  of  his  having 
walked  in  the  same  spirit  as  in  their  own  case  he  was 
rejoicing  in.  It  was  not  that  he  exhorted  others, 
while  availing  himself  of  their  affection,  for  his  own 
advantaore.  It  was  not  that  he  encouracred  them  to 
endure  afflictions,  without  having  courage  himself  to 
undergo  the  same.  Ill-treated  and  insulted  at  Philippi, 
he  was  bold  in  God  to  renew  his  attacks  on  the  king- 
dom of  darkness  at  Thessalonica,  and  that  with  great 
energy.  He  had  not  used  flattering  words  to  win 
them ;  he  had  set  the  truth  before  them,  as  being  him- 
self the  servant  of  God.  He  had  worked  with  his 
own  hands,  that  he  might  not  be  burdensome  to  them. 
All  was  before  God  in  the  light  and  by  the  energy  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  a  spirit  of  devotedness ;  even 
as  he  desired  that  they  should  walk  as  they  knew  he 
had  walked  among  them,  as  holily,  justly,  and  un- 
blamably;  as  also  he  had  exhorted  them,  with  all 
affection  and  tenderness,  to  walk  worthy  of  God,  who 
had  called  them  unto  His  own  kingdom  and  glory. 

We  see  again  in  this  expression  the  close  relation- 
ship of  the  Christian,  in  his  individual  character,  with 
God.  He  has  his  portion  in  God's  own  kingdom  and 
glory,  and  his  conduct  should  become  such  a  position. 
Here  it  is  his  own  position  in  relationship  with  God, 
as  before  it  was  his  relationship  with  God  and  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

II. 


72  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE, 

The  apostle  then  speaks  of  the  means  by  which  this 
world  of  new  thouojhts  was  acquired  by  the  Christian. 
It  was  that  God  had  spoken  to  reveal  Himself  and 
His  counsels.  God  had  committed  the  gospel  to  Paul 
(chap.  ii.  4),  and  he  had  acted  as  being  in  the  presence 
of  God,  and  responsible  to  Him. 

The  Thessalonians  also,  on  their  part,  had  received 
the  word,  not  as  the  word  of  Paul,  but  as  the  word  of 
God  Himself  addressed  to  them  by  the  mouth  of  Paul. 
It  is  interesting,  as  for  us  also  a  serious  thought,  to 
observe  that  (with  regard  to  the  manifestation  of  the 
power  of  God  down  here),  although  the  work  is  of 
God,  the  fruit  of  His  servants'  labours  answers  to  the 
character  and  depth  of  that  labour  itself.  Thus  the 
bonds  of  grace  are  established,  and  communion ;  there 
is  mutual  understanding.  The  work  manifests  the 
workman.  The  labourer  rejoices  in  that  which  his 
heart  had  desired  for  the  souls  that  are  the  fruit  of 
his  labour  ;  and  these  know  how  to  appreciate  the 
walk  and  the  work  of  the  labourer,  acknowledging  the 
power  of  grace  in  him  who  was  the  means  of  bringing 
them  into  this  position ;  and  the  one  and  the  others, 
knowing  God,  rejoice  in  the  fellowship  of  His  grace. 

Paul  was  very  largely  with  God  in  his  own  soul  and 
in  his  work.  The  Thessalonians  had  in  consequence 
received  the  word  in  the  same  power ;  and  they,  with 
him,  were  thus  in  communion  with  God  according  to 
that  power  and  that  intimacy. 

We  see  here,  in  passing,  the  Jews  deprived  of  this 
relationship  with  God,  the  remnant  of  that  people 
received,  and  suffering  from  the  enmity  of  the  mass. 
The  elect  from  among  the  Gentiles  awakened,  on  their 
part,  the  hostility  of  their  fellow-countrymen  by  the 
testimony  which  they  bore  against  the  prince  of  this 
world  in  their  christian  walk,  and  by  their  confession 
of  a  heavenly  Christ — a  Christ  whom  the  world  had 
rejected. 


I   THESSALONIANS.  73 

The  religion  of  the  Jews  had  become  pure  jealousy 
of  others.  The  pretension  to  the  exclusive  possession 
of  religious  privileges — very  precious  when  they  en- 
joyed it  with  God  as  a  testimony  of  His  favour— war; 
nothing  but  a  spring  of  hatred,  when  God  in  the  ful- 
ness of  His  sovereign  grace  chose  to  bless  others  who 
had  a  right  to  nothing.  By  this  exclusive  pretension 
they  denied  the  rights  of  God,  who  had  formerly 
chosen  them  as  a  people ;  they  denied  His  grace, 
according  to  which  He  acted  towards  sinners,  and 
which  would  have  been  the  source  of  better  blessings 
for  themselves.  But  meantime  their  refusal  to  come 
in  had  transferred  the  scene  of  our  hopes  and  our  joys 
from  earth  to  heaven,  where  we  know  the  Lord,  and 
where  He  will  remain  until  He  comes  to  assert  His 
claims  over  the  earth.  Before  He  asserts  them,  He 
will  take  us  to  Himself. 

Meanwhile  the  word  of  God  is  the  source  of  our 
contidence — the  revelation  of  glory,  of  truth,  and  of 
love.  It  is  mighty  in  them  that  believe.  The  Jews 
are  set  aside.  By  their  opposition  to  grace  towards 
the  Gentiles,  they  had  taken  the  position  of  enmity 
against  God  in  grace,  and  wrath  was  come  upon  them 
to  the  uttermost.  It  was  not  yet  executed ;  but  they 
had  put  themselves  in  this  position.  It  was  not  only 
that  they  had  broken  the  law,  they  had  already  killed 
their  prophets  who  were  sent  to  them  in  grace ;  they 
had  already  slain  the  Christ,  Jesus  the  Lord.  Sove- 
reign grace  alone  could  bring  in  a  remedy.  This  they 
resisted ;  because,  according  to  that  grace,  God  was  good 
to  the  Gentiles,  and  granted  to  them,  at  the  same  time  as 
to  themselves,  better  privileges  than  those  which  they 
had  forfeited.  Wrath  therefore  was  finally  come  upon 
them  as  a  nation.  Christians  were  now  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  better  privileges  in  place  of  the  Jews. 

It  is  not  here  the  moment  for  explaining  the  future 
dealings  of  God  with  the  remnant  of  that  people.    The 

II. 


74  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

apostle  speaks  here  of  the  people,  in  order  to  shew 
that  the  only  ones  in  relation  with  God  were  Chris- 
tians— those  who  had  received  the  word.  It  was  the 
reception  of  the  word  by  faith,  and  nothing  else, 
which  brought  souls  really  into  relationship  with  God. 
Hereditary  privileges  were  found  to  be,  in  their 
nature,  opposition  to  grace  and  sovereignty,  and  thus 
to  the  character  and  rights  of  God  Himself ;  for  God  is 
sovereign,  and  God  is  love. 

The  word  reveals  grace ;  it  is  obeyed  by  believing 
it.  And,  brought  into  relationship  with  God,  the 
Christian  walks  in  His  communion  and  in  His  ways, 
and  waits  for  the  Son,  in  whom  He  has  revealed 
Himself  to  men.  This  is  the  fruit  of  that  which 
the  Christian  has  received  through  believing — an 
efficacious  principle  of  life,  and  a  light  from  God  for 
the  way. 

The  apostle  blessed  God  that  it  was  thus  with  the 
Thessalonians ;  and,  having  made  this  point  clear,  he 
returns  to  the  joy  of  his  communion  with  them  in  the 
positive  blessing  which  the  revelation  of  God  in  their 
hearts  by  the  word  had  brought  them.  He  would 
gladly  have  seen  them  to  enjoy  this  communion  in 
intercourse  with  them  face  to  face ;  but  as  long  as  it 
was  by  the  word  only  that  the  knowledge  of  God  was 
obtained — in  a  word  by  faith — as  long  as  the  Lord 
was  absent,  another  result  flowed  from  this  fact; 
namely,  that  these  joys  were  mingled  with  conflict — 
conflict  however,  which,  although  to  the  eye  of  man 
interrupting  enjoyment,  made  it  more  sweet,  more 
real,  preserved  its  heavenly  character,  and  made  the 
Lord  Himself,  from  whom  they  could  not  be  separated, 
the  centre,  the  common  point  in  which  hearts  were 
united,  with  the  consciousness  that  they  were  in  the 
wilderness,  and  that  they  were  awaiting  a  scene  and  a 
time  in  which  evil  and  the  enemy's  power  would  no 
longer  be,  but  where  Christ  would   be  all.     Joyful 


I  THESSALONIANS.  75 

hope,  holy  happiness,  powerful  link  of  the  heart  to 
Christ !  When  He  shall  be  all,  our  joy  will  be  com- 
plete, and  all  saints  will  possess  it.  Paul  wished  to 
have  seen  them  again,  and  had  so  even  twice,  but 
Satan  hindered  it.  The  time  should  come  when  he 
would  fully  enjoy  both  them  and  his  labour  among 
them,  by  seeing  them  in  full  possession  of  glory  at  the 
coming  of  Christ. 

In  the  apostle  himself,  when  at  Thessalonica,  chris- 
tian life  was  fully  developed  in  love  and  in  holiness. 
He  had  been  among  them  in  tenderness,  as  a  mother 
cherishes  her  children ;  ready  to  impart  not  only  the 
gospel  to  them  but  even  his  own  life,  so  dear  were 
they  to  him.  He  had  been  at  the  same  time  holy  and 
without  blame  in  all  his  conduct.  What  energy  of 
life  and  love  springing  up  by  the  power  of  God, 
regardless  of  all  the  consequences  save  the  blessing 
of  the  elect  and  the  glory  of  God !  This  is  true 
christian  life.  The  heart,  not  filled  with  questionings 
through  unbelief  but  strong  in  faith,  counts  on  God  in 
order  to  serve  God.  Thus  love  is  free,  beside  oneself 
for  God,  prudent  and  full  of  consideration  only  for  the 
good  of  others.  And  what  bonds  this  creates  !  Perse- 
cution only  hastens  the  work  by  compelling  to  go 
elsewhere,  when  perhaps  the  labourer  would  be  tempted 
to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  labour  in  the  society  of  those 
who  had  been  blessed  through  him.  (Compare  chap. 
ii.  2.)  Though  absent,  the  apostle's  heart  was  still 
bound  to  them  ;  he  remembered  his  beloved  ones ;  he 
prayed  for  them;  he  blessed  God  for  the  grace 
bestowed  on  them ;  assuring  himself  with  joy,  when 
he  thought  of  it,  of  their  portion  in  glory  as  the  elect 
of  God.  (Chap.  i.  3,  4  ;  ii.  13.) 

The  bond  remained  firm ;  and,  the  way  to  present 
enjoyment  of  personal  communion  being  obstructed  by 
the  devices  of  Satan  (by  permission  of  God),  his  heart 
rose  higher,  and  sought  the  full  satisfaction  of  the 

II. 


76  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE  BIBLE. 

want  produced  in  it  by  love,  in  the  moment  when  a 
Christ  present  in  His  power  should  have  removed  all 
obstacles  and  accomplished  the  purposes  of  God  with 
respect  to  the  saints;  when  His  love  should  have 
borne  all  its  precious  fruits  in  them ;  and  when  Paul 
and  his  dear  children  in  the  faith  should  enjoy 
together  all  that  grace  and  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
should  have  wrought  in  them.  Unable  for  the  moment 
to  satisfy  the  desires  of  his  heart  by  seeing  them,  it 
was  to  that  hour  that  Paul  looked.  And  observe  that, 
if  he  does  so,  it  is  because  his  heart  was  already  filled 
with  it  for  himself.  The  power  of  the  Spirit,  acting 
in  accordance  with  the  truth,  always  leads  the  heart  to 
that  hour.  It  impels  the  heart  to  labour  in  love  in 
the  midst  of  this  world,  causes  thus  the  opposition  of 
the  darkness  of  this  world  to  the  light  (whether  on 
the  part  of  man  or  of  the  prince  of  darkness)  to  be 
realised,  and  makes  us  always  feel  the  need  of  that 
day  of  light,  when  evil  shall  no  longer  be  present  to 
hinder  the  happiness  of  the  new  man  in  his  enjoyment 
of  that  which  is  good,  in  his  communion  with  those 
dear  to  God,  and,  above  all,  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 
presence  of  his  glorified  Saviour,  who  has  loved  him, 
and  who  (for  the  exercise  of  his  faith)  is  at  present 
hidden  from  him. 

It  is  He  who  is  the  source  and  object  of  all  these 
affections,  who  sustains  and  nourishes  them,  who 
attracts  them  ever  to  Himself  by  His  perfections  and 
by  His  love,  and,  in  the  sorrows  of  the  christian  life, 
carries  the  heart  onward  thus  to  the  day  of  our  being 
with  Himself,  to  the  day  of  His  coming,  when  the 
heart  will  be  free  to  occupy  itself  with  all  that  binds 
us  to  Him  without  interruption.  This  thought  of  His 
presence  has  the  mastery,  when  the  heart  is  fresh  in 
the  divine  joy  of  redemption.  We  find  this  here.  We 
are  converted  to  wait  for  Him  (chap,  i.) ;  we  shall 
enjoy  the  communion  of  saints,  and  the  fruit  of  our 


I  THESSALONIANS.  77 

labours  when  He  returns  (chap,  ii.);  that  day  gives  its 
force  and  its  measure  to  our  thoughts  respecting  holi- 
ness (chap,  iii.) ;  it  destroys  the  anguish  of  heart  which 
would  otherwise  accompany  the  death  of  the  saints 
(chap,  iv.) ;  it  is  for  that  day  we  are  kept.  (Chap,  v.) 
The  coming  of  the  Lord,  the  presence  of  Jesus,  fills 
therefore  the  believer's  heart,  when  life  is  springing  up 
in  its  freshness — fills  it  with  a  joyous  hope,  the  fulfil- 
ment of  which  shines  bright  before  our  eyes,  there 
where  all  our  desires  will  be  accomplished. 

To  return  to  the  end  of  chapter  ii.,  the  link  which 
Satan  sought  to  break  by  interrupting  its  enjoyment 
was  but  the  rather  strengthened  by  being  connected 
with  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  The  current  of  the 
Spirit,  against  which  he  had  been  allowed  to  set  up 
this  dike,  though  turned  from  its  natural  bed,  could 
not  be  stopped,  for  its  waters  ever  flow ;  they  gushed 
out  in  waves  that  enriched  all  around  them,  taking 
their  course  towards  that  sea  which  contained  the 
fulness  of  those  waters  and  fed  the  source  from  which 
they  sprang. 

It  should  be  observed  here,  that  the  special  fruits  of 
our  labours  are  not  lost ;  they  are  found  again  at  the 
coming  of  Christ.  Our  chief  personal  joy  is  to  see 
the  Lord  Himself  and  to  be  like  Him.  This  is  the 
portion  of  all  saints ;  but  there  are  particular  fruits  in 
connection  with  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  us  and  by 
us.  At  Thessalonica  the  spiritual  energy  of  the  apos- 
tle had  brought  a  number  of  souls  to  God  and  to  wait 
for  Jesus,  and  into  a  close  union  in  the  truth  with 
Himself.  This  energy  would  be  crowned  at  the  com- 
ing of  Christ  by  the  presence  of  these  believers  in  the 
glory  as  the  fruit  of  his  labours.  God  would  thus 
crown  the  apostle's  work  by  bearing  a  striking  testi- 
mony to  its  faithfulness  in  the  presence  of  all  these 
saints  in  glory ;  and  the  love  which  had  wrought  in 
Paul's  heart  would  be  satisfied  by  seeing  its  object  in 


78  THE   BOOKS   OP  THE   BIBLE. 

glory  and  in  the  presence  of  Jesus.  They  would  be 
his  glory  and  joy.  This  thought  drew  yet  closer  the 
bonds  that  united  them,  and  comforted  the  apostle  in 
the  midst  of  his  toils  and  sufferings. 

Now  this  forced  removal  of  the  apostle  as  the  chief 
labourer,  without  weakening  the  bond  between  him 
and  the  disciples,  formed  other  links  which  would 
consolidate  and  strengthen  the  assembly,  knitting  it 
together  by  that  which  every  joint  supplied.  This  is 
connected  (all  things  are  but  the  instruments  of  the 
power  and  wisdom  of  God)  with  the  circumstances  of 
which  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  give  us  the  principal 
details. 

After  the  persecutions  excited  by  the  Jews  the 
apostle  made  a  short  stay  at  Thessalonica,  and  was 
then  obliged  to  leave  that  city  and  go  to  Berea. 
Even  there  the  Jews  of  Thessalonica  followed  him, 
and  influenced  those  of  Berea,  so  that  the  Berean 
brethren  had  to  provide  for  his  safety.  The  person  to 
whom  they  committed  him  brought  him  to  Athens; 
Silas  and  Timotheus  remained  at  Berea  for  the 
moment,  but  soon  at  his  command  rejoined  him  at 
Athens.  Meantime  a  violent  persecution  raged  against 
the  Christians  at  Thessalonica,  a  city  of  importance,  in 
which,  as  it  appears,  the  Jews  had  already  exercised  a 
considerable  measure  of  influence  over  the  heathen 
population — an  influence  that  was  undermined  by  the 
progress  of  Christianity,  which  the  Jews  in  their 
blindness  rejected. 

The  apostle,  learning  this  state  of  things  from  Silas 
and  Timotheus,  was  concerned  at  the  danger  his  new 
converts  ran  in  being  shaken  in  faith  by  the  difii- 
culties  that  beset  their  path  while  they  were  still 
young  in  the  faith.  His  affection  would  not  allow 
him  to  rest  without  putting  himself  in  communication 
with  them,  and  already  from   Athens  he   had   sent 


I  THESSALONIANS.  79 

Timotheus  to  inquire  into  their  condition,  and  to 
establish  their  hearts  by  reminding  them  that  while 
yet  with  them  he  had  told  them  these  things  would 
happen.  During  his  absence  Paul  left  Athens  and 
went  to  Corinth,  where  Timotheus  again  comforted 
him  by  the  good  tidings  he  brought  from  Thessalonica, 
and  the  apostle  resumed  his  labours  at  Corinth  with 
renewed  energy  and  courage.  (See  Acts  xviii.  5.) 

On  the  arrival  of  Timotheus  Paul  wrote  this  letter. 
Timotheus  had  informed  him  of  the  good  state  of  the 
Thessalonian  Christians — that  they  held  fast  the  faith, 
that  they  greatly  desired  to  see  the  apostle,  and  that 
they  walked  together  in  love.  In  the  midst  of  his 
sorrows,  and  of  the  opposition  of  men — in  a  word,  of 
the  afflictions  of  the  gospel — the  apostle's  spirit  is 
refreshed  by  these  tidings.  He  is  himself  strengthened, 
for  if  the  faifch  of  the  labourer  is  the  means  of  blessing 
to  souls,  and  in  general  the  measure  of  the  outward 
character  of  the  work,  the  faith  of  the  Christians  who 
are  the  fruit  of  his  labours,  and  who  correspond  to  it, 
is  in  return  a  source  of  strength  and  encouragement  to 
the  labourer ;  even  as  their  prayers  are  a  great  means 
of  blessing  to  him. 

Love  finds  in  their  spiritual  welfare  both  its  food 
and  its  joy ;  faith,  that  which  sustains  and  strengthens 
it.  The  word  of  God  is  felt  in  it.  "  I  live,"  says  the 
apostle,  "  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord.  What  thanks," 
he  adds,  "  can  we  render  to  God  for  you,  for  all  the 
joy  wherewith  we  rejoice  for  your  sakes  before  God  ?" 
Beautiful  and  affecting  picture  of  the  effect  of  the 
operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  delivering  souls  from 
the  corruption  of  the  world,  and  producing  the  purest 
affections,  the  greatest  self-renunciation  for  the  sake 
of  others,  the  greatest  joy  in  their  happiness — divine 
joy,  realised  before  God  Himself,  and  the  value  of 
which  was  appreciated  in  His  presence  by  the  spiritual 
heart  that  abode  in  it,  the  heart  which,  on  the  part 

III. 


80  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

of  that  God  of  love,  had  been  the  means  of  its 
existence. 

What  a  bond  is  the  bond  of  the  Spirit!  How 
seltishness  is  forgotten,  and  disappears  in  the  joy  of 
such  affections !  The  apostle,  animated  by  this  affec- 
tion, which  increased  instead  of  growing  weary  by  its 
exercise,  and  by  the  satisfaction  it  received  in  the 
happiness  of  others,  desires  so  much  the  more,  from 
the  Thessalonians  being  thus  sustained,  to  see  them 
again ;  not  now  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening 
them,  but  to  build  upon  that  which  was  already  so 
established,  and  to  complete  their  spiritual  instruction 
by  imparting  that  which  was  yet  lacking  to  their 
faith.  But  he  is,  and  he  ought  to  be,  a  labourer  and 
not  a  master  (God  makes  us  feel  this),  and  he  depends 
entirely  on  God  for  his  work,  and  for  the  edification 
of  others.  In  fact  years  passed  away  before  he  saw 
the  Thessalonians  again.  He  remained  a  long  time  at 
Corinth,  where  the  Lord  had  much  people ;  he  re- 
visited Jerusalem,  then  all  Asia  Minor  where  he  had 
laboured  earlier ;  thence  he  went  to  Ephesus,  where  he 
abode  nearly  three  years ;  and  after  that  he  saw  the 
Thessalonians  again,  when  he  left  that  city  to  go  to 
Corinth,  taking  his  journey  by  the  way  of  Macedonia, 
in  order  not  to  visit  Corinth  before  the  restoration  of 
the  Christians  there  to  order. 

*'  God  himself  " — it  is  thus  that  the  apostle's  desire 
and  his  submission  to  the  will  of  God  expresses  itself 
— "  God  himself  direct  our  way  unto  you."  His 
desire  is  not  vague.  He  refers  to  God  as  to  his  Father, 
the  source  of  all  these  holy  affections.  Him  who  holds 
the  place  of  Father  to  us,  and  orders  all  things  with  a 
view  to  the  good  of  His  children,  according^  to  that 
perfect  wisdom  which  embraces  all  things  and  all  His 
children  at  once.  "  Our  God  and  Father  himself,"  the 
apostle  says.  But  there  is  another  consideration — not, 
assuredly,  in  opposition  to  this,  for  God  is  one,  but 


I   THESSALONrANS.  81 

which  has  aDother  and  less  individual  character:  and 
he  adds — "  And  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Christ  is  Son 
over  God's  house,  and  besides  joy  and  blessing  and 
individual  affections,  there  was  the  progress,  the  wel- 
fare, and  the  development  of  the  whole  assembly  to  be 
considered.  These  two  parts  of  Christianity  act 
assuredly  upon  each  other. 

Where  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  is  full  and  unhin- 
dered, the  well-being  of  the  assembly  and  the  indi- 
vidual affections  are  in  harmony.  If  anything  is 
lacking  in  the  one,  God  uses  the  failure  itself  to  act 
powerfully  on  the  other.  If  the  assembly  as  a  whole 
is  weak,  individual  faith  is  exercised  in  a  special 
manner,  and  more  immediately  upon  God  Himself. 
There  are  no  Elijahs  and  Elishas  in  the  reign  of 
Solomon.  On  the  other  hand  the  watchful  care  of 
the  assembly  by  those  divinely  engaged  in  it  is  the 
true  energy  of  its  spiritual  organisation,  strengthens 
the  life,  and  re-awakens  the  spiritual  affections  of  its 
slumbering  members.  But  the  two  things  are  different. 
Therefore  the  apostle  adds  to  "  our  God  and  Father," 
"  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  who,  as  we  have  said, 
according  to  Hebrews  iii.,  is  a  Son  over  His  house.  It 
is  a  blessing  that  our  path  depends  on  the  love  of  a 
Father,  who  is  God  Himself,  acting  according  to  the 
tender  affections  expressed  by  that  name ;  and,  as  to 
the  well-being  of  the  assembly,  that  it  depends  on  the 
government  of  a  Lord  like  Jesus,  who  loves  it  with  a 
perfect  love :  and  who,  although  He  took  such  a  place, 
is  the  God  who  created  all  things,  the  Man  who  has 
all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  to  whom  Christians 
are  the  objects  of  incessant  and  faithful  care — care 
which  He  expends  in  order  to  bring  the  assembly 
finally  unto  Himself  in  glory  according  to  the  counsels 
of  God.* 

*  It  is  well  here  to  recall  that,  though  Christ  is  Son  over 
God's  honse,  as  Lord  He  is  not  Lord  over  the  assembly  but  over 
vol.  V.  UL  Q 


82  THE    BOOKS    OF   THE    P.IBLE. 

Such  then  was  the  apostle's  first  wish,  and  such 
were  they  with  regard  to  whom  he  formed  it.  Mean- 
while he  must  leave  his  beloved  Thessalonians  to  the 
immediate  care  of  the  Lord  on  whom  he  depended. 
(Compare  Acts  xx.  32.)  To  that  his  heart  turns. 
May  God  "  direct  my  way  to  come  to  you.  And  the 
Lord  make  you  to  increase  and  abound  in  love  one 
toward  another  and  toward  all."  And  his  heart  could 
present  its  affection  for  them,  as  the  pattern  of  that 
which  they  ought  to  feel  for  others.  This  power  of 
love  maintains  the  heart  in  the  presence  of  God,  and 
makes  it  find  its  joy  in  the  light  of  His  presence,  and 
earnestly  desire  that  all  saints  may  be  in  His  presence, 
their  hearts  fitted  for  it  and  there.  For  God  is  love, 
and  the  exercise  of  love  in  the  Christian's  heart  (fruit 
of  the  presence  and  the  operation  of  the  Spirit)  is  in 
fact  the  effect  of  the  presence  of  God ;  and  at  the  same 
time  it  makes  us  feel  His  presence,  so  that  it  keeps 
us  before  Him  and  maintains  sensible  communion 
in  the  heart.  Love  may  suffer  and  thereby  prove  its 
strength,  but  we  are  speaking  of  the  spontaneous 
exercise  of  love  towards  the  objects  which  God 
presents  to  it. 

Now,  being  thus  the  development  of  the  divine 
nature  in  us,  and  the  sustainment  of  our  hearts  in 
conjinunion  with  God  Himself,  love  is  the  bond  of 
perfectness,  the  true  means  of  holiness,  when  it  is  real. 
The  heart  is  kept,  far  away  from  the  flesh  and  its 
thoughts,  in  the  pure  light  of  the  presence  of  God, 
which  the  soul  thus  enjoys.  For  this  reason  the 
apostle  prays,  while  waiting  to  give  them  more  light, 
that  the  Lord  would  increase  love  in  them,  in  order  to 
establish  their  hearts  unblamable  in  holiness  before 
God  even  our  Father  in  the  presence  of   our  Lord 

individuals.  Besides  this,  He  is  in  a  general  sense  Lord  of  all. 
But  His  action  towards  individuals  ministers  to  the  well-being 
of  the  assembly. 


I  THESSALONIANS.  83 

Jesus  Christ  with  all  His  saints.  Here  we  find  again 
the  two  great  principles  o£  which  I  spoke  at  the  end 
of  chapter  i.:  God  in  the  perfection  of  His  nature ;  and 
tlie  Lord  Jesus  in  the  intimacy  of  His  connection  with 
us — God  however  as  Father,  and  Jesus  as  Lord.  We 
are  before  God,  and  Jesus  comes  with  His  saints.  He 
has  brought  them  to  perfection;  they  are  with  Him, 
and  thus  before  God  known  in  the  relationship  of 
Father. 

Observe  also  that  everything  refers  to  this  hope :  it 
was  an  actual  and  present  expectation.  If  they  were 
converted,  it  was  to  serve  God  and  to  wait  for  His 
Son  from  heaven.  Everything  related  to  that  won- 
drous moment  when  He  should  come.  That  which 
holiness  was  would  be  demonstrated  when  they  should 
be  before  God,  and  the  saints  would  be  with  their 
Head ;  moreover  manifested  v/ith  Him  in  glory,  even 
as  then  they  should  also  fully  enjoy  the  fruit  of  their 
labour,  and  the  reward  of  love  in  the  joy  of  all  those 
whom  they  had  loved.* 

The  scene  which  would  be  the  consummation  of  the 
work  is  presented  here  in  all  its  moral  bearing.  We 
are  before  God,  in  His  presence,  where  holiness  is 
demonstrated  in  its  true  character ;  we  are  there  for 
perfect  communion  with  God  in  the  light;  where  the 
connection  of  holiness  with  His  nature  and  with  the 
manifestation  of   Himself  is  apparent;  even  as  this 

*  It  is  very  striking  how  holiness  here,  and  manifestation  in 
glory,  are  brought  together  as  one  thing  in  scripture,  onl^^  the 
veil  drawn  aside  when  the  glory  is  there.  Even  Christ  was  de- 
clared Son  of  God  with  powe''.  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness 
by  resurrection.  We  beholding  the  glory  with  unveiled  face  are 
changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory.  So  here ;  we 
are  to  walk  in  love,  to  be  unblamable  in  holiness.  We  should 
have  said  here ;  but  no,  the  veil  is  drawn  at  the  appearing  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  His  saints,  in  Ephesians  v.  He 
washes  us  with  the  word,  to  present  us  a  glorious  body  without 
spot  to  Himself. 

111. 


84  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

manifestation  is  in  connection  with  the  development 
of  a  nature  in  us,  which  by  grace  sets  us  in  relationship 
with  Him. 

"Unblamable/'  he  says,  "in  holiness,"  and  in  holi- 
ness "  before  God."  He  is  light.  What  immense  joy, 
what  power,  through  grace,  in  this  thought,  for  the 
time  present,  to  keep  ourselves  manifested  before  Him! 
But  only  love,  known  in  Him,  can  do  this. 

But  also  we  add  **  Our  Father."  It  is  a  known  and 
real  relationship,  which  has  its  own  peculiar  character, 
a  relationship  of  love.  It  is  not  a  thing  to  be  acquired, 
and  holiness  is  not  the  means  of  acquiring  it.  Holi- 
ness is  the  character  of  our  relationship  with  God, 
inasmuch  as  we  have  received  His  nature  as  His 
children,  and  it  is  the  revelation  of  the  perfection  of 
that  nature  in  Him  in  love.  Love  itself  has  given  us 
that  nature,  and  has  placed  us  in  that  relationship; 
practical  holiness  is  its  exercise  in  communion  with 
God,  having  fellowship  with  Him  in  His  presence 
according  to  the  love  which  we  thus  know,  that  is,  God 
Himself  as  He  has  revealed  Himself  towards  us. 

But  the  heart  is  not  alone :  there  is  companionship 
in  this  joy  and  in  this  perfection ;  and  above  all  it  is 
with  Jesus  Himself.  He  will  come,  He  will  be  pre- 
sent, and  not  only  He  who  is  the  Head,  but  all  the 
saints  with  Him  will  be  there  also.  It  will  be  the 
accomplishment  of  the  ways  of  God  respecting  those 
whom  He  had  given  to  Jesus.  We  shall  see  Him  in 
His  glory,  the  glory  which  He  has  taken  in  connection 
with  His  coming  for  us.  We  shall  see  all  the  saints  in 
whom  He  will  be  admired,  and  see  them  in  the 
perfection  which  our  hearts  desire  for  them  now. 

Observe  also  that  love  makes  us  rise  above  the 
difficulties,  the  persecutions,  the  fears,  which  the 
enemy  seeks  to  produce.  Occupied  with  God,  happy 
in  Him,  this  weight  of  affliction  is  not  felt.  The 
strength  of  God  is  in  the  heart ;  the  walk  is  sensiblv 


I   THESSALOJ^IANS.  85 

connected  with  the  eternal  happiness  possessed  with 
Him,  and  the  affliction  is  felt  to  be  but  light  and  for  a 
moment.  Nor  this  only ;  we  sutler  for  Christ's  sake : 
it  is  joy  with  Him,  it  is  intimacy  of  communion,  if  we 
know  how  to  appreciate  it,  and  all  is  invested  with 
the  glory  and  salvation  that  are  found  at  the  end — "  at 
the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  his  saints." 

In  reading  this  passage  one  cannot  but  observe  the 
immediate  and  living  way  in  which  the  Lord's  coming- 
is  linked  with  daily  practical  life,  so  that  the  perfect 
light  of  that  day  is  thrown  upon  the  hourly  path  of 
the  present  time.  By  the  exercise  of  love  they  were 
to  be  established  in  holiness  before  God  at  the  coming 
of  Christ.  From  one  day  to  another,  that  day  was 
looked  for  as  the  consummation  and  the  only  term 
they  contemplated  to  the  ordinary  life  of  each  day 
here  below.  How  this  brought  the  soul  into  the  pre- 
sence of  God !  Moreover,  as  I  have  already  in  part 
observed,  they  lived  in  a  known  relationship  with 
God  which  gave  room  for  this  confidence.  He  was 
their  Father;  He  is  ours.  The  relationship  of  the 
saints  to  Jesus  was  equallj^  known.  The  saints  were 
"his  saints."  They  were  all  to  come  with  Him. 
They  were  associated  with  His  glory.  There  is 
nothing  equivocal  in  the  expression.  Jesus,  the  Lord, 
coming  with  all  His  saints,  allows  us  to  think  of  no 
other  event  than  His  return  in  glory.  Then  also  will 
He  be  glorified  in  His  saints,  who  will  already  have 
rejoined  Him  to  be  for  ever  with  Him.  It  will  be  the 
day  of  their  manifestation  as  of  His. 

The  apostle  then  turns  to  the  dangers  that  beset  the 
Thessalonians  in  consequence  of  their  former  habits 
(and  which  were  still  those  of  the  persons  that  sur- 
rounded them),  habits  in  direct  contradiction  to  the 
hoi 3^  and  heavenly  joy  of  which  he  spoke.  He  had 
already  shewn  them  how  they  were  to  walk  and  to 
please  God.  In  this  way  he  had  himself  walked 
in..  IV. 


86  THE   BOOKS    OF   THE   BIBLE. 

among  them.  (Chap.  ii.  10.)  He  would  exhort  them 
to  a  similar  conduct  with  all  the  weight  that  his  own 
walk  gave  him,  even  as  he  would  desire  their  growth 
in  Jove  according  to  the  affection  he  had  for  them. 
(Compare  Acts  xxvi.  29.)  It  is  this  which  gives 
authority  to  the  exhortation,  and  to  all  the  words  of  a 
servant  of  the  Lord. 

The  apostle  takes  up  especially  the  subject  of  purity, 
for  the  pagan  morals  were  so  corrupt  that  impurity 
was  not  even  accounted  to  be  sin.  It  appears  strange 
to  us  that  such  an  exhortation  should  have  been 
needful  to  such  lively  Christians  as  the  Thessalonians ; 
but  we  do  not  make  allowance  enough  for  the  power 
of  those  habits  in  which  persons  have  been  brought 
up,  and  which  become  as  it  were  a  part  of  our  nature 
and  of  the  current  of  our  thoughts,  and  for  the  action 
of  two  distinct  natures  under  the  influence  of  these, 
though  the  allowance  or  cultivation  of  one  soon 
deadens  the  other.  But  the  motives  given  here  shew 
upon  what  entirely  new  ground,  as  regards  the  com- 
monest morality,  Christianity  places  us.  The  body 
was  but  as  a  vessel  to  be  used  at  will  for  whatever 
service  they  chose.  They  were  to  possess  this  vessel, 
instead  of  allowing  themselves  to  be  carried  away  by 
the  desires  of  the  flesh ;  because  they  knew  God. 
They  were  not  to  deceive  their  brethren  in  these 
things,*  for  the  Lord  would  take  vengeance.  God  has 
called  us  to  holiness  :  it  is  with  Him  that  we  have  to 
do ;  and  if  any  one  despised  his  brother,  taking  advan- 
tage of  his  feebleness  of  mind  to  encroach  upon  his 
rights  in  this  respect,  it  would  be  to  despise  not  man 
but  God,  who  would  Himself  remember  it,  and  who 
has  given  us  His  Spirit ;  and  to  act  thus  would  be  to 
despise  that  Spirit,  both  in  one's  self  and  in  one's 
brother  in  whom  He  also  dwells.    He  who  was  wronged 

•  'Ev  T(p  Trpa'y/xart  is  a  euphemism  for  *'  these  things." 


I   THESSALONFANS.  87 

in  this  way  was  not  only  the  husband  of  a  wife,  he  was 
the  dwelling-place  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  ought  to  be 
respected  as  such.  On  what  high  ground  Christianity 
places  a  man,  and  that  in  connection  with  our  best 
affections ! 

As  touching  brotherly  love — that  new  mainspring 
of  their  life — it  was  not  necessary  to  exhort  them  : 
God  Himself  had  taught  them,  and  they  were  an 
example  of  love  to  all.  Only  let  them  abound  in  it 
even  more  and  more;  walking  quietly,  working  with 
their  own  hands,  so  as  to  be  in  no  man's  debt,  that  in 
this  respect  also  the  Lord  might  be  glorified. 

Such  were  the  apostle's  exhortations.  That  which 
follows  is  an  absolutely  new  revelation  for  their  en- 
couragement and  consolation. 

We  have  seen  that  the  Thessalonians  were  always 
expecting  the  Lord.  It  was  their  near  and  immediate 
hope  in  connection  with  their  daily  life.  They  were 
constantly  expecting  Him  to  take  them  to  Himself. 
They  had  been  converted  to  wait  for  the  Son  of  God 
from  heaven.  Now  (from  want  of  instruction)  it  ap- 
peared to  them  that  the  saints  who  had  recently  died 
would  not  be  with  them  to  be  caught  up.  The  apostle 
clears  up  this  point,  and  distinguishes  between  the 
coming  of  Christ  to  take  up  His  own,  and  His  day, 
which  was  a  day  of  judgment  to  the  world.  They 
were  not  to  be  troubled  with  regard  to  those  who  had 
died  in  Christ*  as  those  who  had  no  hope  were 
troubled.     And  the  reason  which  he  gives  for  this  is  a 

*  It  has  been  thought  that  the  apostle  speaks  here  of  those 
who  had  died  for  His  name's  sake  as  martyrs.  It  may  have 
been  so  in  consequence  of  the  persecutions,  but  ^la  tov  'Iijtou 
wouki  be  a  singular  way  of  expressing  it ;  ^id  with  a  genitive  is 
used  for  a  state  of  things,  a  condition  that  we  are  in,  that  cha- 
racterises us.  Being  in  Christ,  their  removal  was  but  falling 
asleep,  not  dying.  They  had  this  position  by  means  of  Jesus, 
not  for  His  name's  sake.  (Compare,  however,  2  Cor.  iv.  14.) 

IV. 


88  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

proof  of  the  strict  connection  of  their  entire  spiritual 
life  with  the  expectation  of  Christ's  personal  return 
to  bring  them  into  heavenly  glory.  The  apostle,  in 
comforting  them  with  regard  to  their  brethren  who 
had  lately  died,  does  not  say  a  word  of  the  survivors 
rejoining  them  in  heaven.  They  are  maintained  in 
the  thought  that  they  were  still  to  look  for  the  Lord 
during  their  lifetime  to  transform  them  into  His 
glorious  image.  (Compare  2  Cor.  v.  and  1  Cor.  xv.) 
An  especial  revelation  was  required  to  make  them 
understand  that  those  who  had  previously  died  would 
equally  have  their  part  in  that  event.  Their  part,  so 
to  speak,  would  resemble  that  of  Christ.  He  has  died, 
and  He  has  risen  again.  And  so  will  it  be  with  them. 
And  when  He  should  return  in  glory,  God  would  bring 
them — even  as  He  would  bring  the  others,  that  is,  the 
living — with  Him. 

Upon  this  the  apostle  gives  some  more  detailed 
explanation  of  the  Lord's  coming  in  the  form  of  ex- 
press revelation,  shewing  how  they  would  be  with 
Him  so  as  to  come  with  Him  when  He  appears.  The 
living  will  not  take  precedence  of  those  who  sleep  in 
Jesus.  The  Lord  Himself  will  come  as  the  Head  of 
His  heavenly  army,  dispersed  for  a  time,  to  gather 
them  to  Himself.  He  gives  the  word.  The  voice  of 
the  archangel  passes  it  on,  and  the  trumpet  of  God  is 
sounded.  The  dead  in  Christ  will  rise  first,  that  is  to 
say,  before  the  living  go  up.  Then  we  who  shall  be 
alive  and  remain  shall  go  with  them,  all  together,  in 
the  clouds  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  So  shall  we  be 
for  ever  with  the  Lord. 

It  %uas  thus  that  the  Lord  Himself  ascended ;  for  in 
all  things  we  are  to  be  like  Him — an  important  cir- 
cumstance here.  Whether  transformed  or  raised  from 
the  dead,  we  shall  all  go  up  in  the  clouds.  It  was  in 
the  clouds  that  He  ascended,  and  thus  we  shall  be  ever 
with  Him. 


I   THESSALONIANft.  80 

In  this  part  of  the  passage,  where  he  explains 
the  details  of  our  ascension  to  the  Lord  in  the  air, 
nothing  is  said  of  His  coming  down  to  the  earth  ;  it 
is  our  going  up  (as  He  went  up)  to  be  with  Hini.* 
Neither,  as  far  as  concerns  us,  does  the  apostle  go 
farther  than  our  gathering  together  to  be  for  ever 
with  Him.  Nothing  is  said  either  of  judgment  or  of 
manifestation;  but  only  the  fact  of  our  heavenly 
association  with  Him  in  that  we  leave  the  earth  pre- 
cisely as  He  left  it.  This  is  very  precious.  There  is 
this  difference:  He  went  up  in  His  own  full  right, 
He  ascended ;  as  to  us.  His  voice  calls  the  dead,  and 
they  come  forth  from  the  grave,  and,  the  living 
being  changed,  all  are  caught  up  together.  It  is  a 
solemn  act  of  God's  power,  which  seals  the  Christians' 
life  and  the  work  of  God,  and  brings  the  former  into 
the  glory  of  Christ  as  His  heavenly  companions. 
Glorious  privilege  !  Precious  grace  !  To  lose  sight  of 
it  destroys  the  proper  character  of  our  joy  and  of  our 
hope. 

Other  consequences  follow,  which  are  the  result  of 
His  manifestation ;  but  that  is  our  portion,  our  hope. 
We  leave  the  earth  as  He  did,  we  shall  for  ever  be 
with  Him. 

It  is  with  these  words  that  we  are  to  comfort  our- 
selves if  behevers  die — fall  asleep  in  Jesus.  They 
shall  return  with  Him  when  He  shall  be  manifested ; 
but,  as  regards  their  own  portion,  they  will  go  away  as 
He  went,  whether  raised  from  the  dead  or  transformed, 
to  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord. 

All  the  rest  refers  to  His  government  of  the  earth : 
an  important  subject,  a  part  of  His  glory  ;  and  we  also 
take  part  in  it.  But  it  is  not  our  own  peculiar  portion. 
This  is,  to  be  with  Him,  to  be  like  Him,  and  even 

*  In  order  that  we  may  all  return— be  brought  back  with 
Him — together. 

IV. 


90  THE   BOOKS    OF   THE   BIBLE. 

(when  the  time  shall  come)  to  quit  in  the  same  manner 
as  Himself  the  world  which  rejected  Him,  and  whic!i 
has  rejected  us,  and  which  is  to  be  judged. 

I  repeat  it :  to  lose  sight  of  this  is  to  lose  our  essen- 
tial portion.  All  lies  in  the  words,  "  so  shall  we  ever  be 
with  the  Lord."  The  apostle  has  here  explained  how  this 
will  take  place.*  Remark  here,  that  verses  15-18  arc 
a  parenthesis,  and  that  chapter  v.  1  follows  on  chap- 
ter iv.  14;  chapter  v.  shewing  what  He  will  do  when 

■''  Compare  2  Corinthians  v.  1,  &c.  We  have  already  re- 
marked as  a  fact  that  this  passage  is  a  new  distinct  revelation. 
But  the  bearing  of  this  fact  appears  here  and  proves  that  it  has 
much  imxDortance.  The  Christian's  life  is  so  connected  with  the 
day  (that  is  to  saj,  with  the  power  of  the  life  of  light  of  which 
Christ  lives),  and  Christ  who  is  already  in  glory  is  so  truly  the 
believer's  hfe,  that  he  has  no  other  thought  than  to  pass  into  it 
by  this  power  of  Christ's,  which  will  transform  him.  (See  2  Cor. 
V.  4.)  It  required  a  new  and  accessory  revelation  to  explain 
that  which  was  wanting  to  the  mtelligence  of  the  Thessalonians, 
how  the  dead  saints  should  not  lose  their  part  in  it.  The  same 
power  would  be  applied  to  their  dead  bodies  as  to  the  mortal 
bodies  of  the  living  saints,  and  all  would  be  caught  up  together. 
But  the  victory  over  death  was  already  gained,  and  Christ,  ac- 
cording to  the  power  of  resurrection,  being  already  the  believer's 
life,  it  was  but  natural,  according  to  that  power,  that  he  should 
pass  without  dying  into  the  fulness  of  life  with  Christ.  This  was 
so  much  the  natural  thought  of  faith  that  it  required  an  express, 
and  as  I  have  said,  an  accessory  revelation  to  explain  how  the 
dead  should  have  their  part  in  it.  To  us  now  it  presents  no 
dif&culty.  It  is  the  other  side  of  this  truth  which  we  lack, 
which  belongs  to  a  much  more  lively  faith,  and  which  realises 
much  more  the  power  of  the  life  of  Christ  and  His  victory  over 
death.  No  doubt  the  Thessalonians  should  have  considered 
that  Christ  had  died  and  risen  again,  and  not  have  allowed  the 
abundant  power  of  their  joy  in  realising  their  own  portion  in 
Christ  to  hide  from  them  the  certainty  of  the  portion  of  those 
who  slept  in  Him.  But  we  see  (and  God  allowed  it  that  we 
might  see)  how  the  life  which  they  possessed  was  connected 
with  the  position  of  the  Head  triumphant  over  death.  The 
apostle  does  not  weaken  this  faith  and  hope,  but  he  adds  (that 
they  may  be  comforted  by  the  thought)  that  the  triumph  of 
Christ  would  have  the  same  power  over  the  sleeping  as  over  the 
living  saints;  and  that  God  would  bring  back  the  former  as 


I   THESSALONIANS.  91 

He  brings  the  aaiiits  with  Him  according  to  chapter 
iv.  14. 

In  this  important  passage  then  we  find  the  Chris- 
tian living  in  an  expectation  of  the  Lord,  which  is 
connected  with  his  daily  life  and  which  completes  it. 

well  as  the  latter  with  Jesus  in  glory,  having  canglit  them  up 
together  as  their  common  portion  to  be  for  ever  with  Him. 

To  us  also  God  gives  this  truth,  this  revelation  of  His  pov/er. 
He  has  permitted  thousands  to  fall  asleep,  because  (blessed  be 
His  name!)  He  had  other  thousands  to  call  in;  but  the  life  oi 
Christ  has  not  lost  its  power,  nor  the  truth  its  certainty.  We 
as  living  ones  wait  for  Him  because  He  is  our  life.  We  shall 
see  Him  in  resurrection,  if  haply  we  die  before  He  comes  to  seek 
us ;  and  the  time  draws  near. 

Observe,  also,  that  this  revelation  gives  another  direction  to  the 
hope  of  the  Thessalonians,  because  it  distinguishes  with  much 
precision  between  our  departure  hence  to  join  the  Lord  in  the 
air,  and  our  return  to  the  earth  with  Him.  Nor  this  only ;  but 
it  shews  the  first  to  be  the  principal  thing  for  Christians,  while 
at  the  same  time  confirming  and  elucidating  the  other  point.  I 
question  whether  the  Thessalonians  would  not  better  have 
understood  this  retm^n  with  Christ  than  our  departure  hence  all 
together  to  rejoin  Him.  Even  at  their  conversion  they  had 
been  brought  to  wait  for  Jesus  from  heaven.  From  the  first  the 
great  and  essential  principle  was  established  in  their  hearts — 
the  Person  of  Christ  was  the  object  of  their  hearts'  expectation, 
and  they  were  separated  thereby  from  the  world. 

Perhaps  they  had  some  vague  idea  that  they  were  to  appear 
with  Him  in  glory,  but  how  it  was  to  be  accomplished  they 
knew  not.  They  were  to  be  ready  at  any  moment  for  His  com- 
ing, and  He  and  they  were  to  be  glorified  together  before  the 
universe.     This  they  knew.     It  is  a  summary  of  the  truth. 

Now  the  apostle  develops  more  than  one  point  here  in  con- 
nection with  this  general  truth.  1st,  they  would  be  with  Christ 
at  His  coming.  This,  I  think,  is  but  a  happy  application  of  a 
truth  which  they  already  possessed,  giving  a  little  more  preci- 
sion to  one  of  its  precious  details.  At  the  end  of  chapter  iii.  we 
have  the  truth  plainly  stated  (although  it  was  still  indistinct  in 
their  hearts,  since  they  thought  the  dead  in  Christ  would  be 
deprived  of  it)  that  all  the  saints  should  come  with  Jesus — an 
essential  point  as  to  the  character  of  our  relationship  to  Him. 
So  that  Jesus  was  expected — the  saints  should  be  together  with 
Jesus  at  the  time  of  His  coming — all  the  saints  should  come 

IV. 


92  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIRLK. 

Death  then  is  only  an  accessory  which  may  take 
place,  and  which  does  not  deprive  the  Christian  of  his 
portion  when  his  Master  shall  return.  The  proper 
expectation  of  the  Christian  is  entirely  separated 
from  all  which  follows  the  manifestation  of  Christ, 
and  which  is  in  connection  with  the  government  of 
this  world. 

The  Lord  comes  in  Person  to  receive  us  to  Himself ; 
He  does  not  send.  With  full  authority  over  death, 
which  He  has  conquered,  and  with  the  trump  of  God, 
He  calls  together  His  own  from  tlie  grave ;  and  these, 
with  the  living  (transformed),  go  to  meet  Him  in  the 
air.  Our  departure  from  the  world  exactly  resembles 
His  own :  we  leave  the  world,  to  which  we  do  not 
belong,  to  go  to  heaven.  Once  there,  we  have  at- 
tained our  portion.     We  are  like  Christ,  we  are  for 

with  Him.  This  fixed  and  gave  precision  to  their  ideas  on  a 
point  alreadj^  more  or  less  known.  2nd,  That  whicli  follows  is 
a  new  revelation  on  the  occasion  of  their  mistake  with  regard  to 
those  who  slept.  They  thought  indeed  that  the  Christians  who 
were  ready  should  be  glorified  with  Christ  when  He  came  back 
to  this  world  ;  but  the  dead — were  they  ready  ?  They  were  not 
present  to  share  the  glorious  manifestation  of  Christ  on  the 
earth.  For,  I  doubt  not,  the  vague  idea  that  possessed  the  mind 
of  the  Thessalonians  was  this :  Jesus  would  return  to  this  world, 
and  they  who  were  waiting  for  Him  would  share  His  glorious 
manifestation  on  the  earth.  Now  the  apostle  declares  that  the 
dead  saints  were  in  the  same  position  as  Jesus  who  had  died. 
God  had  not  left  Him  in  the  gi-ave ;  nor  would  He  those  who 
had,  like  Him,  been  there.  God  would  also  bring  them  with 
Him  when  He  should  return  in  glory  to  this  earth.  But  this 
was  not  all.  The  coming  of  Christ  in  glory  to  the  earth  was  not 
the  principal  thing.  The  dead  in  Christ  should  be  raised,  and 
then,  with  the  living,  should  go  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air, 
before  His  manifestation,  and  return  with  Him  to  the  earth  in 
glory  ;  and  thus  should  they  be  ever  with  the  Lord.  This  was 
the  principal  thing,  the  Christian's  portion  ;  namely,  to  dwell 
eternally  with  Christ  and  in  heaven.  The  portion  of  the  faithful 
was  on  high — was  Christ  Himself,  although  they  would  appear 
with  Him  in  the  glory.  For  this  world  it  would  then  be  the 
judgment. 


I   THESSALONTANS.  03 

ever  with  Him,  but  He  will  bring  His  own  with  Him, 
when  He  shall  appear.  This  then  was  the  true  com- 
fort in  the  case  of  a  Christian's  death,  and  by  no 
means  put  aside  the  daily  expectation  of  the  Lord 
from  heaven.  On  the  contrary  this  way  of  viewing 
the  subject  confirmed  it.  The  dead  saint  did  not  lose 
his  rights  by  dying — by  sleeping  in  Jesus  ;  he  should 
be  the  first  object  of  his  Lord's  attention  when  He 
came  to  assemble  His  own.  Nevertheless  the  place 
from  wdiich  they  go  forth  to  meet  Him  is  the  earth. 
The  dead  should  be  raised — this  was  the  first  thing — 
that  tliey  might  be  ready  to  go  with  the  others ;  and 
then  from  this  earth  all  would  depart  together  to  be 
with  Christ  in  heaven.  This  point  of  view  is  all- 
important,  in  order  to  apprehend  the  true  character 
of  that  moment  when  all  our  hopes  Avill  be  con- 
summated. 

The  Lord's  coming  again  into  this  world  assumes 
therefore  a  very  different  character  frou:i  that  of  a 
vague  object  of  hope  to  a  believer  as  a  period  of  glory. 
In  chapter  v.  the  apostle  speaks  of  it,  but  in  order  to 
distinguish  between  the  position  of  Christians  and 
that  of  the  careless  and  unbelieving  inhabitants  of  the 
earth.  The  Christian,  alive  and  taught  of  the  Lord, 
ever  expects  the  Master.  There  are  times  and  seasons  ; 
it  is  not  needful  to  speak  to  him  concerning  them. 
But  (and  he  knows  it)  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come, 
and  like  a  thief  in  the  night,  but  not  for  him  :  he  is  of 
the  day ;  he  has  part  in  the  glory  which  will  appear  in 
order  to  execute  judgment  on  the  unbelieving  world. 
Believers  are  the  children  of  light ;  and  this  light, 
whicli  is  the  judgment  of  unbelievers,  is  the  expression 
of  the  glory  of  God — a  glory  which  cannot  endure  evil, 
and  which,  when  it  shall  appear,  will  banish  it  from  the 
earth.  The  Christian  is  of  the  day  that  will  judge 
and  destroy  the  wicked  and  wickedness  itself  from  off 
the  face  of  the  earth.     Christ  is  the  Sun  of  righteous- 


94  THE    BOOKS    OF   THE    BIBLE. 

ness,  and  the  faithful  will  shine  as  the  sun  in  tho 
kingdom  of  their  Father. 

The  world  will  say,  "Peace  and  safety,"  and  in  all 
security  will  believe  in  the  continuance  of  its  prospe- 
rity and  the  success  of  its  designs,  and  the  day  will 
come  suddenly  upon  them.  (Compare  2  Peter  iii.  3.) 
The  Lord  Himself  has  often  declared  it.  (Matt.  xxiv. 
36-44 ;  Mark  xiii.  33-36 ;  Luke  xii.  40,  &c. ;  xvii.  26, 
&c. ;  xxi.  35,  &;c.) 

It  is  a  very  solemn  thing  to  see  that  the  professing 
church  (Rev.  iii.  3)  which  says  that  it  lives  and  is  in 
the  truth,  which  has  not  Thyatira's  character  of  cor- 
ruption, is  yet  to  be  treated  as  the  world — at  least, 
unless  it  repents. 

We  may  perhaps  wonder  to  find  the  Lord  saying  of 
a  time  like  this,  that  men's  hearts  will  be  failing  them 
for  fear,  and  for  looking  after  those  things  that  are 
coming  on  the  earth.  (Luke  xxi.  26.)  But  we  see  the 
two  principles — both  security  and  fear — already  exist- 
ing. Progress,  success,  the  long  continuance  of  a  new 
development  of  human  nature — this  is  the  language  of 
those  who  mock  at  the  Lord's  coming;  and  yet  beneath 
it  all,  what  fears  for  the  future  are  at  the  same  time 
possessing  and  weighing  down  the  heart !  I  use  the 
word  "principles,"  liecansc  I  do  not  believe  that  the 
moment  of  which  the  Lord  speaks  is  yet  come.  But 
the  shadow  of  coming  events  falls  upon  the  heart. 
Blessed  are  they  that  belong  to  another  world ! 

The  apostle  applies  this  difference  of  pcition — 
namely,  that  we  belong  to  the  day,  and  that  it  cannot 
therefore  come  upon  us  as  a  thief — to  the  character 
and  walk  of  the  Christian.  Being  a  child  of  the  light 
he  is  to  walk  as  such.  He  lives  in  the  day,  though  all 
is  night  and  darkness  around  him.  One  does  not  sleep 
in  the  day.  They  that  sleep  sleep  in  the  night :  they  that 
are  drunken  are  drunken  in  the  night ;  these  are  tho 
works  of  darkness.     A  Christian,  the  child  of  the  day, 


I  THESSALONIANS.  95 

must  watch  and  be  sober,  clothing  himself  with  all 
that  constitutes  the  perfection  of  that  mode  of  being 
which  belongs  to  his  position — namely,  with  faith  and 
love  and  hope — principles  which  impart  courage  and 
give  him  confidence  for  pressing  onwards.  He  has  the 
breastplate  of  faith  and  love ;  he  goes  straight  for- 
ward therefore  against  the  enemy.  He  has  the  hope 
of  this  glorious  salvation,  which  will  bring  him  entire 
deliverance,  as  his  helmet ;  so  that  he  can  lift  up  his 
head  without  fear  in  the  midst  of  danger.  We  see 
that  the  apostle  here  brings  to  mind  the  three  great 
principles  of  1  Corinthians  xiii.  to  characterise  the 
courage  and  stedfastness  of  the  Christian,  as  at  the 
beginning  he  shewed  tliat  they  were  the  mainspring 
of  daily  walk. 

Faith  and  love  naturally  connect  us  with  God, 
revealed  as  He  is  in  Jesus  as  the  principle  of  com- 
munion; so  that  we  walk  with  confidence  in  Him: 
His  presence  gives  as  strength.  By  faith  He  is  the 
glorious  object  before  our  eyes.  By  love  He  dwells  in 
us,  and  we  realise  what  He  is.  Hope  fixes  our  eyes 
especially  on  Christ,  who  is  coming  to  bring  us  into 
the  enjoyment  of  glory  with  Himself. 

Consequently  the  apostle  speaks  thus :  "  For  God 
hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath  "  (love  is  understood  by 
faith,  that  which  God  wills — His  mind  respecting  us), 
"but  to  obtain  salvation."  It  is  this  which  v/e  hope 
for;  and  he  speaks  of  salvation  as  the  final  deliver- 
ance "  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :"  and  he  naturally 
adds,  "  who  died  for  us,  that  whether  we  wake  or 
sleep  "  (have  died  before  His  coming  or  be  then  alive), 
"  we  should  live  together  with  Him.''  ]3eath  does  not 
deprive  us  of  this  deliverance  and  ghny ;  for  Jesus 
died.  Death  became  the  means  of  oljtaining  them  for 
us;  and  if  we  die,  we  shall  equally  live  with  Him. 
He  died  for  us,  in  our  stead,  in  order  that,  happen 
what  may,  we  should  live  ^.vith  Him.    Everything  that 

V. 


OG  THE    BOOKS    OF   THE    RIBLE. 

hindered  it  is  put  out  of  our  way  aud  has  lost  its 
power;  and,  more  than  lost  its  power,  lias  become  a 
guarantee  of  our  uidiindered  enjoyment  of  the  full  life 
of  Christ  in  glory ;  so  that  we  may  comfort  ourselves 
— and  more  than  that,  we  may  build  ourselves  up — 
with  these  glorious  truths,  through  wliich  God  meets 
all  our  wants  and  all  our  necessities.  This  (ver.  10)  is 
the  end  of  the  special  revelation  with  regard  to  those 
who  sleep  before  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
beginning  with  chapter  iv.  13. 

I  would  here  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the  way 
in  which  the  apostle  speaks  of  the  Lord's  coming  in 
the  different  chapters  of  this  epistle.  It  will  be 
noticed  that  the  Spirit  does  not  present  the  church 
here  as  a  body.  Life  is  the  subject — that  of  each 
Christian  therefore  individually:  a  very  important 
point  assuredly. 

In  chapter  i.  the  expectation  of  the  Lord  is  pre- 
sented in  a  general  way  as  characterising  the  Christian. 
They  are  converted  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God, 
and  to  wait  for  His  Son  from  heaven.  Here  it  is  the 
object  itself  that  is  presented,  the  Person  of  the  Lord. 
God's  own  Son  shall  come,  and  shall  satisfy  all  the 
heart's  desire.  This  is  neither  His  kingdom,  nor  the 
judgment,  nor  even  rest ;  it  is  the  Son  of  God ;  and 
this  Son  c  f  God  is  Jesus,  risen  from  among  the  dead, 
and  who  ha^  delivered  us  from  the  wrath  to  come; 
for  wrath  is  coming.  Each  believer  therefore  ex- 
pects for  himself  the  Son  of  God — expects  Him  from 
heaven. 

In  chapter  ii.  it  is  association  with  the  saints,  joy  in 
the  saints  at  the  coming  of  Christ. 

In  chapter  iii.  responsibility  is  more  the  subject — 
responsibility  in  liberty  and  in  joy  ;  but  still  a  position 
before  God  in  connection  with  the  Christian's  walk 
and  life  here  below.  The  Lord's  appearing  is  the 
Qieasure  and  test  time   of  holiness.     The  testimony 


I  THESSALONIANS.  97 

rendered  by  God  to  this  life,  by  giving  it  its  natural 
place,  takes  place  when  Christ  is  manifested  luith  all 
His  saints.  It  is  not  here  His  coming  for  us,  but  His 
coming  with  us.  This  distinction  between  the  two 
events  always  exists.  For  Christians  even  and  for  the 
church,  that  which  refers  to  responsibility  is  always 
found  in  connection  with  the  a'ppearing  of  the  Lord ; 
our  joy,  with  His  coming  to  take  us  to  Himself. 

Thus  far  then,  we  have  the  general  expectation  of 
the  Lord  in  Person,  His  Son  from  heaven ;  love  satis- 
fied at  His  cominor  as  regards  others ;  holiness  in  its 
full  value  and  full  development.  In  chapter  iv.  it  is 
not  the  connection  of  life  with  its  full  development  in 
our  being  actually  with  Christ,  but  victory  over  death 
(which  is  no  barrier  to  this);  and,  at  the  same  time, 
the  strengthening  and  establishment  of  hope  in  our 
common  departure  hence,  similarly  to  that  of  Jesus, 
to  be  for  ever  with  Him. 

The  exhortations  that  conclude  the  epistle  are  brief; 
the  mighty  action  of  the  life  of  God  in  these  dear  dis- 
ciples made  them  comparatively  little  needed.  Exhor- 
tation is  always  good.  There  was  nothing  among 
them  to  blame.  Happy  condition  !  They  were  perhaps 
not  sufiiciently  instructed  for  a  large  development  of 
doctrine  (the  apostle  hoped  to  see  them  for  that 
purpose) ;  but  there  was  enough  of  life,  a  personal 
relationship  with  God  sufiiciently  true  and  real,  to 
build  them  up  on  that  ground.  To  him  that  hath 
shall  more  be  given.  The  apostle  could  rejoice  with 
them  and  confirm  their  hope  and  add  to  it  some  details 
as  a  revelation  from  God.  The  assembly  in  all  ages  is 
profited  by  it. 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  we  see  life  in  the 
Spirit  rising  above  all  circumstances,  as  the  fruit  of 
long  experience  of  the  goodness  and  faithfulness  of 
God  ;  and  thus  shewing  its  remarkable  power  when  the 
help  of  the  saints  had  failed,  and  the  apostle  was  in 
VOL.  V.  V.  H 


08  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

distress,  his  life  in  danger,  after  four  years'  imprison- 
ment, by  a  merciless  tyrant.  It  is  then  that  he 
decides  his  case  by  the  interests  of  the  assembly.  It 
is  then  that  he  can  proclaim,  that  we  ought  always  to 
rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and  that  Christ  is  all  things  to 
him,  to  live  is  Christ,  death  a  gain  to  him.  It  is  then 
that  he  can  do  all  things  through  Him  who  strengthens 
him.  This  he  has  learnt  In  Thessalonians  we  have 
the  freshness  of  the  fountain  near  to  its  source  ;  the 
energy  of  the  first  spring  of  life  in  the  believer's  soul, 
presenting  all  the  beauty  and  purity  and  vigour  of  its 
first  verdure  under  the  influence  of  the  sun  that  had 
risen  upon  them  and  made  the  sap  of  life  rise,  the  first 
manifestations  of  which  had  not  been  deteriorated  by 
contact  with  the  world  or  by  an  enfeebled  view  of 
invisible  things. 

The  apostle  desired  that  the  disciples  should  ac- 
knowledo'e  those  who  laboured  amonoj  them  and 
guided  them  in  grace  and  admonished  them,  and 
esteem  them  greatly  for  their  work's  sake.  The  opera- 
tion of  God  always  attracts  a  soul  that  is  moved  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  commands  its  attention  and  its 
respect:  on  this  foundation  the  apostle  builds  his 
exhortation.  It  is  not  office  which  is  in  question  here 
(if  such  existed),  but  the  work  which  attracted  and 
attached  the  heart.  Thev  ousrht  to  be  known : 
spirituality  acknowledged  this  operation  of  God. 
Love,  devotedness,  the  ansv/er  to  the  need  of  souls, 
patience  in  dealing  with  them  on  the  part  of  God 
— all  this  commended  itself  to  the  believer's  heart: 
and  it  blessed  God  for  the  care  He  bestowed  upon 
His  children.  God  acted  in  the  labourer  and  in  the 
hearts  of  the  faithful.  Blessed  be  God,  it  is  an  ever- 
existing  principle,  and  one  that  never  grows  weaker ! 

The  same  Spirit  produced  peace  among  themselves. 
This  grace  was  of  great  value.  If  love  appreciated 
the  work  of  God  in  the  labourer,  it  would  esteem  the 


r  THESSALONIANS.  99 

brother  as  in  the  presence  of  God :  self-will  would 
not  act. 

Now  this  renunciation  of  self-will,  and  this  practical 
sense  of  the  operation  and  presence  of  God,  gives 
power  to  warn  the  unruly,  to  comfort  the  fearful,  to 
help  the  weak,  and  to  be  patient  towards  all.  The 
apostle  exhorts  them  to  it.  Commuuion  with  God  is 
the  power  and  His  word  the  guide  in  so  doing.  In  no 
case  were  they  to  render  evil  for  evil,  but  to  follow 
that  which  w^as  good  among  themselves  and  towards 
all.  All  this  conduct  depends  on  communion  with 
God,  on  His  presence  with  us,  which  makes  ns  superior 
to  evil.  He  is  this  in  love ;  and  we  can  be  so  by 
walking  with  Him. 

Such  were  the  apostle's  exhortations  to  guide  their 
walk  with  others.  As  regards  their  personal  state, 
joy,  prayer,  thanksgiving  in  all  things,  these  should  be 
their  characteristics.  With  respect  to  the  public  act- 
ings of  the  Spirit  in  their  midst,  the  apostle's  exhorta- 
tions to  these  simple  and  happy  Christians  were 
equally  brief.  They  were  not  to  hinder  the  action  of 
the  Spirit  in  their  midst  (for  this  is  the  meaning  of 
quenching  the  Spirit)  ;  nor  to  despise  that  which  He 
might  say  to  them,  even  by  the  mouth  of  the  most 
simple,  if  He  were  pleased  to  use  it.  Being  spiritual, 
they  could  judge  all  things.  They  were  therefore  not 
to  receive  everything  that  presented  itself,  even  in  the 
name  of  the  Spirit,  but  to  prove  all  thijigs.  They 
were  to  hold  fast  that  which  was  good  ;  those  who  by 
faith  have  received  the  truth  of  the  word  do  not 
waver.  One  is  not  ever  learning  the  truth  of  that 
which  one  has  learnt  from  God.  As  to  evi\  they  were 
to  abstain  from  it  in  all  its  forms.  Such  w^ere  the 
apostle's  brief  exhortations  to  tiiese  Christians  who 
indeed  rejoiced  his  heart.  And  in  truth  it  is  a  fine 
picture  of  christian  walk,  which  we  find  here  so 
livingly  portrayed  in  the  apostle's  communications. 

V. 


100  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

He  concludes  his  epistle  by  commending  them  to  the 
God  of  peace,  that  they  might  be  preserved  blameless 
until  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

After  an  epistle  like  this  his  heart  turned  readily  to 
the  God  of  peace;  for  we  enjoy  peace  in  the  presence 
of  God — not  only  peace  of  conscience  but  peace  of 
heart. 

In  the  previous  part  we  found  the  activity  of  love 
in  the  heart ;  that  is  to  say,  God  present  and  acting  in 
us,  who  are  viewed  as  partaking,  at  the  same  time,  of 
the  divine  nature,  which  is  the  spring  of  that  holiness 
which  will  be  manifested  in  all  its  perfection  before 
God  at  the  coming  of  Jesus  with  all  His  saints.  Here 
it  is  the  God  of  peace,  to  whom  the  apostle  looks  for 
the  accomplishment  of  this  work.  There  it  was  the 
activity  of  a  divine  principle  in  us — a  principle  con- 
nected with  the  presence  of  God  and  our  communion 
with  Him.  Here  it  is  the  perfect  rest  of  heart  in 
which  holiness  develops  itself.  The  absence  of  peace 
in  the  heart  arises  from  the  activity  of  the  passions 
and  the  will,  increased  by  the  sense  of  powerlessness 
to  satisfy  or  even  to  gratify  them. 

But  in  God  all  is  peace.  He  can  be  active  in  love ; 
He  can  glorify  Himself  by  creating  what  He  will ;  He 
can  act  in  judgment  to  cast  out  the  evil  that  is  before 
His  eyes.  But  He  rests  ever  in  Himself,  and  both  in 
good  and  in  evil  He  knows  the  end  from  the  begin- 
nino'  and  is  undisturbed.  When  He  fills  the  heart.  He 
imparts  this  rest  to  us :  we  cannot  rest  m  ourselves  ; 
we  cannot  find  rest  of  heart  in  the  actings  of  our 
passions,  either  without  an  object  or  upon  an  object, 
nor  in  the  rending  and  destructive  energy  of  our  own 
will.  We  find  our  rest  in  God — not  the  rest  that 
implies  weariness,  but  rest  of  heart  in  the  possession 
of  all  that  we  desire,  and  of  that  which  even  forms 
our  desires  and  fully  satisfies  them,  in  the  possession 
of  an  object  in  which  conscience  hcts  nothing  to  re- 


I  THESSALONIANS.  101 

proach  us  and  has  but  to  be  silent,  in  the  certainty 
that  it  is  the  Supreme  Good  which  the  heart  is  enjoy- 
ing, the  supreme  and  only  authority  to  whose  will  it 
responds — and  that  will  is  love  towards  us.  God 
bestows  rest,  peace.  He  is  never  called  the  God  of 
joy.  He  gives  us  joy  truly,  and  we  ought  to  rejoice; 
but  joy  implies  something  surprising,  unexpected, 
exceptional,  at  least  in  contrast  with,  and  in  conse- 
quence of,  evil.  The  peace  that  we  possess,  that 
which  satisfies  us,  has  no  element  of  this  kind,  nothing 
which  is  in  contrast,  nothing  which  disturbs.  It  is 
more  deep,  more  perfect,  than  joy.  It  is  more  the 
satisfaction  of  a  nature  in  that  which  perfectly  answers 
to  it,  and  in  which  it  develops  itself,  without  any  con- 
trast being  necessary  to  enhance  the  satisfaction  of  a 
heart  that  has  not  all  which  it  desires,  or  of  which  it 
is  capable. 

God,  as  we  have  said,  rests  thus  in  Himself — is  this 
rest  for  Himself.  He  gives  us,  and  is  for  us,  this 
entire  peace.  The  conscience  being  perfect  through 
the  work  of  Christ  who  has  made  peace  and  reconciled 
us  to  God,  the  new  nature — and  consequently  the 
heart — finds  its  perfect  satisfaction  in  God,  and  the 
will  is  silent ;  moreover,  it  has  nothing  further  to 
desire. 

It  is  not  only  that  God  meets  the  desires  that  we 
have :  He  is  the  source  of  new  desires  to  the  new  man 
by  the  revelation  of  Himself  in  love.*  He  is  both 
the  source  of  the  nature  and  its  infinite  object;  and 
that,  in  love.  It  is  His  part  to  be  so.  It  is  more 
than  creation ;  it  is  reconciliation,  which  is  more 
than  creation,  because  there  is  in  it  more  development 
of  love,  that  is  to  say,  of  God:  and  it  is  thus  that 

*  Hence  there  is  the  opposite  to  weariness  in  the  heavenly 
enjoyment  of  God ;  because  He  who  is  the  infinite  object  of 
enjoyment  is  the  infinite  source  and  strength  of  capacity  to 
enjoy,  though  we  enjoy  as  recipient  creatures. 

V. 


102  THE  BOOKS   OP  THE   BTBT.E. 

we  know  God.  It  is  that  which  He  is  essentially  in 
Christ. 

In  the  angels  He  glorifies  Himself  in  creation:  they 
excel  us  in  strength.  In  Christians  He  glorifies  Him- 
si^lf  in  reconciliation,  to  make  them  the  firstfruits  of 
His  new  creation,  when  He  shall  have  reconciled  all 
things  in  heaven  and  on  earth  by  Clirist.  Therefore 
it  is  written  "Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,  for  they 
shjall  be  called  the  children  [sons]  of  God."  They  have 
His  nature  and  His  character. 

It  is  in  these  relationships  with  God — or  rather  it  is 
God  in  these  relationships  with  us  in  peace,  in  His 
communion,  who  develops  sanctification,  our  inward 
conformity  of  affection  and  intelligence  (and  conse- 
quently of  outward  conduct)  with  Him  and  His  will. 
"  The  God  of  peace  himself  sanctify  you  wholly." 
May  there  be  nothing  in  us  that  does  not  yield  to  this 
benignant  influence  of  peace  which  we  enjoy  in  com- 
munion with  God !  May  no  power  or  force  in  us  own 
anything  but  Himself !  In  all  things  may  He  be  our 
all,  so  that  He  only  may  rule  in  our  hearts  ! 

He  has  brought  us  perfectly  into  this  place  of 
blessedness  in  Christ  and  by  His  work.  There  is 
nothing  between  us  and  God  but  the  exercise  of  His 
love,  the  enjoyment  of  our  happiness,  and  the  worship 
of  our  hearts.  We  are  the  proof  before  Him,  the 
testimony,  the  fruit,  of  the  accomplishment  of  all  that 
He  holds  most  precious,  of  that  which  has  perfectly 
glorified  Him,  of  that  in  which  He  delights,  and  of  the 
glory  of  the  One  who  has  accomplished  it,  namely,  of 
Christ,  and  of  His  work.  We  are  the  fruit  of  the 
redemption  that  Christ  has  accomplished,  and  the 
objects  of  the  satisfaction  which  God  must  feel  in  the 
exercise  of  His  love. 

God  in  grace  is  the  God  of  peace  for  us  ;  for  here 
divine  righteousness  finds  its  satisfaction,  and  love  its 
perfect  exercise. 


I  THESSALONIANS.  103 

The  apostle  now  prays  that,  in  this  character,  God 
may  work  in  us  to  make  everything  respond  to  Him- 
self thus  revealed.  Here  only  is  this  development  of 
humanity  given — "  bod}^,  soul,  and  spirit."  The  object 
is  assuredly  not  metaphysical,  but  to  express  "inoM  in 
all  the  parts  of  his  being ;  the  vessel  by  which  he 
expresses  that  which  he  is,  the  natural  affections  of 
his  soul,  the  elevated  workings  of  his  mind,  through 
which  he  is  above  the  animals  and  in  intelligent  rela- 
tionship with  God.  May  God  be  found  in  each,  as  the 
mover,  spring,  and  guide  ! 

In  general  the  words  "  soul  and  spirit "  are  used 
without  making  any  distinction  between  them,  for 
the  soul  of  man  was  formed  very  differently  from  that  of 
animals  in  that  God  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath 
(spirit)  of  life,  and  it  was  thus  that  man  became  a 
living  soul.  Therefore  it  suffices  to  say  soul  as  to 
man,  and  the  other  is  supposed.  Or,  in  saying  spirit, 
in  this  sense  the  elevated  character  of  his  soul  is 
expressed.  The  animal  has  also  its  natural  affections, 
has  a  living  soul,  attaches  itself,  knows  the  persons 
who  do  it  good,  devotes  itself  to  its  master,  loves  him, 
will  even  give  its  life  for  him ;  but  it  has  not  that 
which  can  be  in  relatit)nship  with  God  (alas !  which 
can  set  itself  at  enmity  against  Him),  which  can 
occupy  itself  with  things  outside  its  own  nature  as  the 
master  of  others. 

The  Spirit  then  wills  that  man,  reconciled  with 
God,  should  be  consecrated,  in  every  part  of  his  being, 
to  the  God  who  has  brought  him  into  relationship  with 
Himself  by  the  revelation  of  His  love,  and  by  the 
work  of  His  grace,  and  that  nothing  in  the  man 
should  admit  an  object  beneath  the  divine  nature  of 
which  he  is  partaker;  so  that  he  should  thus  bo 
preserved  blameless  unto  the  coming  of  Christ. 

Let  us  observe  here,  that  it  is  in  no  wise  beneath, 
the  new  nature  in  us  to  perform  our  duties  faithfully 

V. 


104  THt  BOOKS   OF  Tfit:  BIBLE. 

in  all  the  various  relationships  in  which  God  has 
placed  us;  but  quite  the  contrary.  That  which  is 
required  is  to  bring  God  into  them,  His  authority, 
and  the  intelligence  which  that  imparts.  Therefore  it 
is  said  to  husbands  to  live  with  their  wives  "  according 
to  knowledge,"  or  intelligence ;  that  is  to  say.  not  only 
with  human  and  natural  affections  (which,  as  things 
are,  do  not  by  themselves  even  maintain  their  place), 
but  as  before  God  and  conscious  of  His  will.  It  may 
be  that  God  may  call  us,  in  connection  with  the  extra- 
ordinary work  of  His  grace,  to  consecrate  ourselves 
entirely  to  it ;  but  otherwise  the  will  of  God  is  accom- 
plished in  the  relationships  in  which  He  has  placed  us, 
and  divine  intelligence  and  obedience  to  God  are 
developed  in  them.  Finally  God  has  called  us  to  this 
life  of  holiness  with  Himself ;  He  is  faithful,  and  He 
will  accomplish  it.  May  He  enable  us  to  cleave  to 
Him,  that  we  may  realise  it! 

Observe  again  here,  how  the  coming  of  Christ  is 
introduced,  and  the  expectation  of  this  coming,  as  an 
integral  part  of  christian  life.  "Blameless,"  it  says, 
"  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  life 
which  had  developed  itself  in  obedience  and  holiness 
meets  the  Lord  at  His  commg.  Death  is  not  in 
question.  The  life  which  we  have  found  is  to  be  such 
when  He  appears.  The  man,  in  every  part  of  his 
being,  moved  by  this  life,  is  found  there  blameless 
when  Jesus  comes.  Death  was  overcome  (not  yet 
destroyed) :  a  new  life  is  ours.  This  life,  and  the  man 
living  of  this  life,  are  found,  with  their  Head  and 
Source,  in  the  glory.  Then  will  the  weakness  disap- 
pear which  is  connected  with  his  present  condition. 
That  which  is  mortal  shall  be  swallowed  up  of  life: 
til  at  is  all.  We  are  Christ's :  He  is  our  life.  We  wait 
for  Him,  that  we  may  be  with  Him,  and  that  He  may 
perfect  all  things  in  the  glory. 

Let  us  also  here  examine  a  little  into  that  whicli 


I  THESSALONUKS.  105 

this  passage  teaelies  us  with  regard  to  sanctitication. 
It  is  connected  indeed  with  a  nature,  but  it  is  linked 
with  an  object;  and  it  depends  for  its  realisation  on 
the  operation  of  another,  namely,  of  God  Himself ;  and 
it  is  founded  on  a  perfect  work  of  reconciliation  with 
God  already  accomplished.  Inasmuch  as  it  is  founded 
on  an  accomplished  reconciliation,  into  which  we  enter 
by  the  reception  of  a  new  nature,  the  scriptures  con- 
sider Christians  as  already  perfectly  sanctified  in 
Christ.  It  is  practically  carried  out  by  the  operation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who,  in  imparting  this  nature, 
separates  us — as  thus  born  again — entirely  from  the 
world.  It  is  important  to  maintain  this  truth,  and  to 
stand  very  clearly  and  distinctly  on  this  ground : 
otherwise  practical  sanctification  soon  becomes  de- 
tached from  a  new  nature  received,  and  is  but  the 
amelioration  of  the  natural  man  and  then  it  is  quite 
legal,  a  return — after  reconciliation — into  doubt  and 
uncertainty,  because,  though  justified,  the  man  is  not 
accounted  meet  for  heaven — this  depends  on  progress 
so  that  justification  does  not  give  peace  with  God. 
Scripture  says,  "  Giving  thanks  to  the  Father,  who 
hath  made  us  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light."  Progress  there  is,  but  it  is  not  in  scripture 
connected  with  meetness.  The  thief  was  meet  for 
Paradise  and  went  there.  Such  views  are  an  enfeeb- 
ling, not  to  say  destructive,  of  the  work  of  redemption, 
that  is,  of  its  appreciation  in  our  hearts  by  faith. 

We  are  then  sanctified  (it  is  thus  the  scripture  most 
frequently  speaks)  by  God  the  Father,  by  the  blood 
and  the  offering  of  Christ,  and  by  the  Spirit — that  is 
to  say,  we  are  set  apart  for  Gocl  personally  and  for 
ever.  In  this  point  of  view  justification  is  presented 
in  the  word  as  consequent  upon  sanctification,  a  thing 
into  which  we  enter  through  it.  Taken  up  as  sinners 
in  the  world,  we  are  set  apart  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
enjoy  all  the  efficacy  of  the  work  of  Christ  according 

V. 


106  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

to  the  counsels  of  the  Father:  set  apart  by  the  com- 
munication of  a  new  life,  no  doubt,  but  placed  by  this 
setting  apart  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  that  Christ  has 
gained  for  us.  I  say  again,  It  is  very  important  to 
hold  fast  this  truth  both  for  the  glory  of  God  and  for 
our  own  peace :  but  the  Spirit  of  God  in  this  epistle 
does  not  speak  of  it  in  this  point  of  view,  but  of  the 
practical  realisation  of  the  development  of  this  life  of 
separation  from  the  world  and  from  evil.  He  speaks 
of  this  divine  development  in  the  inner  man,  which 
makes  sanctification  a  real  and  intelligent  condition  of 
soul,  a  state  of  practical  communion  with  God,  accord- 
ing to  that  nature  and  to  the  revelation  of  God  with 
which  it  is  connected. 

In  this  respect  we  find  indeed  a  principle  of  life 
which  works  in  us — that  which  is  called  a  subjective 
state :  but  it  is  impossible  to  separate  this  operation  in 
us  from  an  object  (man  would  be  God  if  it  were  so), 
nor  consequently  from  a  continual  work  of  God  in  us 
that  holds  us  in  communion  with  that  object,  which  is 
God  Himself.  Accordingly  it  is  through  the  truth  by 
the  word,  whether  at  first  in  the  communication  of 
life,  or  in  detail  all  along  our  path.  "  Sanctify  them 
through  thy  truth ;  thy  word  is  truth." 

Man,  we  know,  has  degraded  himself.  He  h as- 
enslaved  himself  to  the  lusts  of  the  animal  part  of 
liis  being.  But  how  ?  By  departing  from  God.  God 
does  not  sanctify  man  apart  from  the  knowledge  of 
Himself,  leaving  man  still  at  a  distance  from  Him ; 
but,  while  giving  him  a  new  nature  which  is  capable 
of  it,  by  giving  to  this  nature  (which  cannot  even 
exist  without  it)  an  object — Himself,  He  does  not 
make  man  independent,  as  he  wished  to  be:  the  new 
man  is  the  dependent  man ;  it  is  his  perfection — Jesus 
Christ  exemplified  this  in  His  life.  The  new  man  is  a 
man  dependent  in  his  affections,  who  desires  to  be  so, 
who  delights  in,  and  cannot  be  happy  without  being 


I  THESSALONIANS.  107 

SO,  and  whose  dependence  is  on  love,  while  still  obedient 
as  a  dependent  being  ouoht  to  be. 

Thus  they  who  are  sanctified  possess  a  nature  that 
is  holy  in  its  desires  and  its  tastes.  It  is  the  divine 
nature  in  them,  the  life  of  Christ.  But  they  do 
not  cease  to  be  men.  They  have  God  revealed  in 
Christ  for  their  object.  Sanctification  is  developed  in 
communion  with  God,  and  in  affections  which  go  back 
to  Christ,  and  which  wait  for  Him.  But  the  new 
nature  cannot  reveal  an  object  to  itself ;  and  still  less 
could  it  have  its  object  by  setting  God  aside  at  its 
will.  It  is  dependent  on  God  for  the  revelation  of 
Himself.  His  love  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  whom  He  has  given  us ;  and  the  same 
Spirit  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  communicates 
them  to  us.  Thus  we  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  God, 
being  strengthened  mightily  by  His  Spirit  in  the  inner 
man,  that  we  may  "  comprehend  with  all  saints,  what 
is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height ;  and 
know  the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge,"  and 
be  filled  unto  the  fulness  of  God.  Thus,  "  we  all  with 
open  face  beholding  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed 
into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the 
Spii'it  of  the  Lord."  "  For  their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself, 
that  they  also  may  be  sanctified  through  the  truth." 

We  see  by  these  passages,  which  might  be  multi- 
plied, that  we  are  dependent  on  an  object,  and  that  we 
are  dependent  on  the  strength  of  another.  Love  acts 
in  order  to  work  in  us  according  to  this  need. 

Our  setting  apart  for  God,  which  is  complete  (for  it 
is  by  means  of  a  nature  that  is  purely  of  Himself,  and 
in  absolute  responsibility  to  Him,  for  we  are  no  longer 
our  own,  but  are  bought  with  a  price,  and  sanctified 
by  the  blood  of  Christ  according  to  the  will  of  God, 
who  will  have  us  for  His  own),  places  us  in  a  relation- 
ship, the  development  of  which  (by  an  increasing 
knowledge  of    God,   who    is   the  object  of   our  new 

V. 


108  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

nature)  is  practical  sanctification,  wrought  in  us  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  witness  in  us  of  the 
love  of  God.  He  attaches  the  heart  to  God,  ever 
revealing  Him  more  and  more,  and  at  the  same  time 
unfolding  the  glory  of  Christ  and  all  the  divine 
qualities  that  were  displayed  in  Him  in  human  nature, 
thus  forming  ours  as  born  of  God. 

Therefore  it  is,  as  we  have  seen  in  this  epistle,  that 
love,  working  in  us,  is  the  means  of  sanctification. 
(Chap.  iii.  12,  13.)  It  is  the  activity  of  the  new 
nature,  of  the  divine  nature  in  us ;  and  that  connected 
with  the  presence  of  God  ;  for  he  that  dwelleth  in  love 
dwell eth  in  God.  And  in  this  chapter  v.  the  saints 
are  commended  to  God  Himself,  that  He  may  work  it 
in  them ;  while  we  are  always  set  in  view  of  the 
glorious  objects  of  our  faith  in  order  to  accomplish  it. 

We  may  here  more  particularly  call  the  reader's 
attention  to  these  objects.  They  are,  God  Himself, 
and  the  coming  of  Christ:  on  the  one  hand,  communion 
with  God ;  on  the  other,  waiting  for  Christ.  It  is 
most  evident  that  communion  with  God  is  the  prac- 
tical position  of  the  highest  sanctification.  He  who 
knows  that  we  shall  see  Jesus  as  He  now  is,  and  be 
like  Him,  purifies  himself  even  as  He  is  pure.  By  our 
communion  with  the  God  of  peace  we  are  wholly 
sanctified.  If  God  is  practically  our  all,  we  are  alto- 
gether holy.  (We  are  not  speaking  of  any  change  in 
the  flesh,  which  can  neither  be  subjected  to  God  nor 
please  Him.)  The  thought  of  Christ  and  His  coming 
preserves  us  practically,  and  in  detail,  and  intelligently, 
blameless.  It  is  God  Himself  who  thus  preserves  us, 
and  who  works  in  us  to  occupy  our  hearts  and  cause 
us  continually  to  grow. 

But  this  point  deserves  yet  a  few  more  words. 
The  freshness  of  christian  life  in  the  Thessalonians 
made  it,  as  it  were,  more  objective ;  so  that  these 
objects  are  prominent,  and  very  distinctly  recognised 


I  THESSALONIANS.  109 

by  the  heart.  We  have  already  said  that  they  are 
God  tlie  Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus.  With  reference 
to  the  communion  of  love  with  the  saints  as  his 
crown  and  glory,  he  speaks  only  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  This 
has  a  special  character  of  reward,  although  a  reward 
in  which  love  reigns.  Jesus  Himself  had  the  joy  that 
was  set  before  Him  as  sustainment  in  His  sufferings,  a 
joy  which  thus  was  personal  to  Himself.  The  apostle 
also,  as  regarded  his  work  and  labour,  waited  with 
Christ  for  its  fruit.  Besides  this  case  of  the  apostle 
(chap,  ii.),  we  find  God  Himself  and  Jesus  as  the  object 
before  us,  and  the  joy  of  communion  with  God — and 
this,  in  the  relationship  of  Father — and  with  Christ, 
whose  glory  and  position  we  share  through  grace. 

Thus  it  is  only  in  the  two  epistles  to  the  Thessa- 
lonians  that  we  find  the  expression  "  to  the  church 
which  is  in  God  the  Father,"*  The  sphere  of  their 
communion  is  thus  shewn,  founded  on  the  relationship 
in  which  they  found  themselves  with  God  Himself  in 
the  character  of  Father.  (1  Thess.  i.  3,  9,  10;  iii.  13  ; 
iv.  15,  16  ;  and  here  v.  23.)  It  is  important  to  remark, 
that  the  more  vigorous  and  living  Christianity  is,  the 
more  objective  it  is.  It  is  but  saying  that  God  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  have  a  greater  place  in  our  thoughts ; 
and  that  we  rest  more  really  upon  them.  This  Epistle 
to  the  Thessalonians  is  the  part  of  scripture  which 
instructs  on  this  point;  and  it  is  a  means  of  judging 
many  a  fallacy  in  the  heart,  and  of  giving  a  great 
simplicity  to  our  Christianity. 

The  apostle  closes  his  epistle  by  asking  for  the 
prayers  of  the  brethren,  saluting  them  with  the  confi- 
dence of  affection,  and  conjuring  them  to  have  his 
epistle  read  to  all  the  lioly  brethren.  His  heart  forgot 
none  of  them.     He  would  be  in  relationship  with  all 

*  Perhaps  too  iii  connection  with  their  recent  deliverance 
from  idols  to  the  one  true  God  the  Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
ChriKt.- 

V. 


110  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

according  to  this  spiritual  affection  and  personal  bond. 
Apostle  towards  all  of  them,  he  would  have  them 
recognise  those  who  laboured  among  them,  but  he 
maintained  withal  his  own  relationship.  His  was  a 
heart  which  embraced  all  the  revealed  counsels  of  God 
on  the  one  hand,  and  did  not  lose  sight  of  the  least  of 
His  saints  on  the  other. 

It  remains  to  take  notice  of  one  interesting  circum- 
stance as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  apostle  instructs 
them.  He  takes,  in  the  first  chapter,  the  truths  which 
were  precious  to  their  heart,  but  were  still  somewhat 
vaguely  seized  by  their  intelligence,  and  as  to  which 
they  were  indeed  fallen  into  mistakes,  and  employs 
them  (in  the  clearness  in  which  he  possessed  them 
himself)  in  his  practical  instructions,  and  applies  them 
to  known  and  experienced  relationships,  that  their 
souls  might  be  well  established  on  positive  truth,  and 
clear  as  to  its  use,  before  he  touched  on  their  error  and 
the  mistakes  they  had  made.  They  waited  for  His  Son 
from  heaven.  This  the^^  already  possessed  clearly  in 
their  hearts  ;  but  they  would  be  in  the  presence  of  God 
when  Jesus  comes  with  all  His  saints.  This  was 
clearing  up  a  very  important  point  without  directly 
touching  the  error.  Their  heart  got  straight  as  to  the 
truth  in  its  practical  application  to  what  the  heart 
possessed.  They  understood  what  it  was  to  be  before 
God  the  Father.  It  was  much  more  intimate  and 
real  than  a  manifestation  of  terrestrial  and  hnite 
glory.  Further  they  would  be  before  God  when  Jesus 
came  with  all  His  saints:  a  simple  truth  which 
demonstrated  itself  to  the  heart  by  the  simple  fact 
that  Jesus  could  not  have  some  only  of  His  assembly. 
The  heart  seized  this  truth  without  an  effort ;  yet  in 
doing  so  it  was  established,  as  was  the  understanding 
also,  in  what  made  the  whole  truth  clear,  and  that  in 
view  of  the  relationship  of  the  Thessalonians  to  Christ 
.ind  those  that  were  His.     The  joy  even  of  the  apostlo 


I  THESSALONIANS.  Ill 

in  meeting  them  all  (those  who  had  died  consequently, 
as  well  as  the  living)  at  the  coming  of  Jesus,  placed 
the  soul  on  an  entirely  different  ground  from  that  of 
being  found  here,  and  blessed  by  the  arrival  of  Jesus 
when  they  were  here  below. 

Thus  enlightened,  confirmed,  established,  in  the  real 
bearing  of  the  truth  which  they  possessed  already,  by 
a  development  of  it  which  connected  itself  with  their 
best  affections  and  with  their  most  intimate  spiritual 
knowledge,  founded  on  their  communion  with  God, 
they  were  ready  with  certain  fixed  basis  of  truth  to 
enter  on  and  set  aside  without  difldculty  an  error 
whicli  was  not  in  accord  with  what  they  now  knew 
how  to  appreciate  at  its  just  value,  as  forming  part  of 
their  moral  possessions.  Special  revelation  made  all 
clear  as  to  details.  This  manner  of  proceeding  is  very 
instructive. 


V, 


II  THESSALONIANS. 

In  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  the  apostle 
corrects  some  errors  into  which  these  disciples  had 
fallen  with  regard  to  the  day  of  the  Lord  through 
certain  false  teachers ;  as  in  part  of  the  first  epistle  he 
had  enlightened  the  ignorance  of  the  believers  them- 
selves respecting  the  portion  of  the  saints  at  the 
coming  of  Christ  to  take  them  to  Himself — a  point  on 
which  they  were  evidently  but  little  instructed. 

A  measure  of  Jewish  darkness  was  on  their  minds ; 
and  they  were,  in  some  points,  still  subjected  to  the 
influence  of  that  unhappy  nation,  which  was  ever 
struggling  to  maintain  a  position  lost  through  its 
unbelief. 

This  Jewish  influence  enables  us  to  understand  why 
the  apostle  spoke  as  he  did  in  chapter  ii.  15,  16,  of  the 
First  Epistle.  At  that  time  this  influence  shewed 
itself  in  the  tendency  of  the  Thessalonians  to  lose 
sight  of  the  heavenly  side  of  the  Lord's  coming,  to 
think  that  He  would  return  to  the  earth  and  that  they 
should  then  be  glorified  with  Him — as  a  Jew  might 
have  believed — and  that  the  dead  saints  would  there- 
fore not  be  present  to  share  this  glory.  I  do  not  say 
that  this  thought  had  assumed  a  definite  form  in  the 
minds  of  the  Thessalonians.  To  them  the  principal 
and  living  object  was  the  Lord  Himself,  and  they 
were  awaiting  His  return  with  hearts  full  of  joy  and 
life ;  bat  the  heavenly  side  of  this  expectation  had  not 
its  place  clearly  marked  in  their  minds,  and  they  con- 
nected the  coming  too  much  with  the  manifestation, 
so  that  the  earthly  character  predominated,  and  the 
dead  seemed  to  be  shut  out  from  it. 


II   THESSALO^  [ANS.  113 

When  the  Second  Epistle  was  written,  this  Jewish 
influence  had  another  character ;  and  the  false  teachers 
were  more  directly  concerned  in  it. 

The  faithful  at  Thessalonica  had  learnt  to  contem- 
plate "  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  as  a  day  of  judgment. 
The  Old  Testament  had  spoken  much  of  this  day  of 
the  Lord,  a  day  of  darkness  and  unparalleled  judgment, 
a  day  of  trial  to  men.  (Compare  Isaiah  xiii.,  Joel  ii., 
Amos  V.  18.)  Now  the  Thessalonians  were  undergo- 
ing dreadful  persecution.  Perhaps  their  hope  of  an 
earthly  intervention  of  the  Lord,  during  their  lifetime, 
was  weakened.  The  apostle  at  least  rejoiced  at  the 
increase  of  their  faith,  and  the  abundant  exercise  of 
their  love,  while  he  is  silent  with  regard  to  their 
hope ;  and  the  joy  of  christian  life  is  not  found  here 
as  it  was  manifested  in  the  First  Epistle.  Neverthe- 
less they  were  walking  well,  and  the  apostle  gloried 
in  them*  in  the  churches  of  God.  But  the  false 
teachers  profited  by  their  condition  to  mislead  them 
by  means  of  their  sufferings,  which  weighed  more 
heavily  on  their  hearts  from  the  joy  of  hope  being  a 
little  weakened ;  and  at  the  same  time  the  remains  of 
the  influence  of  Judaising  thoughts,  or  of  habits  of 
mind  formed  through  them,  furnished  occasion  to  the 
assaults  of  the  enemy.  The  instrument  of  the  subtle 
malice  told  them  that  the  day  of  the  Lord,  that  fearful 
time,  was  already  come — the  word  (chap.  ii.  2)  is  not 
"  at  hand,"  but  "  come,"  "  present  "f — and  all  that  the 
Thessalonians  were  .suffering,  and  by  which  their 
hearts    were    shaken,   appeared   like   a   testimony  to 

*  In  the  First  Epistle  lie  says  he  needed  not  to  speak  of 
them,  seeing  that  the  world  itself  recounted  every  where  _  the 
principles  by  which  they  were  governed.  We  shall  see  a  simi- 
lar difference  all  through.  It  is  no  longer  the  same  fresh  energy 
oflife. 

t  See  Eomans  viii.  38  ;  1  Corinthians  iii.  22 ;  where  it  {kvearuiTa) 
is  translated  "present,"  in  contrast  with  "  things  to  come." 
VOL.   V.  I.  I 


Il4  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

prove  it  and  to  confirm  the  words  of  the  false  teachers. 
Was  it  not  written  that  it  should  be  a  day  of  trial 
anjd  anguish  ? 

The  words  of  these  teachers,  moreover,  had  the  pre- 
tension of  being  more  than  human  reasoning  ;  it  was  a 
word  of  the  Lord,  it  was  the  Spirit  who  spoke,  it  was 
a  letter  from  an  inspired  channel :  and  so  bold  and 
wicked  were  they  in  regard  to  this  matter,  that  they 
did  not  fear  to  adduce  the  apostle's  own  name  as  their 
authority  for  declaring  that  the  day  was  come.  Now 
the  dominion  of  fear,  which  Satan  can  exercise  over  the 
mind,  when  it  is  not  kept  of  God  in  peace  and  joy,  is 
astonishing.  "In  nothing  terrified  by  your  adver- 
saries," is  the  apostle's  word  to  the  Philippians,  "  which 
is  to  them  an  evident  token  of  perdition,  but  to  you 
of  salvation,  and  tliat  of  God."  In  such  a  state  of 
mind  as  this  everytliing  is  believed;  or  rather  every- 
thing is  feared,  and  nothing  is  believed.  The  heart 
gives  itself  up  to  this  fear,  and  is  ready  to  believe 
anything  ;  for  it  is  in  darkness  and  knows  not  what 
to  believe.  Thus  the  apostle  exhorts  the  Thessalo- 
nians  (chap,  ii.)  not  to  be  soon  shaken  in  mind  so 
as  to  lose  their  stability  in  the  truth,  and  not  to  be 
troubled. 

The  apostle  deals  with  the  case  in  the  same  manner 
as  in  the  First  Epistle.  Before  entering  on  the  error 
he  treats  the  same  subject  in  its  true  light,  building 
upon  the  knowledge  which  the  Thessalonians  already 
possessed.  Only  he  sets  it  forth  with  clearness  in  its 
application  to  the  circumstances  of  the  moment.  By 
this  means  they  were  delivered  from  the  influence  of 
the  error,  and  from  the  disturbance  of  mind  which  it 
had  caused ;  and  were  rendered  capable  of  looking  at 
the  error,  as  being  themselves  outside  it,  and  of  judg- 
ing it  according  to  the  instruction  that  the  apostle 
gave  them. 

They  were   persecuted   and  were   in   distress   and 


II  THKSSALONIANS.  115 

suffering,  and  the  enemy  took  advantage  of  it.  The 
apostle  puts  that  fact  in  its  right  place.  He  encourages 
them  with  the  thought  that  it  was  a  kind  of  seal  upon 
them  of  their  being  worthy  of  the  kingdom  for  which 
they  were  suffering.  But  more,  the  "  day  of  the 
Lord"  was  the  coming  of  the  Lord  in  judgment;  but 
it  was  not  to  make  His  own  suffer  that  He  was  coming 
— it  was  to  punish  the  wicked.  Persecution  therefore 
could  not  be  the  day  of  the  Lord ;  for  in  persecution 
the  wicked  had  the  upper  hand  and  did  their  own 
will  and  inflicted  suffering  on  those  whom  the  Lord 
loved.  Could  that  be  His  day  !  The  apostle  does  not 
apply  this  argument  to  the  question,  but  he  puts  the 
facts  in  their  place  ;  so  that  all  the  use  which  the 
enemy  made  of  them  fell  of  itself  to  the  ground.  The 
truth  of  the  facts  was  there  in  its  simplicity,  giving 
them  their  evident  and  natural  character.  When  God 
should  take  the  thing  in  hand,  He  would  recompense 
tribulation  to  those  who  troubled  His  children,  and 
these  should  have  rest — should  be  in  peace.  The 
moment  of  their  entering  into  this  rest  is  not  at  all 
the  subject  here,  but  the  contrast  between  their  actual 
condition  and  that  which  it  would  be  if  Jesus  were 
come.  It  was  not  to  persecute  and  harass  His  own 
that  He  was  coming.  In  His  day  they  should  be  at 
rest,  and  the  wicked  in  distress ;  for  He  was  coming  to 
punish  the  latter  by  driving  them  away  for  ever  from 
the  glory  of  His  presence.  When  we  understand  that 
the  Thessalonians  had  been  induced  to  believe  that  the 
day  of  the  Lord  was  already  come,  the  import  of  this 
first  chapter  is  very  plain. 

Two  principles  are  here  established.  First,  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God:  it  is  righteous  in  His  eyes, 
on  the  one  liand,  to  reward  those  who  suffer  for  His 
kingdom's  sake :  and,  on  the  other,  to  requite  those 
who  persecute  His  children.  In  the  second  place,  the 
glorious  manifestation  of  the  Lord  Jesus :  His  own 

I. 


116  THE   BOOKS    OF   THE   BIBLE. 

should  be  in  rest  and  happiness  with  Him,  when  His 
power  should  be  in  exercise. 

We  see  also  here  two  reasons  for  judgment — they 
did  not  know  God,  and  they  did  not  obey  the  gospel 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  All  being  without  excuse 
as  to  the  testimony  that  God  had  ever  given  con- 
cerning Himself,  some  among  them  had  added  the 
rejection  of  the  positive  revelation  of  His  grace  in 
the  gospel  of  Christ  to  their  abuse  of  their  natural 
relationship  with  God  and  their  forgetfulness  of  His 
Majesty. 

Meanwhile  the  apostle  presents  the  positive  result  in 
blessing  of  the  manifestation  of  Jesus  in  glory.  He 
will  come  to  be  glorified  in  His  saints,  and  to  be 
admired  in  all  them  that  have  believed  in  Him,  and 
therefore  in  the  Thessalonians :  a  thorough  proof,  at 
least  that  they  were  not  to  view  their  persecuted 
condition  as  a  demonstration  that  the  day  was  come. 
With  regard  to  themselves,  they  were  thus  entirely 
delivered  from  the  confusion  by  which  the  enemy 
sought  to  disquiet  them  ;  and  the  apostle  could  treat 
the  question  of  this  error  with  hearts  which,  as  to 
their  own  condition,  were  set  free  from  it  and  at  rest. 

These  considerations  characterised  his  prayers  on 
their  behalf.  He  sought  from  God  that  they  might 
always  be  worthy  of  this  vocation,  and  that  the  Lord 
might  be  glorified  in  them  by  the  power  of  faith, 
which  would  shine  the  brighter  through  their  persecu- 
tions ;  and  that  afterwards  they  might  be  glorified  in 
Him  at  the  manifestation  of  His  glory  according  to  the 
grace  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Now  that  the  apostle  has  placed  their  souls  on  the 
ground  of  truth,  he  enters  upon  the  subject  of  tlie 
error,  shewing  that  which  had  occasioned  his  remarks. 
Of  this  we  have  already  spoken. 

In  answeiing  this  error,  and  in  guarding  them  from 
the  wily  efibrts  of  seducers,  he  puts  everything  in  its 


II   THESSALONIANS.  117 

place  here  by  appealing  to  precious  truths  of  which  he 
had  already  spoken.  Their  gathering  together  unto 
Christ  in  the  air  was  a  demonstration  of  the  impossi- 
bility of  the  day  of  the  Lord  being  already  come. 

Moreover  with  regard  to  this  last  he  presents  two 
considerations:  first,  the  day  could  not  be  already  come, 
since  Christians  were  not  yet  gathered  to  the  Lord,  and 
they  were  to  come  with  Him ;  second,  the  wicked  one 
who  has  then  to  be  judged  had  not  yet  appeared,  so 
that  the  judgment  could  not  be  executed. 

The  apostle  had  already  instructed  the  Thessalonians 
with  regard  to  this  wicked  one,  when  at  Thessalonica; 
and  in  the  former  epistle  he  had  taught  them  concern- 
ing the  rapture  of  the  church.  In  order  that  the 
Lord  should  come  in  judgment,  iniquity  must  have 
reached  its  height,  and  open  opposition  to  God  have 
been  manifested.  But  the  truth  had  another  and 
more  precious  side :  the  saints  were  to  be  in  the  same 
position  as  Christ,  to  be  gathered  together  unto  Him, 
before  He  could  manifest  Himself  in  glory  to  those 
outside.  But  these  truths  require  a  more  connected 
examination. 

Their  gathering  together  unto  Christ  before  the 
manifestation  was  a  truth  known  to  the  Thessalonians ; 
it  is  not  revealed  here,  it  is  used  as  an  argument. 
The  Lord  Jesus  was  coming,  but  it  was  impossible 
that  He  should  be  without  His  church  in  the  glory. 
The  King  would  indeed  punish  His  rebellious  sub- 
jects; but,  before  doing  so,  He  would  bring  to  Him- 
self those  who  had  been  faithful  to  Him  amid  the 
unfaithful,  in  order  to  bring  them  back  with  Him  and 
publicly  to  honour  them  in  the  midst  of  the  rebels. 
But  the  apostle  here  speaks  only  of  the  rapture  itself, 
and  he  adjures  them  only  by  that  truth  not  to  allow 
themselves  to  be  shaken  in  mind  as  though  the  day 
were  come.  What  an  assured  truth  must  this  have 
been  to   Christians,  since   the   apostle   could   appeal 

IT. 


118  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

to  it  as  to  a  known  point,  on  which  the  heart 
could  rest!  The  relationship  of  the  church  to  Christ, 
its  being  necessarily  in  the  same  position  with  Him, 
rendered  the  idea  that  the  day  was  already  come  a 
mere  folly. 

In  the  second  place,  the  already  known  fact  is 
asserted,  that  the  apostasy  must  previously  take  place, 
and  then  the  man  of  sin  be  revealed.  Solemn  truth ! 
Everything  takes  its  place.  The  forms  and  the  name 
of  Christianity  have  long  been  maintained;  true 
Christians  have  been  disowned ;  but  now  there  should 
be  a  public  renunciation  of  the  faith — an  apostas}^ 
True  Christians  should  have  their  true  place  in 
heaven.  But,  besides  this,  there  should  be  a  person 
who  would  fully  realise  in  sin  the  character  of  man 
without  God.  He  is  the  man  of  sin.  He  does  his 
own  will — it  is  but  Adam  fully  developed ;  and, 
incited  by  the  enemy,  he  opposes  himself  to  God  (it  is 
open  enmity  against  God),  and  he  exalts  himself 
above  all  that  bears  the  name  of  God ;  he  assumes  the 
place  of  God  in  His  temple.  So  that  there  is  apostasy, 
that  is,  the  open  renunciation  of  Christianity  in  general, 
and  an  individual  who  concentrates  in  his  own  person 
(as  to  the  principles  of  iniquity)  the  opposition  that  is 
made  against  God. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  character  of  the  wicked 
one  is  religious  here,  or  rather  anti-religious.  The 
apostle  does  not  speak  of  a  secular  power  of  the 
world,  whatever  its  inicjuity  may  be.  The  man  of  sin 
assumes  a  religious  character.  He  exalts  himself 
against  the  true  God,  but  he  shews  himself  as  God*  in 
the  temple  of  God.  Observe  here  that  the  sphere  is 
on  earth.  It  is  not  a  god  for  faith.  He  shews  him- 
self as  a  god  for  the  earth.  The  profession  of  Chris- 
tianity has  been  abandoned.     Sin  then  characterises 

^'^  "As  God"  is  to  be  left  out  before  "  sitteth,"  in  chapter  ii.  4. 


II    TH!:.SSALONIANS.  119 

an  individual,  a  man,  who  fills  up  the  measure  of  the 
apostasy  of  human  nature,  and,  as  a  man,  proclaims 
his  independence  of  God.  The  principle  of  sin  in 
man  is  his  own  will.  He  arises,  as  we  have  already 
seen,  out  of  the  rejection  of  Christianity.  In  this 
respect  also  evil  is  at  its  height. 

This  man  of  sin  exalts  himself  above  God,  and, 
sitting  as  God  in  the  temple  of  God,  he  defies  the  God 
of  Israel.  This  last  feature  gives  his  formal  character. 
He  is  in  conflict  with  God,  as  placing  himself  publicly 
in  this  position — shewing  himself  as  God  in  the 
temple  of  God.  It  is  the  God  of  Israel  who  will  take 
vengeance  on  him. 

Christianity,  Judaism,  natural  religion,  all  are  re- 
jected. Man  takes  a  place  there  on  earth,  exalting 
himself  above  it  all,  in  opposition  to  God ;  and,  in  par- 
ticular, arrogating  to  himself  (for  man  needs  a  God, 
needs  something  to  worship)  the  place  and  the  honours 
of  God,  and  of  the  God  of  Israel.* 

These  verses  present  the  wicked  one  in  connection 
with  the  state  of  man,  and  with  the  different  relation- 
ships in  which  man  has  stood  towards  God.  In  them 
all  he  shews  himself  as  apostate,  and  then  he  assumes 
the  place  of  God  Hi'uself — the  first  object  of  human 
ambition,  as  its  attainment  was  the  first  suggestion  of 
Satan. 

In  that  which  follows,  we  see  not  the  condition  itself 
of  apostasy  with  i-egard  to  the  different  positions  in 
which  God  had  placed   man,  but  simply  man  unre- 


*  In  1  John  ii.  we  find  the  double  character  of  the  Antichrist 
as  regards  Christianity  and  Judaism.  He  denies  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  rejects  Christianity ;  he  denies  iliat  Jesus  is  the  Clnist, 
which  is  Jewish  unbelief.  His  power  is  the  working  of  Satan, 
as  we  find  here.  As  man  he  sets  up  to  be  God.  So  that  his 
impiousness  is  manifested  in  eveiy  wa}'.  As  the  question  is 
more  upon  the  earth,  it  is  the  God  of  the  earth,  the  Man  withal 
from  heaven,  who  judges  him. 

II. 


120  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

strained,  and  i\e  work  of  Satan.  The  man  is  but  the 
vessel  of  the  enemy's  power. 

Man  in  whom  is  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  man  filled  with  the  energy  of  Satan, 
are  opposed  to  each  other.  Before,  it  was  man  for- 
saking God,  wicked,  and  exalting  himself.  Here, 
it  is  opposition  against  God  on  the  part  of  man, 
unrestrained,  and  inspired  by  Satan  himself.  Conse- 
quently we  have  (not  the  wicked  one,  but)  the  lawless 
— the  unbridled — one.  The  principle  is  the  same,  for 
sin  is  lawlessness.  (See  1  John  iii.  4 — Greek.)  But  in 
this  first  case  man  is  viewed  in  his  departure  from  God, 
and  in  his  guiltiness  ;  in  the  second,  as  acknowledging 
none  but  himself. 

To  this  condition  in  which  all  restraint  will  be 
removed,  a  barrier  has  yet  existed. 

The  apostle  had  already  told  them  of  the  apostasy, 
and  of  the  manifestation  of  the  man  of  sin.  He  now 
says  that  the  Thessalonians  ought  to  know  the  hin- 
drance that  existed  to  his  progress  and  his  manifesta- 
tion before  the  appointed  time.  He  does  not  say  that 
he  had  told  them,  but  they  ought  to  know  it.  Knowing 
the  character  of  the  wicked  one,  the  barrier  revealed 
itself.  The  main  point  here  is  that  it  was  a  barrier. 
The  principle  of  the  evil  was  already  at  work :  a 
barrier  alone  prevented  its  development.  Its  character, 
when  developed,  would  be  unbridled  will  which  exalts 
and  opposes  itself.* 

Unbridled  self-will  being  the  principle  of  the  evil, 
that  which  bridles  this  will  is  the  barrier.  Now  it 
exalts  itself  above  all  that  bears  the  name  of  God,  or 
to  which  homage  is  paid :  that  which  hinders  it  there- 
fore is  the  power  of  God  acting  in  government  here 
below  as  authorised  b}^  Him.     The  grossest  abuse  of 

*  Note  this  point.  All  was  ready  and  complete  in  the  apos- 
tle's time,  only  restrained.  So  Christ  was  ready  to  judge.  Only 
the  patience  of  God  waits,  in  the  accepted  time 


II  THESSALONIANS.  121 

power  still  bears  this  last  character.  Christ  could  say 
to  Pilate,  *'  Thou  couldest  have  no  power  against  me, 
except  it  were  given  thee  from  above."  Wicked  as  he 
might  be,  his  power  is  owned  as  coming  from  God. 
Thus,  although  men  had  rejected  and  crucified  the 
Son  of  God,  so  that  their  iniquity  appeared  to  be  at 
its  height,  the  hindrance  still  existed  in  full.  After- 
wards God,  having  sent  His  Spirit,  gathers  out  the 
church,  and,  although  the  mystery  of  iniquity  began 
immediately  to  work  mingling  the  will  of  men  with 
the  worship  of  God  in  Spirit,  God  had  always  (He 
still  has)  the  object  of  His  loving  care  upon  the  earth. 
The  Holy  Ghost  was  here  below ;  the  assembly,  be  its 
condition  what  it  might,  was  still  on  earth,  and  God 
maintained  the  barrier.  And  as  the  porter  had  opened 
the  door  to  Jesus  in  spite  of  all  obstacles,  so  He  sus- 
tains everything,  however  great  the  energy  and  pro- 
gress of  evil.  The  evil  is  bridled :  God  is  the  source 
of  authority  on  earth.  There  is  one  who  hinders 
until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  Now^  when  the 
assembly  (the  assembly,  that  is,  as  composed  of  the 
true  members  of  Christ)  is  gone,  and  consequently  the 
Holy  Ghost  as  the  Comforter  is  no  longer  dwelling 
bere  below,  then  the  apostasy  takes  place,*  the  time 
to  remove  the  hindrance  is  come,  the  evil  is  unbridled, 
and  at  length  (without  saying  how  much  time  it  will 
take)  the  evil  assumes  a  definite  shape  in  him  who  is 
its  head.  The  beast  comes  up  from  the  abyss.  Satan 
— not  God — gives  him  his  authority ;  and  in  the  second 
beast  all  the  energy  of  Satan  is  present.  The  man  of 
sin  is  there. 

Here  it  is  an  outward  and  secular  power  that  is 
spoken  of,  but  the  religious  side  of  Satan's  energy. 

*  The  principle  of  this  may  be  widely  at  work  individually, 
as  in  1  John  ii.  it  had  begun,  but  the  open  public  manifestation 
was  to  come.     Jude  gives  the  creeping  in  to  produce  corruption 
John,  the  going  out  which  characterises  the  Antichrist. 

II. 


122  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIJ8LE. 

With  regard  to  the  individual  instruments  whc 
compose  the  barrier,  they  may  change  every  moment, 
and  it  was  not  the  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  name 
them.  He  who  was  the  one  of  them  that  existed 
when  this  epistle  was  written  would  not  be  so  at  the 
present  time  ;  to  have  named  him  then  would  have 
been  of  no  use  to  us  in  the  present  day.  The  object 
was  to  declare  that  the  evil  which  should  be  judged 
was  already  working,  that  there  was  no  remedy  for 
it,  that  it  was  only  a  hindrance  on  God's  part  which 
prevented  its  full  development :  a  principle  of  the 
highest  importance  with  regard  to  the  history  of 
Christianity. 

Whatever  form  it  might  take,  the  apostasy  of  the 
men  who  would  renounce  grace  would  necessarily  be 
more  absolute  than  any  other.  It  is  opposition  to  the 
Lord.  It  has  the  character  of  an  adversary.  The 
other  principle  of  human  iniquity  enters  into  it,  but 
this  is  the  source  of  the  "  perdition."  It  is  the  rejection 
of  goodness;  it  is  direct  enmity. 

"  That  which  hinders  "  is  in  general  only  an  instru- 
ment, a  means,  which  prevents  the  manifestation  of 
the  man  of  sin — the  wicked  one.  So  long  as  the 
assembly  is  on  earth,  the  pretension  to  be  God  in  His 
temple  cannot  take  place  or  at  least  would  have  no 
intluence.  Satan  has  his  sphere,  and  must  needs  have 
it,  in  the  mystery  of  iniquity ;  but  there  is  no  longer 
a  mystery  when  the  place  of  God  in  His  temple  is 
openly  taken.  That  which  hinders  is  therefore  still 
present.  But  there  is  a  person  active  in  maintaining 
this  hindrance.  Here  I  think  indeed  that  it  is  God  in 
the  Person  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who,  during  the  time 
called  "the  things  that  are,"  restrains  the  evil  and  guards 
divine  authority  in  the  world.  As  long  as  that  sub- 
sists, the  unrestrained  exaltation  of  wickedness  cannot 
take  place.  Consequently  I  do  not  doubt  but  that  the 
rapture  of  the  saints  is  the  occasion  of  the  hindrance 


n   THESSALONIANS.  128 

being  removed  and  all  restraint  loosed,  although  some 
of  the  ways  of  God  are  developed  before  the  full 
manifestation  of  the  evil. 

This  thought  does  not  rest  upon  great  principles 
only :  the  passage  itself  supplies  elements  which  shew 
the  state  of  things  when  the  power  of  evil  develops 
itself.  1st,  The  apostasy  has  already  taken  place. 
This  could  hardly  be  said  if  the  testimony  of  the 
assembly  still  subsisted,  as  it  had  in  time  past,  or  even 
yet  more  distinctly  as  being  freed  from  all  false  and 
corrupting  elements.  2nd,  Authority — as  established 
of  God,  so  far  as  exercising  a  restraint  on  man's  will 
in  God's  name — has  disappeared  from  the  scene,  for 
the  wicked  one  exalts  himself  against  all  that  is 
called  God  and  to  which  homage  is  paid,  and  presents 
himself  as  God  in  the  -temple  of  God.  Compare 
Psalm  Ixxxii.,  where  God  stands  among  the  gods  (the 
judges)  to  judge  them  before  He  inherits  the  nations. 
Before  that  solemn  hour  when  God  will  judge  the 
judges  of  the  earth,  this  wicked  one,  despising  all 
authority  that  comes  from  Him,  sets  himself  up  as 
God  :  and  that  on  the  earth,  where  the  judgment  will 
be  manifested.  And  then,  Srdly,  in  place  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  His  power  manifested  on  the  earth,  we  find 
the  power  of  Satan,  and  with  precisely  the  same  tokens 
that  bore  witness  to  the  Person  of  Christ.  So  that  the 
passage  itself,  whether  as  to  man  or  as  to  the  enemy, 
gives  us  (in  the  three  points  of  which  we  have  spoken) 
the  full  confirmation  of  that  which  we  have  ventured 
to  set  forth. 

The  assembly,  the  powers  ordained  by  God  upon  the 
earth,  the  Holy  Ghost  present  here  as  the  Comforter 
in  lieu  of  Christ,  have  all  (as  regards  the  manifestation 
of  the  government  and  the  work  of  God)  given  place 
to  the  self-willed  unbridled  man,  and  to  the  power  of 
the  enemy. 

In  saying  this  we  speak  of  the  sphere  of  this  pro- 
II. 


124  THE   BOOKS    OF    THE    BIBLE. 

phecy,  which   moreover  embraces  that  of  the  public 
testimony  of  God  on  earth. 

Definitively  then  we  have  man  here  in  his  own 
nature — as  it  has  displayed  itself  by  forsaking  God — 
in  the  full  pursuit  of  his  own  will  in  rebellion  against 
God";  the  wilful  man,  developed  as  the  result  of 
apostasy  from  the  position  of  grace  in  which  the 
assembly  stood,  and  in  contempt  of  all  the  govern- 
mental authority  of  God  on  the  earth.  And  since 
that  authority  had  shewn  itself  directly  and  properly 
in  Judea,  this  contempt  and  the  spirit  of  rebellion  in 
man,  who  exalts  himself  above  everything,  but  who 
cannot  be  heavenly  (heaven,  and  all  pretension  to 
heaven,  is  given  up  by  man,  and  lost  by  Satan), 
display  themselves  by  man  taking  the  place  of  God  in 
His  temple  under  the  most  advanced  form  of  Jewish 
apostasy  and  blasphemy.  At  the  same  time  Satan 
acts — God  having  loosed  his  bridle — with  a  power  (a 
lying  power  indeed,  but)  which  gives  the  same  testi- 
mony before  men  as  that  which  the  works  of  Christ 
did  to  the  Saviour;  and  also  with  all  the  skill  that 
iniquity  possesses  to  deceive.  It  is  in  the  wicked,  the 
lawless  one,  that  Satan  works  these  things.  Our  con- 
sideration of  the  development  of  the  latter  part  of  this 
solemn  scene  will  come  (God  willing)  in  the  Book  of 
Revelation.  We  may  add,  that  there  we  have  this 
wicked  one  as  the  false  Messiah,  and  as  prophet,  in 
the  form  of  his  kingdom — two  horns  like  a  lamb. 
He  had  been  cast  down  from  heaven  where  he  had 
been  anti-priest,  and  now  takes  up  Christ's  titles  on 
earth  of  king  and  prophet.  In  Daniel  xi.  he  is  seen  as 
king ;  here,  as  the  unbridled  man,  and  in  particular  as 
the  result  of  the  apostasy,*  and  the  manifestation  of 
Satan's  power.     In  a  word,  instead  of  the  assembly, 

•  "We  may  remark  that  the  apostasy  develops  itself  under 
the  three  forms  in  which  man  has  been  in  relationship  with 
God;  Nature — it  is  the  man  of  sin  unrestrained,  who  exalts 


II   ThESSALONIANS.  125 

the  apostasy ;  instead  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Satan  ;  and, 
instead  of  the  authority  of  God  as  a  restraint  upon 
evil,  the  unbridled  man  setting  himself  up  as  God  on 
the  earth. 

Another  circumstance,  already  mentioned,  demands 
particular  attention.  I  have  said  that  he  presents 
himself  as  the  Messiah  (that  is  to  say,  in  His  two 
characters  as  king  and  prophet,  which  are  His  earthly 
characters).  In  heaven  Satan  has  then  nothing  more 
to  do ;  he  has  been  cast  out  from  thence,  so  that  there 
is  no  imitation  of  the  Lord's  high-priesthood.  In  that 
respect  Satan  had,  in  his  own  person,  acted  another 
part.  He  was  previously  in  heaven  the  accuser  of  the 
brethren.  But,  at  the  time  of  which  we  are  speaking, 
the  assembly  is  on  high,  and  the  accuser  of  the 
brethren  is  Ccist  out  never  to  return  there.  In  a  man 
inspired  by  him  he  makes  himself  prophet  and  king. 
And  in  this  character  he  does  the  same  things  (in 
falsehood)  as  those  by  which  God  had  sanctioned  the 
mission  of  Christ  before  men.  (Compare  Acts  ii.  22.) 
In  Greek  the  words  are  identical*  I  would  alsc 
recall  here  another  solemn  fact  in  order  to  complete 
this  picture.  In  the  history  of  Elijah  we  find  that 
the  proof  of  the  divinity  of  Baal,  or  that  of  Jehovah, 
is  made  to  rest  upon  the  fact  of  their  respective 
servants  bringing  down  fire  from  heaven.  Now  in 
Revelation  xiii.  we  learn  that  the  second  beast  brings 
down  fire  from  heaven  in  the  sight  of  men.  So  that 
we  find  here  the  marvellous  works  that  sanctioned  the 
Lord's  mission,  and  there  that  which  proved  Jehovah 
to  be  the  true  and  only  God.  And  Satan  performs 
both  in  order  to  deceive  men. 

liimself ;  Judaism — he  sits  as  God  in  the  temple  of  God;  Chris- 
tianity— it  is  to  this  that  the  term  apostasy  is  directly  applied 
in  the  passage  before  ns. 

*  Only  the  word  for  "miracle"  or  "power"  is  plural  ir? 
A.ns  li. 

XL 


126  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

This  may  give  us  an  idea  o£  the  state  in  which  they 
will  be;  and  it  indicates  also  that  these  things  will 
take  place  in  relation  with  the  Jews,  under  the  double 
aspect  of  their  connection  with  Jehovah  and  their 
rejection  of  Christ  and  reception  of  Antichrist. 

Thus,  thank  God,  the  truth  is  abundantly  confirmed, 
that  these  things  do  not  relate  to  the  assembly,  but  to 
those  who,  having  had  opportunity  to  profit  by  the 
truth,  have  rejected  it,  and  loved  iniquity.  Neither 
does  it  relate  to  the  heathen,  but  only  to  those  among 
whom  the  truth  has  been  set  forth.*  They  refused  it, 
and  God  sends  a  lie,  and  an  efficacious  lie,  that  they 
may  believe  it.  He  does  this  in  judgment :  He  did  the 
same  thing  with  the  nations  (Rom.  i.  24,  26,  28) ;  He 
did  it  also  with  the  Jews  (Is.  vi.  9,  10) ;  He  does  it 
here  with  nominal  Christians.  But  it  does  relate  to 
the  Jews  as  a  nation  that  rejected  the  truth — the 
testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Acts  vii.) — but  still 
more  to  Christians  (in  name);  in  short  to  all  those 
who  will  have  had  the  truth  presented  to  them. 

With  nominal  Christians  this  has  necessarily  the 
character  of  apostasy,  or  at  least  it  is  connected  with 
this  apostasy,  and  is  consequent  upon  it ;  as  verse  3 
teaches  us,  the  apostasy  takes  place,  and  then  the  man 
of  sin  is  revealed. 

-■'■  J  only  allude  here  to  the  connection  between  the  renuncia- 
tion of  Christianity  and  the  development  of  apostate  Judaism, 
which  are  linked  together  in  the  rejection  of  the  true  Christ, 
and  the  denial  of  the  Father  and  the  Son — features  given  in 
1  John  as  characteristic  of  the  Antichrist.  But  I  am  persuaded 
that  the  more  we  examine  the  word,  the  more  we  shall  see 
(perhaps  with  surprise)  that  this  fact  is  confirmed.  Moreover 
the  turning  back  to  Judaism,  and  the  tendency  to  idolatry  by 
the  introduction  of  other  mediators  and  patrons,  and  the  losing 
sight  of  our  union  with  the  Head,  and  thus  of  the  perfection  and 
deliverance  from  the  law  which  are  ours  in  Christ,  have,  at  all 
times,  characterised  the  mystery  of  iniquity  and  the  principle  of 
apostasy.  The  apostle  had  incessantly  to  combat  this.  That  of 
which  we  spoke  above  is  but  its  full  manifestation. 


II  THESSALONIANS.  127 

In  connection  with  his  character  of  the  man  of  sin 
he  presents  himself  without  restraint  in  the  temple  of 
God,  shewing  himself  that  he  is  God.*  In  relation  to 
the  lying  power  of  Satan  and  his  efficient  work,  he 
presents  himself  in  the  character  of  Chris  ^. — he  is  the 
Antichrist,  assuming  consequently  a  Jewish  character. 
It  is  not  only  the  pride  of  man  exalting  itself  against 
God,  but  the  power  of  Satan  in  man  deceiving  men, 
and  the  Jews  in  particular,  by  a  false  Christ ;  so  that, 
if  it  were  possible,  the  very  elect  would  be  deceived. 
We  may  remark  that  all  these  characters  are  precisely 
the  opposite  of  Christ — falsehood  instead  of  truth, 
iniquity  instead  of  righteousness,  perdition  instead  of 
sal  vation. 

It  is  to  a  power  like  this,  of  lies  and  destruction 
that  man — having  forsaken  Christianity  and  exalted 
himself  in  pride  against  God — will  be  given  up.  The 
apostasy  (that  is  to  say,  the  renunciation  of  Chris- 
tianity) will  be  the  occasion  of  this  evil ;  Judea  and 
the  Jews,  the  scene  in  which  it  ripens  and  develops 
itself  in  a  positive  way. 

The  Antichrist  will  deny  the  Father  and  the  Son 
(that  is,  Christianity)  ;  he  will  deny  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  (this  is,  Jewish  unbelief).  With  the  burden 
upon  him  of  sin  against  Christianity,  grace,  and  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  will  ally  himself  with 
Jewish  unbelief,  in  order  that  there  may  be  not  only 
the  full  expression  of  human  pride,  but  also  for  a  time 
the  Satanic  influence  of  a  false  Christ,  who  will 
strengthen  the  throne  of  Satan  among  the  Gentiles 
occupied  by  the  first  beast  to  whom  the  authority  of 
the  dragon  has  been  given.     He  will  also  set  up  his 

*  This  is  the  culminating  point  in  his  character  as  an  apostate 
who  has  renounced  grace.  The  ninth  and  following  verses  de- 
velop his  positive  and  deceitful  activity  by  which  he  seeks  to 
win  men.  This  explains  the  mixture  (which,  moreover,  generally 
exists)  of  atheism  in  will,  and  superstition. 

U. 


128  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

own  subordinate  throne  over  the  Jews,  as  being  the 
Messiah,  whom  their  unbelief  is  expecting ;  while  at 
the  same  time  he  will  bring  in  idolatry,  the  unclean 
spirit  long  gone  out  who  then  returns  to  his  house 
which  is 'devoid  of  God. 

And  now,  with  regard  to  his  destruction  (whom  the 
Lord  Jesus  will  consume  with  the  spirit  of  His  mouth 
and  destroy  with  the  manifestation  of  His  presence,  or 
of  His  coming),  the  first  of  these  means  characterises 
the  judgment ;  it  is  the  word  of  truth  applied  in  judg- 
ment according  to  the  power  of  God.  In  the  Revela- 
tion, it  says  that  the  sword  proceeds  out  of  His 
mouth.  Here  He  is  not  spoken  of  in  the  character  of 
a  man  of  war,  as  in  Revelation  xix.  The  spirit  of 
His  mouth  is  that  inward  and  divine  power  which 
kindles  and  executes  the  judgment.  It  is  not  an 
instrument,  it  is  the  divine  source  of  power  which 
executes  its  purpose  by  a  word.  (Compare  Is.xxx.  33.) 
But  there  is  another  aspect  of  this  judgment.  The 
Lord,  the  man  Jesus,  will  return.  His  return  has  two 
parts — the  return  into  the  air  to  take  His  assembly 
to  Himself,  and  the  public  manifestation  in  glory  of 
His  return. 

In  the  first  verse  of  our  chapter  we  have  read  of 
His  return  and  our  gathering  together  unto  Him. 
Here,  verse  8,  is  the  manifestation  of  His  presence 
publicly  in  creation.  At  the  time  of  this  public 
manifestation  of  His  coming  He  destroys  the  whole 
work  and  power  of  the  wicked  one.  It  is  the  Man 
formerly  obedient  and  humbling  Himself  on  the  earth, 
exalted  of  God,  and  become  Lord  of  all,  who  destroys 
the  lawless  man  that  has  exalted  himself  above  every- 
thing and  made  himself  as  God,  instead  of  being 
obedient  to  God. 

Tliis  evil — on  the  side  of  Satan's  influence — was 
already  working  in  the  apostle's  time ;  only  it  was 
bridled  and  kept  back,  until  that  which  restrained  it 


II  THESSALONIANS. 

should  no  longer  be  on  the  scene.  Then  should  the 
wicked  one  be  revealed.  To  sum  up,  the  taking  away 
of  the  assembly,  and  the  apostasy,  were  first  neces- 
sary ;  and  then  this  man  should  present  himself  as  an 
unbelieving  Jew,*  and  the  power  of  Satan  would  be 
displayed  in  him. 

Now  this  Satanic  influence  was  for  those  who  had 
rejected  the  truth.     Of  the  Thessalonians — to  whom 

*  I  do  not  say  that  his  first  appearance  will  be  the  apostasy 
of  Judaism ;  I  do  not  think  it  will  be.  He  will  present  himself 
to  them  as  being  the  Christ,  but  according  to  the  hopes  and 
passions  of  the  Jews.  But  afterwards  it  will  be  an  apostasy 
even  fi'om  Judaism,  as  had  partially  been  the  case  in  the  days 
of  the  Maccabees — a  fact  which  the  Spirit  uses  in  Daniel  xi.,  as 
a  figure  precursive  of  the  time  of  Antichrist.  He  is  from  his 
first  appearance  an  unbeliever  and  the  enemy  of  God,  an 
apostate  as  to  the  assembly,  and  denying  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ. 

We  are  taught  positively  by  John,  that  the  rejection  of  Chris- 
tianity and  Jewish  unbelief  are  united  in  the  Antichrist. 

It  appears  that  apostasy  with  regard  to  Christianity  and 
Jewish  unbelief  are  connected  and  go  together ;  and  afterwards 
Jewish  apostasy  and  open  rebellion  against  God,  which,  caus- 
ing the  cry  of  the  remnant,  brings  in  the  Lord,  and  all  is  ended. 
Now  the  apostle  (chap.  ii.  3,  4)  presents  the  complete  picture  of 
man's  iniquity,  developed  when  apostasy  from  the  grace  of  the 
gospel  had  taken  place  (he  exalts  himself  even  to  the  making 
himself  God),  without  touching  the  Jewish  side  or  the  mani- 
fested power  of  Satan.  These  verses  shew  us  the  man  of  sin  is 
the  result  of  the  apostasy  which  will  break  out  in  the  midst  of 
Christendom.  Verse  9  begins  to  teach  us  in  addition,  that  the 
coming  of  this  wicked  one  is  also  in  immediate  connection  with 
a  mighty  display  of  the  energy  of  Satan,  who  deceives  by  means 
of  marvellous  works  and  a  strong  delusion  to  which  God  gives 
men  up,  and  of  which  we  have  spoken  in  the  text.  It  is  man 
and  Satan  here,  with  enough  to  shew  its  connection  with 
Judaism  in  the  last  days  (even  as  the  mystery  of  iniquity  was 
linked  with  Judaism  in  the  days  of  the  apostle),  although  it  is 
not  the  occasion  of  giving  the  details  of  the  Jewish  development 
of  the  evil.  We  must  look  for  these  details  elsewhere,  where 
they  are  in  their  place,  as  in  Daniel.  The  Apocalypse  and 
1  John  furnish  us  with  the  means  of  connecting  them  :*we  do  but 
allude  here  to  this  connection. 

VOL.  V.  II.  K 


130  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

he  had  given  these  explanations  respecting  the  day 
which  they  fancied  was  come — the  apostle  thought 
very  differently.  God  had  chosen  these  "brethren 
beloved  of  the  Lord  "  from  the  beginning  for  salvation, 
through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  and  belief  of  the 
truth,  to  which  He  had  called  them  by  Paul's  gospel 
(and  that  of  His  companions),  and  to  the  obtaining  of 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  How  different  was 
this  from  the  visitations  of  the  day  of  the  Lord, 
and  the  circumstances  of  which  the  apostle  had 
spoken !  They  were  numbered  among  those  who 
should  be  the  companions  in  that  day  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Himself. 

There  is  nothing  very  particular  in  the  apostle's 
exhortations.  His  great  concern  was  the  explanation 
which  we  have  been  considering.  He  prays  that  God 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself,  who  had  given  them  the 
sure  and  everlasting  consolations  of  the  gospel,  would 
comfort  their  hearts  and  establish  them  in  every  good 
word  and  work.  He  asks  for  their  prayers  that  he 
may  be  preserved  in  his  labours.  He  could  not  but 
expect  to  find  men  unreasonable  and  animated  with 
enmity,  for  faith  was  not  the  portion  of  all.  It  was 
only  a  case  for  the  protecting  hand  of  God.  With 
regard  to  them  he  counted  for  this  end  on  the  faith- 
fulness of  the  Lord.  He  reckoned  also  on  their 
obedience,  and  prays  God  to  direct  their  hearts  to- 
wards these  two  points,  of  which  we  have  spoken 
when  studying  the  First  Epistle,  the  love  of  God  and 
the  patient  waiting  with  which  the  Christ  waited — 
the  two  points  in  which  the  whole  of  christian  life  is 
summed  up  with  regard  to  its  objects,  its  moral 
springs.  Christ  Himself  was  waiting — sweet  thought! 
They  were  to  wait  with  Him,  until  the  moment  when 
His  heart  and  the  hearts  of  His  own  should  rejoice 
together  in  their  meeting. 

It  was  this  which  they  needed.     On  the  one  hand, 


II  THESSALONIANS.  131 

they  had  believed  that  the  dead  saints  would  not  be 
re^dy  to  go  and  meet  the  Lord ;  on  the  other,  they  had 
thought  the  day  of  the  Lord  already  come.  The  enjoy- 
ment of  the  love  of  God,  and  peace  of  heart  in  waiting 
for  Christ,  was  necessary  for  them. 

This  excitement  into  which  they  had  been  led  had 
also  betrayed  itself  in  some  among  them  by  their 
neglect  of  their  ordinary  labours,  "  working  not  at  all, 
but  being  busybodies,"  intermeddling  in  the  affairs  of 
others.  The  apostle  had  set  them  a  very  different 
example.  He  exhorts  them  to  be  firm,  and  to  with- 
draw from  those  who  would  not  hearken  to  his 
admonitions,  but  continued  to  walk  disorderly  and  in 
idleness ;  not  however  in  such  a  manner  as  to  treat 
them  as  enemies,  but  to  admonish  them  as  brethren. 

It  will  be  observed  here,  that  there  is  no  longer  the 
same  expression  of  the  energy  of  communion  and  of 
life  as  previously.  (Compare  iii.  16  with  1  Thess.  v. 
23.)  Nevertheless  the  Lord  was  still  the  Lord  of 
peace;  but  the  beauty  of  that  entire  consecration  to 
God,  which  would  shine  forth  in  the  day  of  Christ, 
does  not  present  itself  to  the  apostle's  mind  and  heart 
as  in  the  First  Epistle.  He  prays  for  them,  however, 
that  they  may  have  peace  always  and  by  all  means. 

The  apostle  points  out  the  method  by  which  he 
assured  the  faithful  of  the  authenticity  of  his  letters. 
With  the  exception  of  that  to  the  Galatians  he  em- 
ployed other  persons  to  write  them,  but  he  attached 
his  own  signature  in  order  to  verify  their  contents  to 
the  church,  adding  the  prayer  or  blessing. 


I  TIMOTHY. 

The  Epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus  have  naturally  a 
peculiar  bearing  and  character,  being  addressed  to 
persons  deputed  by  the  apostle  to  act  in  his  name,  or 
to  care  for  the  churches  during  his  absence.  Their 
application  to  us  is  none  the  less  direct  on  this  account, 
because  they  not  only  instruct  us  with  regard  to  the 
state  of  the  church,  and  the  pastoral  care  which  the 
apostle  bestowed  on  it,  but  the  line  of  conduct  in 
which  Timothy  is  charged  to  lead  the  faithful  is  that 
which  the  faithful  ought  always  themselves  to  follow. 
Nevertheless  to  confound  the  directions  given  to 
Timothy  and  Titus  with  the  words  addressed  immedi- 
ately to  the  faithful,  would  be  to  cast  confusion  upon 
ministry  in  its  best  sense. 

A  great  part  of  this  First  Epistle  to  Timothy  re- 
quires but  little  development ;  not  because  it  is  without 
importance,  but  because  it  contains  directions — so 
plain  and  simple  that  explanation  would  be  superfluous 
— atid  practical  exhortations  which  would  only  be 
obscured  and  their  force  and  point  taken  away  by 
attempting  to  enlarge  upon  them. 

On  the  other  hand,  some  general  principles  of  great 
importance  for  the  position  of  the  assembly  in  general 
are  contained  in  this  epistle. 

God  assumes  here,  in  a  peculiar  way,  the  character 
of  a  Saviour-God  with  regard  to  the  world  :  a  principle 
of  great  importance  in  all  that  concerns  our  conversa- 
tion in  the  world  and  our  intercourse  with  men.  We 
represent  in  our  religious  character  a  God  of  love. 
This  was  not  the  case  in  Judaism.     He  was  indeed 


I  TIMOTHY.  133 

the  same  God ;  but  there  He  took  the  character  of  a 
Lawgiver.  All  were  indeed  to  come  to  His  temple 
according  to  the  declaration  of  the  prophets,  and  His 
temple  was  open  to  them ;  but  He  did  not  characterise 
Himself  as  a  Saviour- God  for  all.  In  Titus  we  find 
the  same  expression. 

In  these  confidential  communications  to  his  dear 
children  in  the  faith  and  companions  in  the  work,  we 
can  understand  that  the  apostle  would  clearly  estab- 
lish the  great  principles  on  which  the  administration 
committed  to  him  rested.  That  all  men  were  the 
objects  of  God's  dealings  in  grace  was  the  general 
basis  on  which  this  administration  was  founded — that 
the  character  of  God  towards  the  world  was  that  of  a 
Saviour.  (Compare  2  Cor.  v.)  The  law  has  its  place 
and  it  still  has  it,  as  the  apostle  shews — the  conviction 
of  unrighteous  men.*  But  the  sovereign  mercy  of 
God  was  the  starting-point  of  all  that  the  apostle  had 
to  declare.  This  thought,  this  spirit,  was  to  govern 
the  worship  even  of  believers.  Details  follow.  Not- 
withstanding this  love  to  the  world,  there  was  upon 
the  earth  an  assembly  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar 
and  support  of  the  truth,  and  the  witness  to  it  on 
earth.  The  Person  of  Christ,  and  all  that  concerns 
Him,  is  the  subject  of  its  confession,  the  foundation  of 
its  existence,  and  the  object  of  its  faith.  This  faith 
would  be  assailed  in  the  last  days  by  the  enemy,  who, 
under  the  pretence  of  sanctity,  would  set  himself  up 
against  God  the  Creator  and  Preserver  of  all  men  and 
of  believers  in  particular.     Directions  for  the  walk  of 

*  Not  here,  specially,  that  any  one  is  under  it,  or  that  it  is  a 
riile  of  life  for  a  people  of  God,  but  a  rule  of  right  and  wrong  to 
demonstrate  evil  to  any  conscience.  In  verse  5  we  have  the  end 
of  the  commission  of  the  gospel  on  the  other  hand,  partaking  of 
the  divine  nature — ^love  and  hoHness,  acting  up  to  responsibility, 
a  good  conscience  and  the  heart  fully  devoted  to  God,  receiving 
His  word  and  trusting  Him. 

L 


134  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

the  assembly  compose  the  remainder  of  the  epistle. 
Conduct  suitable  to  all  is  set  before  Timothy  to  make 
him,  as  well  as  ourselves,  understand  that  which  befits 
the  assembly  of  God.  We  will  now  look  more  closely 
into  the  contents  of  this  epistle. 

From  its  commencement  the  apostle  designates  God 
as  the  Saviour- God.  Paul  is  the  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ  by  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour.  Tlie 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  confidence  and  the  hope  of 
the  soul. 

We  observe  also  that  the  apostle's  wish  differs  from 
that  which  he  expresses  when  addressing  an  assembly ; 
"  Grace,  mercy,''  he  says,  "  and  peace."  He  does  not 
say  "mercy"  to  the  assemblies,  which  stand  before 
God  as  such,  in  consequence  of  the  mercy  shewn  them, 
and  which  (however  low  their  condition  might  be)  are 
viewed  as  assemblies  according  to  the  nature  in  which 
they  live  by  the  Spirit,  in  which  there  is  no  question 
of  mercy,  because  that  nature  is  itself  of  God.  Grace 
and  peace  are  that  which  they  are  to  enjoy  on  the 
part  of  God.  But  when  an  individual  is  in  question, 
whatever  his  piety  or  faithfulness  may  be,  he  is  both 
flesh  and  spirit,  his  career  has  yet  in  part  at  least  to 
be  provided  for,  having  alwaj^s  need  of  mercy.  There- 
fore the  apostle  wishes  it  to  Timothy  as  well  as  to 
Titus.*  In  the  case  of  Philemon  he  adds  "  the  church 
in  thy  house,"  and  his  wish  has  therefore  no  longer 
the  personal  form.  But  with  Timothy  and  Titus  it  is 
the  apostle's  intimacy  with  his  beloved  fellow-labourers 
He  knew  how  much  they  needed  mercy.  It  was  his 
own  resource,  that  which  he  had  experienced  for  the 
comfort  of  his  own  soul. 

The  special  object  for  which  Paul  had  left  Timothy 
at  Ephesus,  when  he  went  into  Macedonia,  was  that  he 

*  There  is,  however,  some  question  as  to  the  reading  in 
Titus. 


I  TIMOTHY.  135 

might  watch  over  the  doctrine  which  was  taught ;  but. 
being  there,  he  gives  him  directions  for  the  interior 
order  of  the  assembly.  The  evil  which  the  enemy- 
sought  to  introduce,  with  regard  to  doctrine,  had  a 
twofold  character;  fables  of  human  imagination,  and 
the  introduction  of  the  law  into  Christianity.  As  to 
the  former,  it  was  pure  evil  and  edified  no  one.  The 
apostle  does  not  here  say  much  about  it ;  he  fore- 
warned them  of  the  evil;  and  the  faith  of  the 
assembly  at  Ephesus  was  sound  enough  to  allow  him 
to  treat  the  whole  system  as  mere  fables  and  genea- 
logies. The  Spirit  gave  warning,  that  in  later  times 
it  would  have  more  disastrous  consequences;  but  at 
present  there  was  only  need  to  guard  the  faithful 
from  it  as  that  which  was  worthless.  Timothy  was 
charged  by  the  apostle  to  attend  to  this. 

But  that  which  is  committed  to  us  in  Christianity, 
as  service,  is  always,  both  in  its  object  and  its  cha- 
racter, at  the  height  of  the  eternal  principles  of  God, 
and  belongs  to  the  foundation  of  our  moral  relations 
with  Him. 

The  object  of  Paul's  mandate  is  the  love  of  a  pure 
heart,  a  good  conscience,  and  faith  unfeigned,  and 
never  the  subtleties  of  argument  or  of  human  imagi- 
nation. This  is  a  sure  token  for  souls  that  are  sound 
in  the  faith  and  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Specu- 
lative questions  do  not  act  on  the  conscience,  nor  bring 
into  the  presence  of  God.  Some  had  forsaken  these 
great  landmarks  of  Christianity,  turning  aside  to  vain 
discussions.  And  here  we  again  find  those  same  cor- 
rupters of  Christianity,  who,  after  having  rejected  the 
Saviour,  sowed  the  apostle's  path  with  thorns — Juda- 
ising  teachers.  They  desired  to  inculcate  the  law. 
The  human  mind  is  adequate  to  this. 

Now  we  see  here  the  way  in  which  one  who  is  at 
the  height  of  the  truth  of  God  can  put  everything  in 
its  true  place.    Paul  treats  the  produce  of  human 

I. 


136  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

imagination  as  mere  fables ;  but  the  law  was  of  God, 
and  could  be  made  useful  if  rightly  employed.  Ifc 
was  of  great  service  to  condemn,  to  judge  evil,  to  slay 
— to  shew  the  judgment  of  God  against  every  wrong- 
thing  forbidden  by  the  gospel  which  revealed  the 
glory  of  the  blessed  God — a  glory  which  tolerated  no 
evil  and  which  had  been  committed  to  the  apostle.  It 
could  be  used  to  act  upon  the  conscience  in  this  way, 
but  it  did  not  build  up  the  righteous ;  and,  if  any  were 
under  the  law,  they  were  under  the  curse.  As  a 
Bword  for  the  conscience,  it  may  be  used.  But  grace 
alone  is  the  source  of  our  preaching  and  the  stay  of 
our  souls. 

These  two  systems  and  their  respective  places  are 
presented  in  verses  5-17,  which  form  a  kind  of  paren- 
thesis, the  apostle  resuming  his  address  to  Timothy  in 
verse  18.  The  use  of  the  law  is  explained  in  verses 
8-13.  The  apostle  in  a  certain  sense  lowers  it  here, 
while  acknowledging  its  utility  in  its  place,  as  the 
weapon  of  righteousness  for  condemnation,  and  con- 
trasts it  with  the  gospel  which  is  connected  with  the 
glory  of  God  Himself  which  this  gospel  proclaims,  as 
the  law  is  connected  with  the  wickedness  which  it 
condemns. 

Having  spoken  of  the  gospel  of  the  glory  which 
had  been  committed  to  him,  the  apostle  turns  to  the 
sovereign  grace  that  brought  him  into  the  knowledge 
of  this  glory  which  is  the  testimony  to  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  work  of  grace. 

"I  give  thanks,"  he  says,  "to  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  who  hath  counted  me  faithful,  putting  me  into  the 
ministry,  who  was  before  a  blasphemer  and  persecutor 
and  injurious."     This  indeed  was  grace. 

The  apostle  speaks  of  two  things  in  his  conversion : 
the  one,  how  God  could  have  compassion  on  him  in 
such  a  state — he  was  in  ignorance;  the  other,  the 
purpose  of  God  that  the  apostle  should  be  a  pattern  of 


I  TIMOTHY.  137 

grace  to  all.  That  he  was  in  ignorance  and  unbelief, 
although  a  condition  which  made  mercy  possible  (for 
had  he  been  an  enemy,  knowing  and  willing  it,  while 
acquainted  with  the  grace  of  the  gospel,  it  would  have 
l^een  impossible),  yet  that  condition  was  no  excuse  for 
his  sin ;  he  puts  pure  and  perfect  grace  forward,  as 
lia.ving  abounded  in  his  case — he  was  the  chief  of 
sinners.  This  indeed  was  true.  The  high  priests  had 
resisted  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  uttermost.  Paul  had 
joined  them  in  it :  but  he  was  not  satisfied  with  that. 
He  desired  to  be  the  active  enemy  of  the  faith  wher- 
ever it  existed,  and  to  destroy  the  name  of  Jesus.  He 
had  done  much  at  Jerusalem,  but  he  wished  to  satiate 
his  hatred  even  in  foreign  cities.  We  know  his  history 
in  the  Acts.  The  living  expression  of  Jewish  resist- 
ance to  grace,  he  was  also  among  men  the  expression 
of  the  most  active  human  enmity  to  Him  whom  God 
would  glorify.  Grace  was  greater  than  the  sin,  the 
patience  of  God  more  perfect  than  the  perseverance  of 
man's  hostility.  The  latter  was  limited  by  man's 
importance,  the  former  has  no  limit  in  the  nature  of 
God  but  that  of  His  own  sovereign  will.  Guilty  as 
man  may  be,  his  sin  cannot  so  reach  God  as  to  disturb 
the  independent  action  of  His  nature  or  change  His 
purposes.  He  was  pleased  to  shew  forth  in  Paul  a 
pattern  of  the  sovereignty  of  that  grace  and  perfect 
goodness — to  the  Jews  hereafter,  who  as  a  nation  will 
be  in  Saul's  condition — to  all  men  as  the  enemies  of 
God  and  by  nature  children  of  wrath.  The  chief,  the 
most  active,  the  most  inveterate  of  enemies  was  the 
best  and  most  powerful  of  witnesses  that  the  grace  of 
God  abounded  over  sin,  and  that  the  work  of  Christ 
was  perfect  to  put  it  away. 

"  Unto  God  " — being  such  in  His  nature,  and  having 
the  development  of  all  the  ages  in  His  counsels — 
"unto  the  only  God,  invisible,  incorruptible,"  he  as- 
cribes all  praise  and  all  glory.     Such  was  the  founda- 


1.38  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

tion  of  Paul's  ministry  in  contrast  with  the  law.  It 
was  founded  on  the  revelation  of  grace ;  but  it  was  a 
revelation  connected  with  the  experience  of  its  appli- 
cation to  his  own  case.  Peter,  guilty  of  denying  a 
living  Saviour,  could  speak  to  the  Jews  of  grace  that 
met  their  case,  which  was  his  own  ;  Paul,  formerly  the 
enemy  of  a  glorified  Saviour  and  the  resister  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  could  proclaim  grace  that  rose  above  even 
that  state  of  sinfulness,  above  all  that  could  flow  from 
human  nature — grace  that  opened  the  door  to  the 
Gentiles  according  to  God's  own  counsels,  when  the 
Jews  had  rejected  everything,  substituting  the  heavenly 
assembly  for  them — grace  that  sufficed  for  the  future 
admission  of  that  guilty  nation  to  better  privileges 
than  those  which  they  had  forfeited. 

Such  was  the  call  of  this  apostle,  such  his  ministry. 
Having  shewn  the  opposition  between  that  which  was 
committed  to  him  and  the  law  (while  affirming  the 
usefulness  of  the  latter,  not  as  a  rule  to  the  righteous 
or  a  guide  to  God's  people,  but  as  judging  wrong),  he 
resumes  his  address  to  Timothy  in  that  which  refers 
fco  the  details  of  his  mission  among  the  Ephesians. 

At  the  end  of  chapter  i.  he  commits  the  charge  to 
him — sends  him  his  mandate.  The  term  he  employs 
relates  to  verses  3  and  5.  He  had  left  Timothy  at 
Ephesus  in  order  to  command  some  persons  there  not 
to  teach  other  doctrines  than  the  truths  of  the  gospel. 
Now  the  end  of  the  command,  of  this  evangelical 
comraission,  was  love  flowing  from  a  pure  heart  and  a 
good  conscience  and  faith  unfeigned.  For  the  gospel, 
while  revealing  the  marvellous  counsels  of  God,  main- 
tains the  great  eternal  principles  of  His  nature.  It  is 
this  which  distinguishes  truth  from  the  lofty  preten- 
sions of  heretical  imaginations;  it  requires  that  man 
should  be  in  relationship  with  God  really  in  heart  and 
in  truth  according  to  those  principles.  And  this 
commission  the  apostle  now  entrusted  to  Timothy, 


I   TIMOTHY.  1S9 

his  own  son  in  the  faith.  He  was  to  maintain  it  with 
an  authority  that  had  its  basis  in  divine  testimony, 
but  which  he  held  formally  from  the  apostle  who 
appointed  him  to  it ;  not  merely  of  his  own  accord,  but 
according  to  prophecies  which  had  pointed  him  out 
for  this  jDurpose,  and  which  were  a  means  of  strength 
to  him  in  the  conflict  he  was  thus  brought  into. 
The  conditions  of  victory  were  in  accordance  with  the 
nature  of  the  commission.  He  was  to  keep  the  faith 
and  a  good  conscience.  Now  faith  here  is  the  doctrine 
of  Christianity ;  yet  not  merely  as  doctrine,  but  as 
that  which  the  soul  held  between  itself  and  God  as 
coming  from  Him.  He  had  to  maintain  the  truth,  the 
christian  doctrine,  but  to  hold  it  as  so  revealed  by 
God  Himself  to  the  soul  that  it  should  be  the  truth. 
The  light  should  possess,  with  well-defined  outlines^ 
the  authority  of  God. 

It  was  the  faith,  that  which  God  had  revealed, 
received  with  certainty  as  such — as  the  truth. 

But,  to  be  in  communion  with  God,  the  conscience 
must  be  good,  must  be  pure ;  and  if  we  are  not  in 
communion  with  God,  we  cannot  have  the  strength 
that  would  maintain  us  in  the  faith,  that  would  enable 
us  to  persevere  in  the  profession  of  the  truth,  as  God 
gives  it  to  us.  Satan  has  then  a  hold  upon  us,  and  if 
the  intellect  of  one  in  this  state  is  active,  he  falls  into 
heresy.  The  loss  of  a  good  conscience  opens  the  door 
to  Satan,  because  it  deprives  us  of  communion  with 
God;  and  the  active  mind,  under  Satan's  influence, 
invents  ideas  instead  of  confessing  the  truth  of  God. 
The  apostle  treats  the  fruit  of  this  state  as  "  blas- 
phemies ;"  the  will  of  man  is  at  work,  and  the  higher 
the  subject,  the  more  an  unbridled  will,  possessed  by 
the  enemy,  goes  astray,  and  exalts  itself  against  God, 
and  against  the  subjection  of  the  whole  mind  to  the 
obedience  of  Christ,  to  the  authority  of  the  revelation 
of  God. 

L 


140  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

The  apostle  had  delivered  up  two  persons  of  this 
character  to  Satan — that  is  to  say,  outwardly.  Though 
already  deceived  by  him,  they  were  not  under  his 
dominion  as  having  power  to  torment  and  make  them 
.suffer.  For  in  the  assembly  (when  in  its  normal 
state)  Satan  has  no  power  of  that  kind.  It  is  guarded 
from  it,  being  the  dwelling  place  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  protected  by  God  and  by  the  power  of  Christ. 
Satan  can  tempt  us  individually ;  but  he  has  no  right 
over  the  members  of  the  assembly  as  such.  They  are 
ivithin,  and,  weak  as  they  may  be,  Satan  cannot  enter 
there.  They  may  be  delivered  to  him  for  their  good. 
This  may  take  place  at  all  times — witness  the  history 
of  Job.  But  the  assembly  ought  to  have  the  know- 
ledge, and  be  the  guardian  and  instrument,  of  the 
accomplishment  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  His  own. 
Within  the  assembly  is  the  Holy  Ghost ;  God  dwells 
in  it  as  His  house  by  the  Spirit.  Without  is  the 
world  of  which  Satan  is  the  prince.  The  apostle  (by 
the  power  bestowed  on  him,*  for  it  is  an  act  of 
positive  power)  delivered  these  two  men  into  the 
power  of  the  enemy — deprived  them  of  the  shelter 
they  had  enjoyed.  They  had  listened  to  the  enemy — 
had  been  his  instruments.  It  was  not  in  the  as- 
sembly, with  members  of  Christ,  that  this  should  have 
taken  place.  They  must  be  made  to  feel  what  he  was 
to  whom  they  had  given  ear.  God  thus  made  use  of 
Satan  himself  as  a  rod  for  the  good  of  His  rebellious 
children.  Satan  should  instruct  them,  through  the 
pains  he  would  make  them  suffer,  of  whatever  kind  it 

*  We  must  not  confound  this  act  of  power  with  discipline, 
which  is  the  act  of  the  assembly  and  its  formal  duty.  In  1 
Corinthians  v.  the  apostle  joins  the  assembly  to  himself  in  this 
act  of  power,  but  he  delivered  with  the  power  of  Christ.  The 
duty  of  the  assembly  is  stated  there  in  verse  13.  As  to  the 
saints'  or  assembly's  part,  when  God  has  exercised  discipline 
see  1  John  v.  16 ;  James  v.  14,  15. 


I   TIMOTHY.  141 

might  be,  whether  anguish  of  soul  or  of  body,  and  the 
latter  is  the  immediate  effect,  in  order  that  their  will 
might  be  broken  and  brought  into  subjection  to  God. 
Solemn  discipline  !  Marvellous  power  in  the  hands  of 
man !  but  a  proof  that  the  love  of  God  can  order  all 
things  for  the  purpose  of  delivering  a  soul  and  bringing 
it  to  Himself. 

The  apostle  proceeds  to  give  instructions,  founded 
on  the  great  principles  which  he  had  established — on 
grace.  The  Jewish  spirit  might  look  on  Gentile  kings 
as  enemies,  and  on  Gentiles  in  general  as  unworthy 
of  divine  favour.  The  persecution  of  which  Chris- 
tians were  the  object  gave  the  Hesh  occasion  to 
nourish  these  dispositions  and  to  enter  into  the  spirit 
of  the  law.  Grace  rises  above  all  these  thoughts — all 
these  feelings  of  the  heart.  It  teaches  us  to  think  of 
all  men  with  love.  We  belong  to  a  Saviour-God,  who 
acts  in  the  gospel  towards  all  men  with  love.  Espe- 
cially were  they  to  pray  for  kings  and  those  who  had 
places  in  the  world,  that  God  would  dispose  their 
hearts  to  allow  us  to  live  in  peace  and  quietness  in  all 
honesty.  This  was  well-pleasing  to  a  Saviour-God,, 
who  was  willing  that  all  men  should  be  saved  and  be 
brought  to  know  the  truth.  The  subject  here  is  not 
the  counsels  of  God,  but  His  dealings  with  men  under 
the  gospel.  He  acts  in  grace.  It  is  the  acceptable 
time — the  day  of  salvation.  He  opens  the  door 
through  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  proclaims  peace  and 
a  sure  reception  to  all  who  come.  The  work  is  done ; 
His  character  fully  glorified  with  regard  to  sin.  If 
they  refuse  to  come,  that  is  the  will  of  man.  That 
God  will  fulfil  His  counsels  after  all  makes  no  change 
in  His  dealings,  nor  in  the  responsibility  of  men. 
We  have  love  to  proclaim  to  all — in  the  spirit  of  love 
in  our  ways  towards  them.  The  distinction  between 
Jew  and  Gentile  totally  disappears  here.  There  is 
one  Godj  and  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  a 

IL 


142  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Man,  Christ  Jesus.  These  are  the  two  great  truths 
which  form  the  basis  of  all  true  religion.  Judaism 
had  already  been  the  revelation  and  testimony  in  the 
world  of  the  first:  there  was  one  only  God.  This 
remains  eternally  true,  but  did  not  suffice  to  bring 
men  into  relationship  with  God.  With  regard  to  men 
He  abode  within  the  veil  in  the  darkness  which 
shrouded  His  majesty.  Christianity,  while  fully  re- 
vealing the  one  God,  presents  the  second  truth  :  there 
is  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men.  There  is  one, 
and  there  is  but  one.  It  is  as  true  that  there  is  but 
one  Mediator  as  that  there  is  but  one  God.  This  is 
the  great  and  distinctive  truth  of  Christianity. 

Two  things  here  characterise  the  Mediator.  He  is 
a  man ;  He  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  all.  The  time 
for  this  testimony  was  ordered  of  God. 

Precious  truth  !  We  are  in  weakness,  we  are  guilty, 
we  could  not  bring  ourselves  near  to  God.  We  needed 
a  Mediator,  who,  wdiile  maintaining  the  glory  of  God, 
should  put  us  into  such  a  position  that  He  could 
present  us  to  God  in  righteousness  according  to  that 
glory.  Christ  gave  Himself  as  a  ransom.  But  He 
must  be  a  man  in  order  to  suffer  for  men,  and  to 
represent  men.  And  this  He  was.  But  this  is  not 
all.  We  are  weak — here,  where  we  are  to  receive  the 
revelation  of  God ;  and  weak,  with  regard  to  the  use 
of  our  resources  in  God  and  our  communion  with  Him 
— even  when  our  guilt  is  blotted  out.  And,  in  our 
weakness  to  receive  the  revelation  of  God,  Christ  has 
revealed  God,  and  all  that  He  is  in  His  own  Person,  in 
all  the  circumstances  wherein  man  could  have  need 
either  in  body  or  in  soul.  He  came  down  into  the 
lowest  depths  in  order  that  there  should  be  none,  even 
of  the  most  wretched,  who  could  not  feel  that  Go.d 
in  His  goodness  w^as  near  him  and  was  entirely 
accessible  to  him — come  down  to  Him — His  love  find- 
ing its  occasion  in  misery;  and  that  there  was  no 


I  TIMOTHY.  143 

need  to  which  He  was  not  present,  which  He  could 
not  meet. 

It  is  thus  that  He  made  himself  known  on  earth; 
and,  now  that  He  is  on  high,  He  is  still  the  same. 
He  does  not  forget  His  human  experiences :  they  are 
perpetuated  hy  His  divine  power  in  the  sympathising 
feelings  of  His  humanity,  according  to  the  energy  of 
that  divine  love  which  was  their  source  and  their 
motive  power.  He  is  still  a  man  in  glory,  and  in 
divine  perfection.  His  divinity  imparts  the  strength 
of  its  love  to  His  humanity,  but  does  not  set  aside  the 
latter.  Nothing  could  resemble  such  a  Mediator  as 
this;  nothing  could  equal  the  tenderness,  the  know- 
ledge of  the  human  heart,  the  sympathy,  the  experi- 
ence of  need.  In  the  measure  which  divinity  could 
give  to  what  He  did,  and  in  the  strength  of  its  love. 
He  came  down,  took  part  in  all  the  sorrows  of  humanity, 
and  entered  into  all  the  circumstances  in  which  the 
human  heart  could  be,  and  was  wounded,  oppressed, 
and  discouraged,  bowing  down  under  the  evil.  No 
tenderness,  no  power  of  sympathy,  no  humanity, 
like  His ;  no  human  heart  that  can  so  understand, 
so  feel  with  us,  whatever  the  burden  may  be  that 
oppresses  the  heart  of  man.  It  is  the  Man,  the  Christ 
Jesus,  who  is  our  Mediator ;  none  so  near,  none  who 
has  come  down  so  low,  and  entered  with  divine  power 
into  the  need,  and  all  the  need,  of  man.  The  con- 
science is  purified  by  His  work,  the  heart  relieved  by 
that  which  He  was,  and  which  He  is  for  ever. 

There  is  but  One :  to  think  of  another  would  be  to 
snatch  from  Him  His  glory,  and  from  us  our  perfect 
consolation.  His  coming  from  on  high,  His  divine 
nature,  His  death.  His  life  as  man  in  heaven,  all  point 
Him  out  as  the  one  and  only  Mediator. 

But  there  is  another  aspect  of  this  truth,  and  of  the 
fact  that  He  is  a  Man.  It  is,  that  He  is  not  merely  a 
Mediator  as  a  Priest  upon  His  throne,  between  Israel 

u. 


THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

and  the  Lord;  not  simply  the  Messiah,  in  order  to 
place  Israel  in  relationship  with  their  God,  but  a  Man 
between  God  and  men.  It  is  according  to  the  eternal 
nature  of  God  Himself  and  to  the  need  of  men  in 
His  presence.  It  was  of  these  truths,  eternal  and 
of  universal  bearing,  that  Paul  was  the  herald  and 
the  apostle. 

Possessing  a  character  that  belongs  to  all  ages  and 
that  goes  beyond  them,  all  these  facts  had  their  time 
bo  be  revealed. 

All  means  dependent  on  man's  use  of  them  had 
been  tried  with  men — and  in  vain,  as  to  recalling  him 
to  God ;  and  now  the  necessary  foundations  of  their 
relationship  with  God  had  to  be  set  forth,  laid  by 
God  Himself,  and  the  Gentiles  were  to  hear  the  testi- 
mony of  grace.  And  such  was  the  apostle's  testimony, 
"  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  faith  and  in  the 
truth." 

Paul  has  plainly  now  laid  the  foundations,  and  he 
proceeds  therefore  to  details.  Men  were  to  pray 
everywhere,  lifting  up  pure  hands,  without  wrath, 
and  without  vain  human  reasonings.  Women  were 
to  ^talk  in  modesty,  adorned  with  good  works,  and  to 
learn  in  silence.  A  woman  was  forbidden  to  teach  or 
to  exercise  authority  over  men;  she  was  to  abide  in 
quietness  and  silence.  The  reason  given  for  this  is 
remarkable,  and  shews  how,  in  our  relations  with 
God,  everything  depends  on  the  original  starting-point. 
In  innocence  Adam  had  the  first  place  ;  in  sin.  Eve 
It  was  Eve  who,  being  deceived,  brought  in  transgres- 
Bion.  Adam  was  not  deceived,  guilty  as  he  was  of 
disobeying  God.  United  to  his  wife,  he  followed  her, 
aot  deceived  by  the  enemy  but  weak  through  his 
affection.  Without  the  weakness,  it  was  this  which 
the  second  Adam  did  in  grace;  He  followed  His 
deceived  and  guilty  bride,  but  in  order  to  redeem  and 
deliver  her  by  taking  her  faults  upon  Hinself.     Eve 


I  TIMOTHY.  145 

suffered  on  earth  the  penalty  of  her  fault  in  a  way 
which  is  a  mark  of  the  judgment  of  God ;  but  walking 
in  modesty,  with  faith  and  love  and  holiness,  she  shall 
be  delivered  in  the  hour  of  her  trial ;  and  that  which 
bears  the  stamp  of  judgment  shall  be  an  occasion  of 
the  mercy  and  succour  of  God. 

The  apostle  next  points  out  to  Timothy  the  qualities 
necessary  for  a  bishop  or  a  deacon,  as  well  as  for  the 
wife  of  the  latter.*  He  supposes  here  that  there  were 
some  who  desired  to  undertake  this  work.  It  was  a 
good  work.  To  care  for  souls  and  have  a  vigilant  eye 
upon  the  walk  of  believers ;  to  watch  over  them  in 
order  that  the  members  oi  Christ  should  answer  to 
His  love  and  lose  no  christian  privilege  ;  to  do  this  by 
maintaining  that  happy  order  and  that  precious  unity 
which  were  realised  at  that  time,  and  to  protect  the 
flock  of  the  Lord  against  the  ravaging  wolves  that 
were  seeking  to  invade  it :  this  indeed  was  valuable 
work,  and  he  on  whose  heart  the  Lord  had  thus  laid 
the  souls  of  His  people  might  well  desire  to  undertake 
it.  The  apostle  felt  this :  it  was  a  true  and  faithful 
saying ;  but  certain  qualities  were  needed  to  make 
any  one  fit  for  such  a  charge.  Gifts  are  not  included 
among  them,  unless  the  being  "apt  to  teach"  might 
be  so  considered;  but  even  this  is  presented  as  a 
quality — the  man  must  have  aptnessf  for  it — not  as  a 
gift.  Power  to  use  such  truth  with  others  was  very 
useful  in  fulfilling  his  charge,  without  saying  at  all 
that  he  taught  publicly  in  the  assembly.  The  essential 
thing  was  that  which  gave  moral  weight. 

Timothy  was  not  left  at  Ephesus  to  appoint 
elders;  but  these  were  the  qualities  necessary  to  a 

*  So  it  would  read  in  English;  but  I  see  no  reason  why 
yvvaiKag  should  not  apply  to  the  elders'  wives.     It  runs  really 

thus,  "In  like  manner  [the]  deacons In  like  manner 

[the]  wives."     See,  however,  remarks  in  next  page. 

t  Some  translate  this  word,  "ready  to  learn." 

VOL.  V.  Ill,  h 


146  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

bishop,  and  Paul  exhorts  him  to  be  watchful  on  this 
point. 

It  is  not  needful  to  enter  into  the  details  of  these 
qualities ;  they  are  plain  enough,  as  well  as  those 
required  for  a  deacon. 

We  see  what  was  the  subject  of  "  the  condemnation 
of  the  devil :"  he  exalted  himself  at  the  thought  of  his 
own  importance.  (Compare  Ezek.  xxviii.)  "  The  snare 
of  the  devil"  is  another  thing.  If  a  man  is  not  of  good 
report,  he  will  yield  somewhere  to  the  enemy,  because 
he  will  not  dare  to  withstand  him  boldly. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  apostle  speaks  of  the 
wives  of  deacons,  and  not  those  of  bishops*  (ex- 
cept to  say  that  these  must  be  the  husbands  of  one 
wife  only).  Bishops  had  a  charge,  in  which  they  were 
occupied  with  souls  and  exercised  authority  in  the 
church,  in  which  women  were  not  to  act.  Deacons 
were  necessarily  occupied  with  family  details  and 
circumstances.  In  these  women  might  well  be  con- 
cerned and  often  very  useful.  In  the  spiritual  cares 
of  elders  they  had  nothing  to  do.  It  was  re- 
quisite therefore  that  the  wives  of  deacons  should 
possess  qualities  which  would  cause  their  husbands  to 
be  respected,  and  at  the  same  time  guard  themselves 
from  becoming  busybodies  and  tale-bearers. 

Faithfulness  in  the  charge  of  a  deacon — the  exercise 
of  which  in  fact  is  a  matter  of  the  greatest  delicacy, 
and  requires  much  christian  love  and  patience — was 
a  means  of  acquiring  strength  in  the  work  of  God. 
Stephen  and  Philip  are  examples  of  this:  their  s^^ivitual 
powers  soon  carried  them  beyond  their  services  as 
deacons. 

What  was  the  assembly  in  those  happy  days  ? 
That  which  surely  it  always  is  in  the  sight  of  God , 
hut  then  in  fact,  when  love  displayed  itself  in  an 

*  3ut  see  note,  page  145. 


I  TIMOTHY.  147 

order  maintained  by  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  when  the  oneness  of  the  entire  body  developed 
itself  in  the  action  of  all  its  members,  it  was  the  house 
of  God.  Thank  God,  it  is  so  always ;  yet  what  a 
difference  since  then  in  its  practical  condition  ! 

But  let  us  here  examine  the  character  which  the 
apostle  gives  to  the  assembly  on  earth.  He  wrote 
hoping  soon  to  come,  but  in  order  that,  in  case  he 
might  tarry  long,  Timothy  should  know  how  to  conduct 
himself.     He  then  tells  us  what  the  assembly  is. 

In  the  first  place  it  is  the  house  of  God.  God 
dwells  in  it  upon  the  earth.  (Compare  Eph.  ii. 
22.)  We  understand  that  it  is  here  viewed  as  on 
the  earth,  because  the  apostle  is  speaking  of  how  to 
behave  in  it.  But  this  truth  is  important.  It  gives  a 
character  to  the  assembly  of  the  highest  importance 
for  us  with  regard  to  our  responsibility.  It  is  not  a 
vague  thing,  composed  of  the  dead,  of  the  living — a 
thing  which  we  know  not  where  to  find,  because  one 
part  of  it  is  alive  on  the  earth  and  another  part  con- 
sists of  souls  in  heaven.  It  is  the  house  of  God  here 
below,  in  which  we  have  to  behave  (whatever  other 
position  we  may  hold)  in  a  manner  that  becomes  the 
house  of  God.  God  dwells  in  the  assembly  upon 
earth.  We  cannot  too  earnestly  remember  this  fact. 
Whatever  would  bring  confusion  into  the  presentation 
of  the  truth,  through  the  idea  that  some  are  dead  and 
that  the  whole  assembly  is  not  here,  comes  from  the 
enemy  and  is  in  opposition  to  the  word.  The  assembly, 
viewed  as  subsisting  on  earth,  is  the  house  of  God. 

In  the  second  place  it  is  tlte  assembly  of  the  living 
God.  God,  in  whom  is  the  power  of  life,  in  contrast 
with  men  and  with  dead  idols,  has  an  assembly  not  of 
the  world,  having  set  it  apart  for  Himself.  It  is  not  a 
nation  like  Israel.  That  people  were  the  assembly  of 
God  in  the  wilderness.  The  assembly  is  now  the 
assembly  of  the  living  God. 

JIT. 


148  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

In  the  third  place  it  is  the  pillar  and  support  of  the 
truth.  Christ  on  earth  was  the  Truth.  (He  is  so 
always,  but  He  was  so  on  the  earth.)  He  is  now 
hidden  in  God.  The  assembly  is  not  the  truth :  the 
word  of  God  is  the  truth.  His  word  is  truth.  Truth 
exists  before  the* assembly;  it  is  faith  in  the  truth 
which  gathers  the  assembly  together.  But  the  as- 
sembly is  that  which  uiaintains  the  truth  on  earth.* 
When  the  assembly  is  gone,  men  will  be  given  up  to  a 
strong  delusion. 

It  may  be  that  there  is  only  a  little  remnant  of 
those  that  call  themselves  Christians  who  maintain 
the  word  of  truth ;  but  it  is  not  the  less  true  that  the 
assembly — as  long  as  it  remains  here  below — is  the 
only  witness  for  the  truth  upon  the  earth.  It  is  God's 
witness  to  present  the  truth  before  men.  At  the  end 
that  which  God  owns  as  such  will  be  ttie  feeble  flock 
at  Philadelphia ;  and  then  that  which  is  in  the  respon- 
sible position  of  being  the  assembly  (Laodicea)  will  be 
spued  out  of  the  mouth  of  Christ,  who  Himself  takes 
the  character  of  Amen,  the  faithful  and  true  Witness. 
But  the  assembly  as  planted  by  God  on  the  earth  is 
the  pillar  and  support  of  the  truth.  Authority  is  not 
the  question  here,  but  the  maintenance  and  presenta- 
tion of  the  truth.  That  which  does  not  maintam 
and  present  the  truth  is  not  the  assembly  as  God 
understands  it. 

The  presence,  then,  of  the  living  God,  and  the  profes- 
sion of  the  truth,  are  the  characteristics  of  the  house 
of  God.  Wherever  this  assembly  of  the  living  God  is, 
wherever  the  truth  is,  there  is  His  house,  f 

*  But  the  assembly  does  not  teach.  Teachers  teach  the  as- 
sembly, but  by  laithfulness  in  holding  fast  the  truth  taught,  it 
sustains  it  in  the  world. 

t  Thus,  in  order  to  judge  what  the  assembly  is,  we  must 
know  and  be  able  to  distinguish  the  truth  and  the  living  God. 
It  is  this  which  the  apostle  says  with  regard  to  th?  in^ivi4ual, 


1  TIMOTHY.  149 

The  mystery  of  piety,  which  lies  at  the  very  centre 
of  what  the  assembl}^  maintains  before  the  world,  is 
great,  and  relates  essentially  to  the  Person  of  Christ. 
The  apostle  naturally  does  not  here  develop  all  the 
different  parts  of  the  truth,  but  that  which  is  the 
living  centre  of  the  whole — that  which  is  essential  to 
the  relations  between  God  and  men. 

God  had  been  manifested  in  the  flesh;  marvellous 
truth  in  fact !  There,  vfhere  all  is  confusion  and  sin, 
in  the  nature  of  him  in  whom  all  this  sin  and  all  this 
confusion  are  introduced,  the  Centre  of  all  blessing, 
He  who  is  Light  itself,  He  who  as  the  light  puts  every- 
thing morally  in  its  place,  and  who  by  the  fact  of  His 
presence  shews  that  love  is  above  everything,  God 
who  is  love,  has  been  manifest  in  the  flesh.  Where 
sin  was,  there  was  love  above  the  sin.  Man,  who  is 
the  slave  of  evil,  sees  here  in  his  own  nature  the 
source  and  the  power  of  all  good.  In  the  centre  of 
evil  and  of  weakness,  in  human  nature,  God  Himself 
has  been  manifested.  Was  there  then  evil  in  Him 
who  was  such  ?  Did  He  undergo  the  lot  of  the  com- 
mon bondage  ?  By  no  means.  Truly  in  the  same 
circumstances,  in  the  same  nature.  He  proved  supeinor 
to  all  evil,  perfect  in  all  respects.  The  absence  of  all 
sin  was  made  evident  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
during  His  whole  life  (if  men  had  been  able  to 
discern  it ;  and,  in  fact,  it  was  manifest  to  the  conscience 
of  every  man,  for  He  was  pure  light  shining  upon 
all),  and  with  power  by  the  resurrection.  (Compare 
Rom.  i.  4.) 

Thus  God  was  made  visible  to  the  angels,  was 
preached  to  the  Gentiles  (not  merely  the  God  of  the 
Jews),  became  the  object  of  faith  in  the  world  (it  was 
not  the  manifestation  of  visible  power,  claiming  His 

•*  the  Spirit  is  truth."  These  are  the  cardinal  points  with  re- 
gard to  unbelief  and  faith,  the  truth  and  the  Spirit;  and  the 
word  of  God  is  the  truth. 

III. 


150  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

rights  and  His  glory),  and  at  last  took  a  place  on  high 
in  the  glory  whence  He  had  descended.  It  is  thus 
that  God  is  known  in  the  assembly  according  to  the 
truth.  There  is  no  truth  outside  the  maintenance  of 
this  revelation  of  the  Person  of  Christ. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  in  this  epistle,  and  even 
in  the  second,  the  apostle  speaks  nowhere  of  the 
relationship  of  Christians  with  God  as  His  children,  of 
the  privileges  of  children,  or  of  that  which  is  known 
within  in  the  intimacy  of  the  family.  He  speaks  of 
truths  that  are  essential  as  testimony  before  the  world; 
that  which  the  assembly  is  externally,  that  which  it 
is  as  the  witness  of  God  towards  men.  It  is  the  house 
of  God,  the  assembly  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar  and 
support  of  the  truth  :  that  which  it  is  as  responsible  in 
the  world,  and  in  order  that  all  should  learn  what  God 
is.  The  mystery  of  piety,  of  which  the  assembly  is 
the  vessel  for  testimony,  answers  to  this.  It  is  the 
grand  essential  truth  on  which  all  relation  between 
God  and  men  is  founded,  by  means  of  which  God  has 
to  do  with  men.  Therefore  also  he  says  previously, 
"  There  is  but  one  God,  and  one  Mediator  between 
God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus." 

We  have  not  here  the  privileges  of  children,  nor  the 
heavenly  bride  of  Christ,  but  the  foundation  of  God's 
relations  with  all  men.  Thus  the  Father  is  not  named, 
nor  even  the  Spirit,  except  here  in  connection  with 
the  Lord's  Person,  as  the  justification  of  His  testimony. 
It  is  God,  the  Mediator,  and  man,  and  the  assembly  as 
the  vessel  and  depositar}^  of  this  truth  of  the  testimony 
of  God ;  or  else  evil  spirits  turning  men  away  from  the 
faith.     This  deserves  all  attention. 

Not  only,  as  we  have  seen  elsewhere,  the  testimony 
of  the  grace  of  the  gospel  maintains  the  great  eternal 
principles  of  the  nature  and  glory  of  God,  and  His 
relations  according  to  that  glory  with  men  ;  but  even 
in  the  pains  the  apostle  takes  that  the  assembly  may 


I  TIMOTHY.  151 

be  cared  for  and  guarded,  during  his  absence,  from  the 
assaults  of  the  enemy  and  from  disorder  and  impro- 
prieties within ;  it  is  not  of  its  internal  privileges  that 
he  speaks.  God  is  set  before  us,  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  God,  in  the  majesty  of  His  immutable  truth, 
in  His  relations  with  men  as  such,  and  in  the  revela- 
tion of  Himself  in  the  flesh — God  was  in  Christ, 
reconciling  the  world;  dwelling  in  the  assembly,  in 
order  that  it  should  present  and  maintain  the  truth 
before  the  world — the  truth  (as  we  have  seen)  with 
regard  to  Christ,  of  the  revelation  of  God  in  Him. 
God  desires  to  be  in  relation  with  men :  it  is  thus  that 
He  accomplishes  it.  The  assembly  maintains  the 
rights  of  the  Creator  and  Saviour-God  on  the  earth. 
The  assembly  itself  must  be  maintained  in  moral  order, 
that  it  may  confront  the  enemy  who  is  in  the  world, 
and  be  able  to  sustain  this  testimony. 

But  there  would  be  some  who  departed  from  the 
faith,  from  this  knowledge  of  the  one  Creator  and 
Saviour-God — Him  who  was  manifested  in  the  flesh. 
They  would  attack  precisely  these  points  which  we 
have  named.  It  might  be  that  they  would  pretend  to 
carry  the  idea  of  christian  privileges  farther  than  all 
others  had  done,  as  w^ell  as  that  of  profound  know 
ledge  of  God ;  but  they  would  sin  against  first  prin- 
ciples, against  the  faith  which  connected  the  Saviour- 
God  revealed  in  Christianity  with  the  one  only 
Creator-God.  According  to  Christianity,  the  eternal 
God  had  not  only  created  the  world  but  had  revealed 
Himself  in  Christ.  These  apostates,  bringing  in  doc- 
trines of  demons,  would  seek  to  deny  that  it  was  this 
one  and  only  God  of  nature  who  had  manifested 
Himself  in  grace.  Seduced  by  demons,  and  their 
conscience  being  seared,  they  forbade  that  which  God 
had  established  in  creation,  that  which  He  had  given 
to  man  in  full  right  after  the  flood:  as  though  tht^ 
superior  holiness  which  they  preached,  and  relation- 

IV. 


152  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

ship  with  a  more  exalted  God,  were  not  consistent 
with  such  customs.  Forsaking  the  real  and  practical 
holiness  of  communion  with  God,  and  of  His  com- 
mandments by  Christ,  they  created  a  false  sanctity 
for  themselves,  which  denied  that  which  God  had 
ordained  from  the  beginning,  and  thus  exalted  them- 
selves against  the  authority  of  Him  who  had  ordained 
it,  as  though  He  was  an  imperfect  or  perhaps  evil 
being. 

Thus  the  restraint  of  the  fear  of  God  was  lost,  and 
the  door  opened  to  licence  and  dissoluteness.  The 
Spirit  of  God  warned  the  assembly  of  this,  and  the 
faithful  apostle  communicates  it  to  Timothy  and 
through  him  puts  the  faithful  on  their  guard.  He 
does  not  therefore  speak  of  privilege.  Faithful  to  the 
glory  of  God,  he  returns  to  the  first  principles  of  His 
glory,  and  maintains  the  incontestable  rights  of  the 
one  and  only  God ;  faithful  to  God,  not  making  boast 
of  his  knowledge,  but  seeking  in  love  to  guard  the 
assembly  from  all  departure  from  God. 

We  must  not  confound  the  few  here  who  forsake 
the  faith  with  the  general  apostasy  of  2  Thessalonians. 
Here  a  few  depart  from  the  truth,  seduced  by  de- 
mons; and  the  assembly  still  subsists  to  be  guarded 
from  the  invasion  of  these  hurtful  principles.  Quite 
another  thing  is  the  general  apostasy,  and  the  mani- 
festation of  the  man  of  sin,  which  is  not  mentioned 
here  at  all. 

Here  we  have  the  faithfulness  which  repels  error 
by  truth,  reminding  the  brethren  of  the  latter,  in 
order  that  they  may  not  be  seduced.  There  it  is  the 
manifestation  of  the  one  who  sits  in  the  temple  of  God, 
and  who  is  destroyed  by  the  brightness  of  the  Lord's 
presence.  Here  all  that  had  to  be  done  was  to  recall 
in  simplicity  the  goodness  of  the  Creator,  and  that 
His  gifts,  received  with  thanksgiving,  were  always 
[Xood,  and  not  to  be  refused :  assuredly  not  that  they 


1  TIMOTHY.  153 

were  to  use  them  for  the  gratification  of  their  lusts, 
but  as  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God,  which  brought 
them  to  us  as  God's  gifts,  and  by  prayer,  which  con- 
nects us  with  God  in  using  them.  They  were  to  be 
received  as  from  Him,  as  the  gift  of  His  hand ;  and 
they  were  sanctified,  as  is  the  case  with  everything 
that  comes  from  Him  and  bears  the  stamp  of  His  will 
and  His  goodness.  Man  had  forfeited  everything  in 
forsaking  God:  what  he  had  he  had  not  now  with 
God,  would  eat  merely  as  an  animal,  and  worse  as 
having  left  God.  The  word  of  God  replaced  the 
relationship  in  grace,  and  prayer  used  it  on  this  foot- 
ing. Here  (although  in  other  circumstances  it  has  gone 
much  farther)  the  monastic  principle,  in  the  heart  and 
in  form,  is  fully  judged;  however  sincere  any  indi- 
vidual may  be  who  i^eeks  to  follow  it  in  order  to 
honour  God.  God  does  not  withdraw  the  gifts  on 
which  man,  so  to  speak,  has  seized  by  his  will ;  but  his 
use  of  them,  instead  of  being  the  gratification  of  his  will 
and  lusts,  is  now  as  received  from  God  by  His  will  in 
thankfulness,  and  owning  Him. 

This  in  fact  the  apostle  shews  in  that  which  follows. 
By  teaching  thus  Timothy  would  be  a  good  servant 
of  Jesus  Christ,  nourished  in  the  truth :  bodily  exer- 
cise profited  little,  but  godliness  much — both  here 
below  and  for  eternity ;  warning  him  again  against  the 
idle  and  profitless  speculation  of  the  human  mind,  to 
the  danger  of  which  he  continually  recurs.  It  is  for 
this  doctrine  of  God — true  and  worthy  of  all  accepta- 
tion— that  the  apostle  laboured  and  suffered  reproach; 
because  he  had  faith  in  the  living  God,  who,  by  His 
providence  and  by  His  supreme  power,*  governed, 
preserved,  and  took  care  of  all  men,  and  especially  of 
those  that  believed.  It  was  this  same  only  God, 
Creator    and    Saviour,   in   whom    he    trusted    while 

*  Compare  Matthew  x,  29. 
IV. 


154  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

labouring  for  the  Lord.  Timothy  was  to  teach  this 
and  enforce  it  with  authority. 

Afterwards,  in  connection  with  this  authoritative 
instruction,  the  apostle  speaks  of  the  person  and  posi- 
tion of  Timothy  himself.  He  was  young,  but  he  was 
to  maintain  his  place,  and  gain  by  his  conduct  that 
weight  which  years  did  not  yet  give  him.  He  was  to 
be  an  example  to  the  believers,  and  occupy  himself, 
till  Paul  came,  with  reading,  exhortation,  and  instruc- 
tion. Moreover,  in  his  case  God  had  given  a  special 
preparation  for  his  work;  he  was  not  to  forget  or 
neglect  it.  A  gift  had  been  imparted  to  him:  God 
had  pointed  him  out  to  this  end  by  prophecy;  and  this 
immediate  testimony  from  God,  to  which  the  opera- 
tion of  His  power  was  united,  had  been  accompanied 
by  the  seal  of  testimony  from  man,  that  is,  that 
of  the  elders  among  the  Christians.  (Compare  Acts 
xiii.  1-3.) 

Thus  all  things  concurred  to  strengthen  Timothy  in 
his  service,  and  in  the  authority  that  he  exercised  at 
that  moment  in  place  of  the  apostle.  He  should 
always  present  the  weight  of  an  irreproachable  con- 
duct, which  would  have  its  influence  over  hearts  and 
consciences ;  but  he  was  inwardly  strengthened  by  the 
consciousness  of  having  been  formally  set  apart  by 
God  for  the  work  ;  the  gift  of  God  had  been  imparted 
to  him,  and  the  sanction  of  all  that  had  weight  in  the 
assembly  had  been  laid,  as  a  seal,  upon  him.  Thus 
strengthened,  he  was  to  devote  himself  to  the  things 
of  the  Lord  in  such  a  manner,  that  his  progress  should 
be  evident  to  all  men — a  demonstration  of  his  commu- 
nion with  the  Lord.  At  the  same  time  he  was  to  take 
heed  to  himself  and  to  the  doctrine,  and  that  con- 
tinually, which  should  be  the  means  of  salvation  both 
to  himself  and  to  those  who  heard  him. 

Having  thus  considered  the  labourer,  the  apostle 
returns  to  the  details  of  the  work,  in  which  Timothy 


1  TIMOTHY.  155 

was  to  display  his  diligence  and  watchful  care.  Every- 
where here  the  subject  is  that  which  is  suitable 
outwardly  to  an  upright  walk,  that  which  is  seemly, 
whether  with  regard  to  the  position  of  individuals,  or 
with  respect  to  the  world.  The  apostle  speaks  of 
elders;  of  widows,  of  that  which  is  becoming  for 
younger  widows ;  of  the  honour  due  to  faithful  elders, 
those  among  them  especially  who  were  teachers  also. 
There  is  nothing  inward,  nothinej  of  the  soul's  rela- 
tionships  to  God ;  but  everything  refers  to  the  public 
testimony  which  suited  the  position  of  men  in  this 
world  before  God.  It  is  important  to  remark  this, 
that  although  our  joy  lies  in  our  heavenly  privileges, 
in  our  communion,  yet  we  can  never  with  impunity 
neglect  ordinary  duties  or  moral  proprieties ;  we  must 
take  knowledge  of  the  practical  dangers  that  would 
beset  us,  owing  to  that  which  the  flesh  is. 

We  may  notice  that  provision  was  made  for  all 
widows  who  had  no  relatives  able  to  maintain  them; 
and  also  that  there  were  elders  who  did  not  teach. 

Against  an  elder,  Timothy  was  not  to  receive  an 
accusation,  unless  there  were  two  or  three  witnesses. 

All  this  bears  testimony  to  the  fact,  that  the  apostle 
gives  these  directions  with  a  view  to  outward  order ; 
for  the  maintenance  of  that  which  is  respectable  in 
the  eyes  of  all,  and  of  respect  for  all  that  ought  to  be 
respected.  At  the  same  time,  Timothy  was  to  be 
careful  not  to  give  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  his 
sanction  to  any  one  who  did  not  offer  moral  guaran- 
tees that,  in  the  position  he  had  taken,  he  deserved 
this  mark  of  respect  from  others.  It  would  be,  on 
Timothy's  part,  to  become  a  partaker  in  the  sins  of 
which  such  a  one  might  be  guilty.  He  was  not  to  lay 
hands  hastily  on  any  one. 

Some  men's  sins  were  open,  and  proclaimed  before- 
hand the  judgment  that  awaited  them.  The  sins  of 
others  were  hidden:  they  would  find  them  again  at 


156  THE  BOOKS  OT  THE  BIBLE. 

the  great  day.  But  this  was  a  reason  why  he  sliould 
do  nothing  in  his  charge  with  precipitation;  he  was 
also  to  keep  himself  pure. 

Timothy's  habitual  temperance  is  here  seen :  weak 
in  body,  the  apostle  recommends  him  to  use  his  liberty 
by  taking  a  little  wine — a  pleasing  instance  of  grace. 
We  have  here  a  proof  of  the  habits  of  this  faithful 
servant.  The  Spirit  shews  us  how  carefully  he  kept 
himself  from  exciting  or  satisfying  his  passions  in  the 
least  thing  (at  the  same  time  that  there  is  perfect 
liberty  to  use  everything  that  is  good  when  there  is 
a  true  reason  for  it),  and  also  the  apostle's  tender 
interest  in  his  fellow-labourer  in  the  gospel.  It  is  a 
little  parenthesis  attached  to  the  expression,  "  be  not  a 
partaker  of  other  men's  sins,"  but  it  has  great  beauty. 
This  affectionate  watchfulness  became  the  apostle ; 
he  desired  holiness  in  his  representative,  but  he  well 
knew  how  to  respect  Timothy,  and  to  maintain  the 
decorum  which  he  had  enjoined,  and  to  exhibit  his 
heartfelt  tenderness.  The  24th  verse  is  connected 
with  the  22nd. 

The  apostle  then  goes  equally  into  detail  with  regard 
to  servants,  that  is,  slaves.  They  were  to  respect  their 
masters,  in  order  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord  should 
not  be  blasphemed. 

When  the  masters  were  believers,  there  was  natu- 
rally more  familiarity,  for  they  were  one  in  Christ, 
and  thence  the  danger  (for  the  flesh  is  crafty)  that  the 
servants  might  not  treat  their  masters  with  the  respect 
due  to  them.  The  apostle  guards  against  this  abuse 
of  christian  love,  and  of  the  just  intimacy  and  confi- 
dence which  ought  to  exist  between  brethren;  but 
which,  on  the  contrary,  was  a  motive  for  the  servant 
to  render  all  honour  to  his  master,  by  treating  him 
with  more  love  and  with  the  same  respect. 

It  was  necessary  that  the  apostle  should  be  firm. 
All  other  instruction — all  refusal  to  receive  the  whole- 


I  TIMOTHY.  157 

some  words  of  christian  doctrine,  the  words  of  Christ 
and  the  doctrine  which  is  according  to  practical  godli- 
ness— proceeded  from  the  iiesh,  from  human  pride  in 
those  who  wished  to  take  advantaoe  of  godliness,  and 
make  it  a  means  of  gain.  From  such  persons  Timothy 
was  to  turn  away.  Godliness  was  indeed  gain,  if  they 
were  contented  with  what  they  had ;  and  the  Chris- 
tian, who  does  not  belong  to  this  world,  if  he  has  food 
and  raiment,  ought  to  be  content  therewith.  He 
brought  nothing  into  this  world,  and  will  certainly 
carry  nothing  out  of  it.  And  the  love  of  money  is  a 
root  of  all  sorts  of  evi].  Seduced  by  this  covetous- 
ness,  some  had  wandered  away  from  christian  faith, 
and  had  pierced  their  hearts  with  sorrow.  The  desire 
to  be  rich  was  the  path  of  snares  and  temptation,  of 
foolish  and  hurtful  lusts.  Timothy  was  to  flee  these 
things,  as  a  man  of  God.  This  is  always  the  thought 
here :  he  was  in  the  world  on  the  part  of  God  ;  he 
represented  Him  for  his  part  in  the  work.  He  was 
therefore  to  follow  after  other  things  than  earthly 
riches — the  character  of  a  man  of  God — righteousness, 
godliness,  faith,  love,  patience,  meekness :  these  were 
the  things  which,  in  man,  presented  God  to  the  world 
and  glorified  Him. 

Meanwhile  there  was  conflict:  he  must  fight  the 
good  fight  of  faith.  If  any  one  represents  God  in  the 
world,  there  must  be  warfare,  because  the  enemy  is 
there.  The  energy  of  faith  was  also  necessary,  in  order 
to  lay  hold  of  eternal  life  in  the  midst  of  the  seduction 
and  difficulties  which  the  "  things  that  are  seen " 
presented.  God,  moreover,  had  called  Timothy  to 
this,  and  he  had  made  a  good  confession  before  many 
witnesses. 

Finally,  the  apostle  charges  him  most  solennily  in 
the  presence  of  God,  the  Source  of  life  for  all  things, 
and  of  Christ  Jesus  who  had  Himself  borne  witness 
without  wavering  before  the  powers  of   this  world, 

VJ. 


168  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

placing  him  under  the  responsibility  of  keeping  the 
commandment  without  spot,  unrebukable  until  the 
appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

It  will  be  noticed  here  that,  as  Paul  had  not  spoken 
in  the  epistle  of  the  privileges  of  the  assembly,  but  of 
its  responsiblity,  so  neither  does  he  here  speak  of  its 
being  caught  up  but  of  its  manifestation,  when  the 
fruits  of  faithfulness  (or  of  failure  in  it)  will  be 
gathered,  and  every  one  be  in  his  place  in  the  visible 
glory  according  to  his  work.  All  are  like  Christ,  all 
enter  into  His  joy;  but  to  sit  at  His  right  and  left 
hand  in  His  kingdom  is  the  portion  of  those  for  whom 
it  is  prepared  by  His  Father,  who  bestoAvs  it  accord- 
ing to  the  work  which  He  has  granted  each  to  perform, 
giving  him  power  to  accomplish  it,  although  in  grace 
He  reckons  it  as  our  own. 

Christ  Himself  is  here  viewed  as  the  faithful  man 
^ver.  13),  whom  God  will  manifest  in  glory  before  all 
creatures  at  the  time  ordained  in  His  counsels. 

All  here  is  responsibility  before  the  world,  or  glory 
as  the  result  of  that  responsibility.  The  supreme, 
invisible  God  is  maintained  in  His  majesty;  and  He 
presents  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  creation  as  its 
centre,  and  repositary  of  His  glory — He  who  dwells  in 
light  inaccessible,  whom,  in  His  divine  essence,  man 
has  not  seen  and  cannot  see. 

This  character  of  the  epistle  is  very  remarkable. 
Nowhere  else  is  the  inaccessible  majesty  of  God,  as 
God,  thus  presented.  His  character  is  often  the  sub- 
ject of  instruction  and  manifestation.  Here  He  alone 
has  essential  immortality.  He  dwells  in  inaccessible 
light.  He  is  ever  invisible  to  the  eyes  of  men.  He 
alone  has  power.  He  has  dominion  over  all  who  reign. 
It  is  God  in  the  abstraction  of  His  essence,  in  the 
proper  immutability  of  His  being,  in  the  rights  of  His 
majesty,  veiled  to  all  men. 

Now  Christ  vvill  be  the  centre  of  the  visible  glory. 


I  TIMOTHY.  159 

Having  part  in  the  divine  glory  before  the  world  was, 
He  disj^lays,  in  the  human  nature  in  which  He  took 
part,  this  glory,  which  is  rendered  visible  in  Him, 
causing  His  own  to  participate  in  His  joy  and  in  all 
that  Pie  has  in  this  character;  but  here,  He  is  mani- 
fested by  God,  and  in  order  that  all  should  acknow- 
ledge Him.*  And  it  is  our  responsibility,  faithfulness 
to  which  will  be  manifested  in  that  day,  which  is  here 
set  before  us.  However  small  may  be  our  share  of 
responsibility,  it  is  of  such  a  God  as  this  that  we  are 
the  representatives  on  earth.  Such  is  the  God  before 
whom  we  are  to  walk,  and  whose  majesty  we  are  to 
respect  immediately  in  our  conduct,  and  also  in  our 
relations  to  all  that  He  has  made. 

The  apostle  concludes  his  exhortation  to  Timothy 
by  engaging  him  to  warn  the  rich  not  to  rest  on  the 
uncertainty  of  riches,  but  on  the  living  God  who  gives 
us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy.  It  is  still  the  supreme 
and  Creator-God  who  is  before  our  eyes.  Moreover, 
they  were  to  be  rich  in  good  works,  and  ready  to  give; 
to  be  rich  in  those  dispositions  which  would  be  of 
value,  which  would  lay  up  a  store  (this  is  but  a 
figure)  against  the  time  to  come;  and  to  lay  hold  of 
that  which  really  is  life.  The  apostle  repeats  his 
urgent  exhortation  to  Timothy  to  keep  that  which 
had  been  committed  to  him,  to  avoid  profane  and  vain 
babblings,  holding  fast  the  sound  and  sanctifying 
truth,  and  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  oppositions  of 
human  science,  which  pretended  to  penetrate  into 
divine  things  as  though  they  were  subject  to  its  know- 
ledge. This  was  the  origin  of  the  fall  of  many  with 
regard  to  christian  faith. 

I  do  not  doubt  that,  in  the  manner  in  which  the 

*  In  Eevelation  xix.  He  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords. 
Here  He  who  is  so  manifests  Him.  So  in  Daniel  vii.  The  Son 
of  man  is  brought  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  but  in  the  SdiXXxa 
chapter  the  Ancient  of  days  comes. 

Vi 


160  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

apostle  here  sets  God  before  us,  he  refers  to  the  foolish 
imaginations  to  which,  under  the  influence  of  the 
enemy,  men  were  abandoning  themselves.  Thus  he 
speaks  of  these  with  relation  to  the  majesty  of  His 
Being  as  the  one  only  God  in  whom  is  all  fulness,  and 
with  regard  to  the  sobriety  of  practical  morality, 
which  keeps  the  heart  under  the  influence  of  that 
truth,  and  apart  from  the  false  and  vain  speculations 
in  which  the  pride  of  man  indulged  itself.  He  main- 
tained souls  by  the  majesty  of  the  only  God  in  the 
practical  sobriety  in  which  peace  dwells. 

Soon  will  the  veil  be  drawn  aside  by  the  appearing 
of  Jesus,  whom  the  Almighty  God  will  display  to  the 
world. 


II  TIMOTHY. 

The  Seeond  Epistle  to  Timothy  has  a  very  peculiar 
character.  It  is  the  expression  of  his  heart,  who  out- 
side Palestine  had,  under  God,  founded  and  built  the 
assembly  of  God  on  earth,  and  it  was  written  in  sight 
of  its  failure,  and  its  departure  from  the  principles  on 
which  he  had  established  it.  God  remained  faithful ; 
His  foundation  was  sure  and  immovable ;  but  the 
work  committed  into  the  hands  of  men  was  already 
enfeebled  and  decaying.  The  consciousness  of  this 
state  of  things,  which  moreover  betrayed  itself  in  the 
way  in  which  the  apostle  himself  was  then  forsaken, 
oppressed  his  heart ;  and  he  pours  it  out  into  the 
bosom  of  his  faithful  Timothy.  By  this  means  the 
Spirit  instructs  us  in  the  solemn  truth,  that  the  church 
has  not  kept  its  first  estate,  and  sets  before  us  the  ways 
of  safety  for  those  who  seek  God,  and  desire  to  please 
Him,  in  such  a  state  of  things  as  this. 

The  apostle  John  gives  the  history  of  the  fall  of  the 
assembly  here  below,  and  of  its  judgment,  and  that  of 
the  world  likewise.  He  also  sets  before  us  a  life 
which,  apart  from  all  questions  of  the  assembly's  con- 
dition, abide^^  ever  the  same,  which  renders  us  capable 
of  enjoying  God,  and  makes  us  resemble  Him  in  His 
nature  and  character. 

As  a  witness  John  was  to  remain  until  the  Lord 
came:  but  Paul  sees  for  himself  the  ruin  of  that  which 
he  had  built  and  watched  over  so  faithfully.  He  had 
spent  himself  for  the  assembly,  accomplishing  that 
which  was  behind  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ ;  and  he 
had  to  see  that  which  he  had  so  much  loved  (which  he 
VOL.  V.  M 


1G2  THE   BOOKS    OF   THE    BIBLE. 

had  cared  for  even  as  a  mother  cherishes  her  nursHnor 
which  he  had  planted  as  God's  plant  on  the  earth) 
grow  feeble  as  to  its  condition  and  testimony  in  the 
world,  depart  from  the  source  of  strength,  and  become 
corrupt.  What  a  painful  experience !  But  it  is  that 
of  the  servant  of  God  in  all  ages  and  in  all  dispensa- 
tions. He  sees  indeed  the  power  of  God  acting  to 
plant  the  testimony  on  earth,  but  he  sees  that  men 
soon  fail  in  it.  The  house  inhabited  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
becomes  dilapidated  and  in  disorder.  Nevertheless 
(and  we  love  to  repeat  it  with  the  apostle)  the  sure 
foundation  of  the  Lord  abiaes  for  ever.  Whatever 
may  be  the  condition  of  the  whole  company,  the 
individual  is  always  to  depart  from  all  iniquity,  and 
to  maintain,  by  himself  if  need  be,  the  true  testimony 
of  the  name  of  the  Lord.  This  can  never  fail  the 
faithful  soul. 

In  view  of  the  mixture  and  confusion  which  began 
to  shew  itself  in  the  assembly,  the  apostle's  comfort 
was  founded  on  these  two  principles,  while  remember- 
ing and  joyfully  availing  himself  of  the  communion 
and  faithfulness  of  some  precious  souls.  He  had  such 
as  Timothy  and  Onesiphorus,  amid  the  afflictions  of 
the  gospel  and  the  sorrow  of  being  forsaken  by  so 
many  who  were  seals  to  his  testimony  before  the 
Lord. 

The  apostle  begins  by  taking  the  ground  of  grace 
and  of  individual  life — which  never  changes  in  essen- 
tial character — outside  church  privileges.  Not  that 
these  had  changed;  but  he  could  no  longer  connect 
them  with  the  general  body  on  earth.  He  calls  him- 
self here  an  apostle  according  to  the  promise  of  eternal 
life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  not  merely  the 
Messiah,  it  is  not  the  head  of  the  body,  it  is  the  promise 
of  life  which  is  in  Him. 

Paul  addresses  his  dearly  beloved  son  Timothy, 
whose  afiection  he  remembers.     He  desired  greatly  to 


II  TIMOTHY.  163 

see  him,  being  mindful  of  his  tears,  shed  probably  at 
the  time  when  Paul  was  made  prisoner,  or  when  he 
was  separated  from  him  on  that  occasion,  or  when  he 
heard  of  it.  It  is  the  confidence  of  a  friend  that  is 
speaking  to  one  whose  heart  he  knew.  We  see  some- 
thing of  this,  but  in  the  perfection  that  was  peculiar 
to  Himself,  in  Jesus  on  the  cross,  in  that  which  Ho 
said  to  John  and  to  His  mother.  A  similar  form 
would  have  been  unsuitable  in  Paul.  The  affections 
of  men  shew  themselves  in  and  by  their  wants,  the 
wants  of  their  hearts ;  those  of  the  Lord  by  His  con- 
descension. With  Him  all  is  in  itself  perfect.  With 
us  it  is  only  by  grace  that  all  is  in  its  right  place. 
But  when  separation  to  service  in  power,  which  knows 
but  that,  is  over,  nature  according  to  God  has  its  right 
place.  In  the  consecrated  meat-offering  that  was  to 
be  made  with  fire,  honey  had  no  place. 

Verse  3.  The  apostle  does  not  speak  any  longer  of 
the  high  character  of  his  work,  but  of  his  personal 
position  rightly  felt  according  to  the  Spirit.  He  had 
served  God,  following  in  the  steps  of  his  forefathers, 
with  a  pure  conscience.  In  every  way  he  was  a  vessel 
made  unto  honour.  For  more  than  one  generation 
his  ancestors  were  distinguished  for  a  good  conscience; 
and  personal  piety,  founded  on  the  truth,  shewed 
itself  in  the  service  of  God.  Paul  was  not  here  ex- 
pressing a  judgment  as  to  the  inward  condition  of 
each  generation:  it  was  their  character.  He  calls  to 
mind  a  similar  fact  with  regard  to  Timoth}-,  in  whose 
case  however  personal  faith  is  referred  to,  known  to 
Paul  himself,  so  that  the  bond,  though  of  personal 
feeling,  v»^as  christian.*  Judaism,  as  to  its  outward 
obligations,  is  totally  absent;  for  the  father  of  Timothy 

*  It  is  indeed  the  basis  of  the  exhortation  of  verse  0.  When 
the  faith  of  so  many  is  giving  way,  he  turns  to  the  personal  eon- 
fid.iire  which  his  heart  had  in  Timothy,  nourished  up  througli 
grace  hy  the  atmosphere  he  had  lived  in.  « 

I. 


164«  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

was  a  Greek,  and  the  marriage  of  his  Jewish  mother 
was  unclean  according  to  the  law,  and  would  have 
rendered  Timothy  also  unclean  and  deprived  him  of 
Jewish  rights ;  and  in  fact  he  had  not  been  circumcised 
when  an  infant.  Paul  did  it,  which  was  also  not 
according  to  the  law,  unless  Timothy  had  become  a 
proselyte.  Both  heathens  and  their  children  were 
excluded,  as  we  read  in  Nohemiah.  Paul's  act  was 
above  the  law.  Here  he  i;dves  no  notice  of  it;  he 
leaves  the  Gentile  father  out  of  sight,  and  speaks  only 
of  the  pc]-sonal  unfeigned  i'aith  of  Timothy's  mother 
r-nd  gi.-iiKlmol.lier,  and  that  of  his  beloved  disciple 
himself. 

The  state  of  the  assembly  was  only  an  additional 
occasion  for  the  exercise  of  his  faith,  and  for  his 
zealous  activity  of  heart  and  courage.  Difficulties  and 
dangers  multiplied  on  every  hand  ;  the  unfaithfulness 
of  Christians  was  added  to  all  the  rest.  But  God  is 
none  the  less  with  His  people.  God  has  not  given  us 
a  spirit  of  fear,  but  of  power  and  of  love  and  of  a 
sound  mind,  so  that  the  Lord's  labourer,  the  man  of 
God,  he  who  kept  himself  in  communion  with  God  in 
order  to  represent  Him  on  the  earth,  was  to  stir  up 
the  gift  that  was  in  him,  and  (as  the  apostle  expresses  it 
with  admirable  and  touching  force  and  clearness)  to 
endure  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel  according  to  the 
power  of  God.  Here,  in  the  case  of  Timothy,  the 
apostle  could  make  mention  of  a  special  gift  of  the 
Spirit,  which  had  been  conferred  upon  Timothy, 
through  the  laying  on  of  hands.  In  the  First  Epistle 
he  had  spoken  of  the  prophecy  which  had  called  him 
or  pointed  him  out  for  the  possession  of  this  gift,  and 
told  us  that  it  had  been  acconipanied  by  the  laying  on 
of  the  hands  of  the  elders ;  here  he  tells  us  that  the 
layino'  on  of  his  own  hands  was  the  means  of  bestowing 
it  upon  him. 

Tl\e  apostle  reminds  him  of  this  proof  of  power  and 


II   TIMOTHY.  165 

reality  in  his  ministry  (and  in  that  of  Paul  himself), 
in  view  of  this  period  when  its  exercise  was  more 
difficult.  When  all  is  prosperous,  and  the  progress  of 
the  gospel  is  remarkable,  so  that  even  the  world  is 
struck  with  it,  the  work  is  found  to  be  easy,  in  spite 
of  difficulties  and  opposition;  and — such  is  man — even 
in  consequence  of  this  opposition  one  is  bold  and  per- 
severing. But  when  others,  Christians  even,  forsake 
the  labourer,  when  evil  and  the  deceptions  of  the 
enemy  come  in,  when  love  has  grown  cold,  and, 
because  one  is  faithful,  prudence  takes  alarm,  and 
desires  a  less  forward  walk,  to  stand  firm  in  circum- 
stances like  these,  to  persevere  in  the  work,  and 
maintain  one's  courage,  is  not  an  easy  thing.  We 
must  possess  Christianity  with  God,  so  that  we  know 
why  we  stand  fast :  we  must  be  ourselves  in  commu- 
nion with  Him,  in  order  to  have  the  strength  necessary 
to  continue  labouring  in  His  name,  and  the  sustainment 
of  His  grace  at  all  times. 

God  then  has  given  us  the  Spirit  of  power  and  of 
love  and  of  a  sound  mind;  the  apostle  had  received 
such  a  position  from  God,  that  he  had  been  able  to 
bestow  on  Timothy  the  gift  needed  for  his  service; 
but  the  state  of  spirit  and  soul  which  could  use  it  was 
part  of  the  inheritance  of  every  Christian  who  leant 
really  on  God.  Nor  was  he  to  be  ashamed  either  of 
the  testimony,  which  was  losing  outwardly  its  onward 
current  in  the  world,  nor  of  Paul  who  was  now  a 
prisoner.  How  precious  to  possess  that  which  is 
eternal,  that  which  is  founded  on  the  power  and  on 
the  work  of  God  Himself!  There  were  indeed  the 
afflictions  of  the  gospel,  but  he  should  take  part  in 
them  and  not  shrink,  enduring  according  to  the  power 
of  God.  God  has  saved  us,  has  callcvl  us  with  a  holy 
calling,  not  according  to  our  works,  as  though  any- 
thing depended  on  man,  but  according  to  His  own 
purpose  and  His  grace  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before 

J, 


166  THE   BOOKS   05"  THli   BIBLE. 

the  world  began.  This  is  the  sure  and  immovable 
foundation,  a  rock  for  our  souls,  ngninst  which  the 
waves  of  difficulty  break  in  vain,  shewing  a  strength 
which  we  could  not  resist  for  a  moment,  but  shewing 
also  their  total  powerlessness  against  the  purpose  and 
work  of  God.  The  efforts  of  the  enemy  only  prove 
that  he  is  without  strength,  in  the  presence  of  that 
which  God  is,  and  of  tliat  which  He  has  done  for  us. 
And  the  apostle  identifies  his  ministry  with  this,  and 
the  sufferings  he  was  undergoing.  But  he  knew  whom 
he  had  believed  and  his  happiness  was  safe  laid  up 
with  Him. 

That  which  we  have  to  seek  is  the  power  of  the 
Spirit,  in  order  that  we  may  realise  this  gift  of  God  by 
faith,  and  that  we  may  abide,  as  to  our  hearts,  as  to 
our  practical  faith,  in  the  sense  of  our  union  with 
Christ,  upon  this  immutable  foundation,  which  is 
nothing  less  than  the  immutability  and  the  glory  of 
God  Himself.  For  His  purpose  has  been  manifested ; 
that  purpose,  which  gave  us  a  place  and  a  portion  in 
Christ  Himself,  was  now  manifested  through  the 
appearance  of  that  very  Christ. 

It  is  no  longer  a  nation  chosen  in  the  world  to 
display  in  it  the  principles  of  the  government  of  God, 
and  of  His  ways  in  righteousness,  in  patience,  in 
kindness,  and  in  power,  on  the  earth  (however  un- 
changeable His  counsels,  however  sure  His  calling),  as 
manifested  in  His  dealings  with  regard  to  the  people 
whom  He  called. 

It  is  a  counsel  of  God,  formed  and  established  in 
Christ  before  the  world  existed,  which  has  its  place  in 
the  ways  of  God,  outside  and  above  the  world,  in 
union  with  the  Person  of  His  Son,  and  in  order  to 
manifest  a  people  united  with  Him  in  glory.  Thus  is 
it  a  orrace  which  was  ffiven  us  in  Him,  before  the  world 
was.  Hidden  in  the  counsels  of  God,  this  purpose  of 
God  was  manifested  with  the  manifestation  of  Him  in 


n  TIMOTHY.  Iu7 

whom  it  had  its  accomplishment.  It  was?  not  merely 
blessings  and  dealings  of  God  with  regard  to  men — it 
was  life,  eternal  life  in  the  soul,  and  incorruptibility 
in  the  body.  Thus  Paul  was  apostle  according  to  the 
promise  of  life. 

While  Christ  Himself  was  alive,  although  life  was 
in  Him,  this  purpose  of  God  was  not  accomplished 
with  respect  to  us.  The  power  of  life,  divine  power 
in  life,  was  to  manifest  itself  in  the  destruction  of  the 
power  of  death  brought  in  by  sin  and  in  which  Satan 
reigned  over  sinners.  Christ  then  in  His  resurrection 
has  annulled  death,  and  by  the  gospel  has  brought  to 
light  both  life  and  incorruptibility,  that  is  to  say,  that 
condition  of  eternal  life  which  puts  the  soul  and  the 
body  beyond  death  and  its  power.  Thus  the  glad  tidings 
of  this  work  were  addressed  to  all  men.  Founded  in 
the  eternal  counsels  of  God,  established  in  the  Person 
of  Christ,  the  work  necessary  for  its  fulfilment  being 
accomplished  by  Him,  possessing  a  character  altogether 
outside  Judaism,  and  the  mere  government  of  God  in 
the  earth,  Paul's  gospel  was  unto  all  men.  Being  the 
manifestation  of  the  eternal  counsels  and  power  of 
God,  having  to  do  with  man  as  lying  under  the  power 
of  death,  and  with  the  accomplishment  of  a  victory 
that  placed  man  beyond  that  power,  and  in  an  entirely 
new  condition  which  depended  on  the  power  of  God 
and  His  purposes,  it  addressed  itself  to  man,  to  all 
men,  Jews  or  Gentiles  without  distinction.  Knowing 
Adam  dead  by  sin  and  Christ  alive  in  the  power  of 
divine  life,  he  announced  this  good  news  to  man — 
deliverance,  and  a  totally  new  state  of  things. 

It  was  to  proclaim  this  gospel  that  the  apostle  had 
been  called  as  a  herald.  It  ^A-as  for  this  he  suffered, 
and,  in  the  sense  of  what  had  caused  it,  was  not 
ashamed  to  suffer.  For  he  knew  whom  he  had  be- 
lieved ;  he  knew  His  power.  He  believed  in  the  gospel 
that   he   pi-eached,   and    therefore   in   the    victorious 

I. 


168  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE    BIBLE. 

power  of  Him  in  whom  he  believed.  He  could  die 
with  regard  to  the  life  that  he  had  received  from  the 
first  Adam,  he  could  be  dishonoured  and  put  to  shame 
in  the  world  and  by  the  world:  life  in  Christ,  the 
power  by  which  Christ  had  won  a  place  for  man  out- 
side the  condition  of  the  first  Adam,  life  as  Christ  now 
possesses  it  was  not  touched  thereby.  Not  that  life 
had  not  been  there  before,  but  death  and  he  that  had 
the  power  of  death  were  not  overcome,  and  all  was 
dark  beyond  the  closing  tomb :  a  lightning  flash  might 
pass  across  the  gloom,  adequate  ground  be  laid  for  the 
just  conclusion  of  the  Pharisee,  but  life  and  incorrup- 
tibility were  not  brought  to  light  but  in  Christ  and 
His  resurrection. 

But  this  is  not  all  which  is  here  expressed.  The 
apostle  does  not  say  "  in  what  I  have  believed,"  but 
"  whom ;"  an  important  difference,  which  places  us  (as 
to  our  confidence)  in  connection  with  the  Person  of 
Christ  Himself.  The  apostle  had  spoken  of  the  truth, 
but  truth  is  allied  to  the  Person  of  Christ.  He  is  the 
truth ;  and  in  Him  truth  has  life,  has  power,  is  linked 
with  the  love  which  applies  it,  which  maintains  it  in 
the  heart  and  the  heart  by  it.  "  I  know,"  says  the 
apostle,  "  luhom  I  have  believed."  He  had  committed 
his  happiness  to  Christ.  In  Him  was  that  life  in 
which  the  apostle  participated ;  in  Him,  the  power 
that  sustained  it,  and  that  preserved  in  heaven  the 
inheritance  of  glory  which  was  his  portion  where  this 
life  was  developed. 

Encouraged  by  this  hope,  and  committing  himself 
to  Jesus,  he  had  endured  all  things  for  Him,  and  for 
those  who  were  His ;  he  had  accepted  all  suffering 
here,  he  was  ready  to  die  daily.  His  happiness,  in  the 
glory  of  that  new  life,  he  had  committed  to  Jesus ;  he 
laboured  meanwhile  in  affliction,  sure  of  finding  again, 
without  being  deceived,  that  which  he  had  committed 
to  the  Lord,  in  the  day  when  he  should  see  Him  and 


11   TIMOTHY.  1G9 

all  his  sorrows  ended.  It  was  in  the  expectation  of 
that  day,  in  order  to  find  it  again  at  that  day,  that  he 
had  committed  to  Him  his  happiness  and  his  joy. 

Moreover,  his  own  career  would  soon  be  finished ; 
his  eyes  therefore  turn  towards  Timothy  for  the  wel- 
fare of  the  assembly  here  below.  He  exhorts  hiui  to 
be  stedfast,  to  hold  fast  the  truth,  as  he  had  tauglit  it 
to  him  (it  was  the  testimony  of  the  Lord),  but  tlie 
truth  in  its  realisation  by  faith  in  Christ,  and  accord- 
ing to  the  power  of  love  that  is  found  in  communion 
with  Him.  It  is  this  which,  as  we  have  seen,  the 
apostle  had  realised.  The  truth,  and  living  grace  in 
Jesus,  in  faith  and  in  love,  which  gave  it  its  power 
and  its  value — these  are,  as  it  were,  the  pivots  of 
strength  and  faithfulness  at  all  times,  and  especially 
for  the  man  of  God,  when  the  assembly  in  general  is 
unfaithful. 

Truth  as  it  was  taught  by  the  apostles  and  expressed 
by  them,  the  manner  in  which  they  presented  the 
truth,  "  the  form  of  sound  words,"  is  the  inspired 
expression  of  that  which  God  was  pleased  to  reveal ; 
and  that,  in  all  the  relationships  in  which  the  truth  is 
linked  together,  in  all  its  different  parts,  according  to 
the  living  nature  and  power  of  God,  who  is  necessarily 
its  centre  as  He  is  its  source.  Nothing  except  revela- 
tion could  be  this  expression.  God  expresses  every- 
thing as  it  is,  and  in  a  living  way  ;  and  by  His  word 
all  exists.  He  is  the  source  and  the  centre  of  all 
things.  All  flow  from  Him — are  in  relation  with  a 
living  Person,  namely  Himself,  Avho  is  their  source, 
from  whom  all  hold  their  existence.  This  existence 
only  subsists  in  connection  with  Him  ;  and  the  relation- 
ship of  all  things  to  Him,  and  between  themselves,  is 
found  in  the  expression  of  His  mind — in  that  measure 
at  least  in  which  He  puts  Himself  in  relation  with 
man  in  all  these  things.  If  evil  comes  in,  as  regards 
will  or  its  consequences  in  judgment,  it  is  because  this 

I. 


170  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

relationship  is  broken;  and  the  relationship  that  is 
broken  is  the  measure  of  the  evil. 

Thus  we  see  the  immense  importance  of  the  word  of 
God.  It  is  the  expression  of  the  relationship  of  all 
things  to  God;  whether  as  regards  their  existence — 
that  is,  creation — or  with  respect  to  His  counsels ;  or 
even  as  to  His  own  nature,  and  the  relationship  of 
man  with  Him,  and  the  communication  of  life  received 
from  Him,  and  the  maintenance  of  His  true  character. 
It  comes  from  heaven  as  did  the  living  Word,  reveals 
what  is  there,  but  adapts  itself,  as  the  living  Word 
did,  to  man  here,  directs  him  where  there  is  faith  here, 
but  leads  him  up  there  where  the  living  Word  is  gone 
as  man. 

The  more  we  consider  the  word,  the  more  we  shall 
see  its  importance.  Analogously  to  Christ  the  living 
Word,  it  has  its  source  on  high,  and  reveals  what  is 
there,  and  is  perfectly  adapted  to  man  down  here, 
giving  a  perfect  rule  according  to  what  is  up  there, 
and,  if  we  are  spiritual,  leading  us  up  there :  our  con- 
versation is  in  heaven.  We  must  distinguish  between 
the  relationship  in  which  man  stood  as  child  of  Adam, 
and  as  child  of  God.  The  law  is  the  perfect  expres- 
sion of  the  requirements  of  the  former,  the  rule  of  life 
to  him ;  it  is  found  to  be  to  death.  Once  we  are  sons 
of  God,  the  life  of  the  Son  of  God  as  man  down  here 
becomes  our  rule  of  life.  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God 
as  dear  children,  and  walk  in  love  as  Christ  hath 
loved  us." 

In  His  nature,  as  the  author  of  all  existence,  and 
the  centre  of  all  authority  and  subsistence  outside 
Himself,  God  is  the  centre  of  all,  and  the  upholder  of 
all.  As  to  His  counsels,  Christ  is  the  centre,  and  here 
man  has  a  peculiar  place ;  wisdom's  good  pleasure  was 
eternally  in  Him,  and  all  is  to  be  under  His  feet.  In 
order  that  the  nature  and  the  counsels  of  God  should 
not  be  separated  (which  indeed  is  impossible,  but  what 


11   TIMOTHY.  171 

was  in  His  counsels  in  order  that  it  miglit  not  be), 
God  became  man.  Christ  is  God  made  manifest  in 
flesh,  the  Word  made  flesh.  Thus  the  divine  nature, 
the  expression  of  that  nature,  is  found  in  that  which 
is  the  object  of  His  counsels,  that  which  forms  their 
centre.  Thus  Christ  is  the  truth — is  the  centre  of  all 
existing  relationships :  all  have  reference  to  Him. 
We  are,  through  Him,  for  Him,  or  we  are  against 
Him:  all  subsist  by  Him.  If  we  are  judged,  it  is  as 
His  enemies.  He  is  the  life  (spiritually)  of  all  that 
enjoy  the  communication  of  the  divine  nature ;  even 
as  He  sustains  all  that  exists.  His  manifestation 
brings  to  light  the  true  position  of  all  things.  Thus 
He  is  the  truth.  All  that  He  says,  being  the  words  of 
God,  are  spirit  and  life ;  quickening,  acting  according 
to  grace,  judging  with  regard  to  the  responsibility  of 
His  creatures. 

But  there  is  yet  more  than  this.  He  is  the  revela- 
tion of  love.  God  is  love,  and  in  Jesus  love  is  in 
action  and  is  known  by  the  heart  that  knows  ffim. 
The  heart  that  knows  Him  lives  in  love,  and  knows 
love  in  God.  But  He  is  also  the  object  in  whom  God 
is  revealed  to  us,  and  has  become  the  object  of  entire 
reliance.  Faith  is  born  by  His  manifestation.  It 
existed  indeed  through  partial  revelation  of  this  same 
object,  by  means  of -which  God  made  Himself  known; 
but  these  were  only  partial  anticipations  of  that 
which  has  been  fully  accomplished  in  the  manifesta- 
tion of  Christ,  of  the  Son  of  God.  The  object  is  the 
same:  formerly,  the  subject  of  promise  and  prophecy; 
now,  the  personal  revelation  of  all  tliafc  God  is,  the 
image  of  the  invisible  God,  the  One  in  whom  the 
Fat! i IT  also  is  known. 

Thus  faith  and  love  have  their  birth,  their  source,  in 
the  object  which  by  grace  has  created  them  in  the 
soul:  the  object  in  which  it  has  learnt  what  love  is, 
and  with  regard  to  which  faith  is  exercised.     By  Him 

I. 


1/2  THE  fiOOKS  OP  THE  SiBLE. 

wc  believe  in  God.  No  one  has  ever  seen  God :  the 
only-begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father, 
He  has  revealed  Him. 

Truth  is  tluis  revealed,  for  Jesus  is  the  Truth,  the 
expression  of  that  which  God  is,  so  as  to  put  all  thin 
perfectly  in  their  place,  in  their  true  relationships  w  th 
God  and  with  each  other.  Faith  and  love  find  the 
occasion  of  their  existence  in  the  revelation  of  the  Sor 
of  God,  of  God  as  a  Saviour  in  Christ. 

But  there  is  another  aspect  of  the  accomplishment 
of  the  work  and  of  the  counsels  of  God,  which  we 
have  not  yet  spoken  of :  that  is,  the  communication 
of  the  truth  and  of  the  knowledge  of  God.  This  is 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  which  the  truth  and 
the  life  are  united,  for  we  are  begotten  by  the  word. 
It  io  divine  energy  in  the  Deity,  acting  in  all  that 
connects  God  with  the  creature  or  the  creature  w4th 
God.  Acting  in  divine  perfection  as  God,  in  union 
with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  the  Holy  Ghost  reveals 
the  counsels  of  which  we  have  spoken,  and  makes 
them  effectual  in  the  heart,  according  to  the  purpose 
of  the  Father,  and  by  the  revelation  of  the  Person  and 
work  of  the  Son.  I  have  said,  divine  energy,  not 
as  a  theological  definition — which  is  not  my  object 
here — but  as  a  practical  truth,  for,  while  attributing 
all  that  regards  the  creature  to  the  Father  (except 
judgment,  which  is  entirely  committed  to  the  Son, 
because  He  is  the  Son  of  man)  and  to  the  Son, 
the  immediate  action  in  creation  and  on  the 
creature,  wherever  it  takes  place,  is  attributed  to  the 
Spirit. 

The  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the 
waters  when  this  earth  was  formed ;  by  His  Spirit  the 
heavens  Avcre  garnished ;  we  are  born  of  the  Spirit ; 
scaled  with  the  Spirit ;  holy  men  of  God  spake  by  the 
Spirit ;  gifts  were  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  distri- 
buting to  whom   He  would ;  He  bears  witness  with 


II  TIMOTHY.  173 

our  spirits ;  He  groans  in  us ;  we  pray  by  the  Holy 

Ghost,  if  tliat  grace  is  bestowed  upon  us.  The  Lord 
Himself,  born  as  man  in  this  world,  was  conceived  by 
the  Holy  Ghost;  by  the  Spirit  of  God  He  cast  out 
devils.  The  Spirit  bears  witness  of  all  things,  that  is 
to  say,  of  all  truth  in  the  word  : — the  love  of  the 
Father,  the  nature  and  the  glory  of  God  Himself,  His 
character,  the  Person  and  glory  and  love  of  the  Son, 
His  work,  form  the  substance  of  His  testimony,  with 
all  that  relates  to  man  in  connection  with  these 
truths.  The  Spirit's  witness  to  these  things  is  the 
word,  and — produced  by  means  of  men — takes  the 
shape  of  the  truth  formally  set  forth  by  revelation. 
Christ  is  the  truth,  as  we  have  seen,  the  centre  of  all 
the  ways  of  God  ;  but  what  we  are  now  speaking-  of  is 
the  divine  connnunieation  of  this  truth  ;  and  in  this 
way  it  can  be  said  iluit  the  u'ovd  is  the  tiuth.*  But, 
although  communicated  by  means  of  men,  so  that  it 
takes  a  form  adapted  to  man,  its  source  is  divine ;  and 
He  who  has  communicated  it  is  divine  :  lie  of  Avhom 
it  is  said,  "he  shall  not  speak  of  himself"  (that  is  to 
say,  from  Himself — apart  from  the  Father  and  the  Son). 
Consequently  the  revelation  af  the  truth  has  all  the 
depth,  the  universality  of  relationship,  the  inseparable 
connection  with  God  (without  which  it  would  not  be 
truth,  for  all  that  is  separate  from  God  is  falsehood), 
which  truth  itself  possesses — ^necessarily  possesses — 
because  it  is  the  expression  of  the  relationships  which 
all  things  have  to  God  in  Christ;  that  is  to  say,  of 
God's  own  thoughts,  of  which  all  these  relationships 
are  but  the  expression.  It  is  true  that  this  revelation 
also  judges  all  that  is  not  in  accordance  with  these 
relationships,  and  judges  according  to  the  value  of 
the  relationship  that  is  broken  with  regard  to  God 
Himself,  and  the  place  which  this  relationship  has  in 

*  Hence  also  it  is  said  (1  John  v.),  "  the  Spirit  is  truth.'* 
I. 


174  THE   BOOKS    OF   THE    BIBLE. 

His  mind.*  When  this  word  is  received  through  the 
quickening  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  heart,  it  is 
efficacious;  there  is  faith,  the  soul  is  in  real  living 
practical  relationship  with  God  according  to  that 
which  is  expressed  in  the  revelation  it  has  received. 
The  truth — which  speaks  of  the  love  of  God,  of  holi- 
ness, of  cleansing  from  all  sin,  of  eternal  life,  of  the 
relationship  of  children — being  received  into  the  heart, 
places  us  in  real  present  living  relationship  with  God, 
according  to  the  force  of  all  these  truths,  as  God  con- 
ceives them  and  as  He  has  revealed  them  to  the  soul. 
Thus  they  are  vital  and  efficacious  by  the  Holy  Ghost; 
and  the  consciousness  of  this  revelation  of  the  truth,  and 
of  the  truth  of  that  which  is  revealed,  and  of  really 
hearing  the  voice  of  God  in  His  word,  is  faith. 

But  all  this  is  true  in  the  revealed  word  before  I 
believe  in  it,  and  in  order  that  I  may  believe  in  it — 
may  believe  in  the  truth — although  the  Holy  Ghost 
alone  makes  us  hear  the  voice  of  God  in  it,  and  so 
produces  faith.  And  that  which  is  revealed  in  it  is 
the  divine  expression  of  that  which  belongs  to  the 
infinite  on  the  one  side,  and  is  expressed  in  the  ffiiite 
on  the  other ;  of  that  which  has  the  profoundness  of 
the  nature  of  God,  from  whom  all  proceeds,  with 
whom  and  with  whose  rights  all  is  in  relationship, 
but  which  is  developed — since  it  is  outside  God — in 
creation  and  in  the  finite. 

The  union  of  God  and  man  in  the  Person  of  Christ 

*  This  is  true  as  regards  p^nilt.  But  God,  being  perfectly  re- 
vealed, and  that  in  grace  as  the  Father  and  the  Son,  our  appre- 
hension of  the  ruin  in  which  we  are,  goes  deeper  far  than  the 
sense  of  guilt  as  the  breach  of  previously  existing  relationships. 
We  were  guilty  according  to  our  place  as  men.  But  we  were 
dOto.,  without  God  in  the  world,  and  (when  God  is  known)  this 
is  awful.  The  beginning  of  Eomans  treats  tlie  question  of  guilt; 
Ephesians  ii.,  the  state  we  were  in  ;  John  v.  24  briefly  resumes 
grace  as  to  both.  The  relationship  now  is  an  entirely  new  one, 
founded  on  puri)ose,  redemption,  and  our  being  children  of  God. 


II  TIMOTHY.  175 

is  the  centre — we  may  say  (now  that  we  know  it)  the 
necessary  centre  of  all  this,  as  we  liave  seen.  And  thi^! 
inspired  word  is  its  expression  according  to  the  per- 
fection of  God,  and  (we  bless  God  for  it,  as  the 
Saviour  is  the  grand  subject  ot*  the  scriptures,  "for," 
said  He,  "  they  testify  of  me  ")  in  human  forms. 

But  this  word,  being  divine,  being  hispired,  is  the 
divine  expression  of  the  divine  nature,  persons,  and 
counsels.  Nothing  that  is  not  inspired  in  this  way  can 
have  this  place — -for  none  but  God  can  perfectly  ex- 
press or  reveal  what  God  is — hence  infinite  in  what 
Hows  in  it ;  because  it  is  the  expression  of,  and  con- 
nected with,  the  depths  of  the  divine  nature,  and  so  in 
its  connection  infinite,  though  expressed  in  a  finite 
sense,  and  so  far  finite  in  expression,  and  thus  adapted 
to  finite  man.  Nothing  else  is  the  divine  expression 
of  the  divine  mind  and  truth,  or  is  in  direct  union 
with  the  unmixed  source,  even  though  it  sprang  from 
the  same  source.  The  immediate  connection  is  broken; 
that  which  is  said  is  no  longer  divine.  It  may  contain 
many  truths,  but  the  living  derivation,  the  infinite, 
the  union  with  God,  the  immediate  and  uninterrupted 
derivation  from  God,  are  wanting.  The  infinite  is  no 
longer  there.  The  tree  grows  from  its  root,  and  forms 
one  whole ;  the  energy  of  life  pervades  it — the  sap 
which  flows  from  the  root.  We  may  consider  one 
part,  as  God  has  set  it  there,  as  a  part  of  the  tree ;  we 
may  see  the  importance  of  the  trunk ;  the  beauty  of 
the  development  in  its  smallest  details,  the  stateliness 
of  the  whole,  in  which  the  vital  energy  combines 
liberty  and  harmon}^  of  form.  We  see  that  it  is  a 
whole,  united  in  one  by  the  same  life  that  produced  it. 
The  leaves,  the  flowers,  the  fruit,  all  tell  us  of  the 
warmth  of  that  divine  Sun  which  developed  them,  of 
the  gushing  inexhaustible  stream  which  nourishes 
them.  But  we  cannot  separate  one  part,  be  it  ever 
so    beautiful,   from    the    tree,   without    depriving    it 

I. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   B[BLE. 

of  the  energy  of  life  and  its  relationship  with  the 
whole. 

When  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  produces  the 
truth,  it  develops  itself  in  union  with  its  source, 
whether  in  revelation  or  even  in  the  life  and  in  the 
service  of  the  individual ;  although  in  the  two  latter 
cases  there  is  a  mixture  of  other  elements,  owing  to 
the  weakness  of  the  man.  Wlien  a  man's  mind  ap- 
prehends the  truth,  and  he  seeks  to  give  it  a  form,  he 
does  it  according  to  the  capacity  of  man,  which  is  not 
its  source ;  the  truth  as  he  expresses  it,  even  were  it 
pure,  is  separated  in  him  from  its  source  and  its 
totality ;  but,  besides  this,  the  shape  that  a  man  gives 
it  always  bears  the  stamp  of  the  man's  weakness.  He 
has  only  apprehended  it  partially,  and  he  only  pro- 
duces a  part  of  it.  Accordingly  it  is  no  longer  the 
truth.  Moreover,  when  he  separates  it  from  the  whole 
circle  of  truth  in  which  God  has  placed  it,  he  must 
necessarily  clothe  it  in  a  new  form,  in  a  garment 
which  proceeds  from  man:  at  once  error  mixes  with 
it.  Thus  it  is  no  longer  a  vital  part  of  the  whole,  it  is 
partial,  and  thereby  not  the  truth ;  and  it  is  in  fact 
mixed  with  error.     That  is  theology. 

In  the  truth  there  is,  when  God  expresses  it,  love, 
holiness,  authority,  as  they  are  in  Him  the  expression 
of  His  own  relationships  with  man,  and  of  the  glory 
of  His  being.  When  man  gives  it  a  shape,  all  this  is 
wanting  and  cannot  be  in  it,  because  it  is  riiian  who 
shapes  it.  It  is  no  longer  God  speaking.  God  gives 
it  a  perfect  form ;  that  is  to  say,  He  expresses  the 
truth  in  words  of  certainty.  If  man  gives  it  a  form, 
it  is  no  longer  the  truth  given  of  God.  Therefore  to 
liold  fast  the  truth  in  the  form  God  has  given  it,  the 
rype,  the  shape  in  which  He  has  expressed  it,  is  of  all 
importance:  we  are  in  relationsliip  with  God  in  it 
.ipcording  to  the  certainty  of  that  which  He  has 
revealed.     This  is  the  sure  I'csource  of  the  soul,  when 


II   TIMOTHY.  177 

the  assembly  has  lost  its  power  and  its  energy,  and  is 
no  longer  a  sustaiiinient  to  feeble  souls ;  and  that 
which  bears  its  name  no  longer  answers  to  the  cha- 
racter given  it,  in  the  First  Epistle,  "the  pillar  and 
support  of  the  truth."* 

The  truth,  clear  and  positive  truth,  given  as  a 
revelation  from  God  in  the  words — clothed  with  His 
authority — by  which  He  has  given  the  truth  a  form, 
communicating  the  facts  and  the  divine  thoughts 
which  are  necessary  for  the  salvation  of  men,  and  for 
their  participation  in  divine  life — this  it  is  which  we 
are  to  hold  fast. 

We  are  only  sure  of  the  truth  when  we  retain  the 
very  language  of  God  which  contains  it.  By  grace  I 
may  speak  of  the  truth  in  all  liberty,  I  may  seek  to 
explain  it,  to  communicate  it,  to  urge  it  on  the  con- 
science, according  to  the  measure  of  light  and  spiritual 
power  bestowed  upon  me ;  I  may  endeavour  to  demon- 
strate its  beauty,  and  the  connection  between  its 
various  parts.  Every  Christian,  and  especially  those 
who  have  a  gift  from  God  for  the  purpose,  may  do 
this.  But  the  truth  which  I  explain  and  propose  is 
the  truth  as  God  has  given  it,  and  in  His  own  words 
in  the  revelation  He  has  made.  I  hold  fast  the  form 
of  sound  words,  which  I  have  received  from  a  divine 
source  and  authority :  it  gives  me  certainty  in  the 
truth. 

And  here  it  is  important  to  remark  the  assembly's 
part  when  faithful.  She  receives,  she  maintains  the 
truth  in  her  own  faith  ;  she  guards  it,  she  is  faithful 
to  it,  she  is  subject  to  it,  as  a  truth,  a  revelation, 
which   comes   from   God    Himself.     She   is   not   the 

*  The  doctrines  or  dogmas  of  scripture  have  their  importance 
and  their  adaptation  to  the  simplest  soul  in  this,  that  they  are 
facts,  and  so  objects  of  faith,  not  notions.  Thus  Christ  is  God, 
Christ  is  man,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  Person,  and  the  like,  are 
facts  for  faith  realised  in  the  simplest  soul. 

yOL.  Y.  }.  ^ 


178  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

source  of  the  truth.  As  an  assembly  she  does  not 
propagate  it — does  not  teach  it.  She  saj's  "I  be- 
lieve," not  "Believe."  This  last  is  the  function  of 
ministry,  in  which  man  is  always  individually  in 
relationship  with  God  by  means  of  a  gift  which  he 
holds  from  God,  and  for  the  exercise  of  which  he  is 
responsible  to  God.  This  is  all-important.  Those 
who  possess  these  gifts  are  members  of  the  body. 
The  assembly  exercises  her  discipline  with  regard  to 
all  that  is  of  the  flesh  in  them,  in  the  exercise  or 
apparent  exercise  of  a  gift,  as  in  all  else.  She  pre- 
serves her  own  purity  without  respect  of  persons  as  to 
their  outward  appearance,  being  guided  therein  by  the 
word  (for  this  is  her  responsibility) ;  but  she  does  not 
teach,  she  does  not  preach. 

The  word  goes  before  the  assembly,  for  she  has 
been  gathered  together  by  the  word.  The  apostles,  a 
Paul,  those  who  were  scattered  abroad  by  the  persecu- 
tion, a  thousand  faithful  souls,  have  proclaimed  the 
word,  and  thus  the  assembly  has  been  gathered  out. 
It  has  been  said  that  the  assembly  was  before  the 
scriptures.  As  regards  the  written  contents  of  the 
New  Testament,  this  is  true ;  but  the  preached  word 
was  before  the  assembly.  The  assembly  is  its  fruit, 
but  is  never  its  source.  The  edification  even  of  the 
assembly,  when  it  has  been  gathered  together,  comes 
direct  from  God,  through  the  gifts  which  He  has 
bestowed;  the  Holy  Ghost  distributing  to  each  according 
to  His  will. 

The  scriptures  are  the  means  which  God  has  used  to 
preserve  the  truth,  to  give  us  certainty  in  it;  seeing  the 
fallibility  of  the  instruments  by  whom  it  is  propagated, 
since  revelation  has  ceased. 

If  at  the  beginning  He  filled  certain  persons  with 
His  Spirit  in  such  a  way  that  error  was  excluded 
from  their  preaching,  if  besides  this  He  then  gave 
revelations  in  which  there  was  nothing  but  His  owr> 


II   TIMOTHY.  179 

word,  yet  as  a  general  rule  preaching  is  the  fruit  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  heart,  and  its  spirituality  is 
only  in  measure,  and  there  is  the  possibility  of  error. 
Here,  whatever  may  be  the  power  of  the  Spirit's  woi*k, 
v.'e  have  to  judge.  (See  Acts  xvii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  29.) 
Farther  on  we  shall  see  that  in  forming  this  judgment, 
it  is  the  scriptures  which  assure  those  who  are  led 
of  God. 

We  have  thus  in  the  ways  of  God  respecting  this 
subject  three  things  closely  united,  yet  different : 
ministry,  the  assembly,  and  the  word  of  God,  that  is, 
the  written  word ;  when  it  is  not  written,  it  belongs  to 
the  order  of  ministry. 

Ministry — as  regards  the  word,  for  this  is  not  the 
only  service — preaches  to  the  world,  and  teaches  or 
exhorts  the  members  of  the  assembly. 

The  assembly  enjoys  communion  with  God,  is  fed, 
and  grows  by  means  of  that  with  which  its  different 
members  supply  it.  It  preserves,  and,  in  its  confession, 
bears  witness  to  the  truth.  It  maintains  holiness, 
and,  by  the  grace  and  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
enjoys  mutual  communion;  and,  in  love,  cares  for  the 
temporal  need  of  all  its  members. 

The  written  word  is  the  rule  which  God  has  given, 
containing  all  that  He  has  revealed.  It  is  complete. 
(Col.  i.  25.)  It  can,  because  it  is  the  truth,  be  the 
means  of  communicating  the  truth  to  a  soul :  the  Holy 
Ghost  can  use  it  as  a  means ;  but  at  all  events  it  is  the 
perfect  rule,  the  authoritative  communication  of  the 
will  and  the  mind  of  God,  for  the  assembly. 

The  assembly  is  subject,  is  to  be  faithful,  to  have  no 
will.  It  does  not  reveal,  it  maintains  by  its  confes- 
sion, it  watches  over  that  which  it  has,  it  does  not 
communicate ;  it  has  received  and  is  faithfully  to  keep. 
The  man  directs,  that  is,  Christ:  the  woman  obeys, 
and  is  faithful  to  her  husband's  thoughts — at  least 
ought  to  be  so  (1  Cor.  ii.) :  this  is  the  assembly.     The 

I, 


180  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

oracles  of  God  are  committed  to  her.     She  does  not 
give  them  ;  she  obeys  them. 

The  minister  is  bound  individually  to  the  same 
faithfulness.  This  we  understand ;  and  in  our  epistle 
we  have  especially  to  do  with  this  individual  respon- 
sibility. That  which  the  assembly  is  in  this  respect  is 
leveaied  in  the  first  epistle.  (Chap.  iii.  15.)  Here  it 
IS  the  individual  who  is  to  hold  fast  this  form  of  sound 
words  which  he  has  received  from  a  divine  source,  for 
such  the  apostle  was,  in  his  apostolic  function,  as  an 
instrument.  Neither  Timothy  nor  the  assembly  could 
frame  such  a  form  of  sound  words ;  their  part  was  to 
hold  it  fast,  having  received  it. 

And  here,  as  we  have  said,  however  unfaithful  the 
assembly  may  be,  the  individual  is  bound  to  be  faithful 
a^A  always  to  be  so. 

This  therefore  is  what  we  have  to  do :  the  truth 
which  is  set  before  us  is  the  inspired  word  we  are 
(and  I  am)  to  hold  fast,  in  the  form  in  which  it  is 
presented  to  us.  I  am  to  hold  it  fast,  not  merely  as  a 
proposition,  but  in  union  with  the  Head,  in  faith  and 
love,'  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  Strength  to  fulfil 
comes  from  above.  For  here  another  point  is  brought 
before  us.  The  Holy  Ghost  has  been  given  indeed  to 
the  assembly;  but  a  period  of  unfaithfulness  is  here 
contemplated.  (Ver.  15.)  He  has  been  given  to  the 
..ian  of  God,  to  each  Christian,  and  to  each  servant 
with  reference  to  the  service  appointed  him.  By  the 
Holy  Ghost  we  are  to  keep  the  good  thing  that  has 
been  committed  to  us.  In  days  like  those,  this  was 
the  duty  of  the  man  of  God  ;  and  in  our  day,  things 
have  gone  much  farther.  Possessing  the  promise  of 
life,  and  forsaken  by  the  mass  of  Christians,  he  is  to 
hold  fast  the  truth  in  the  words  in  which  it  has  been 
expressed  by  divine  authority  (this  is  what  we  have 
in  the  word,  and  not  merely  doctrine :  people  may  say 
that  they  have  the  doctrine  of  Peter  ..nd  Paul,  but 


II   TIMOTHY.  181 

they  cannot  say  that  they  have  their  words,  the  form 
of  the  truth  as  Paul  and  Peter  gave  it,  elsewhere  than 
in  their  writings)  ;  and  he  is  to  hold  it  fast  in  faith 
and  love,  which  are  in  Christ.  Moreover  he  is  to  keep, 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  substance  of  the 
truth,  that  which  has  been  given  us  as  a  treasure — the 
deposit  of  divine  truth  and  riches,  which  has  been 
given  us  as  our  portion  here  below. 

In  verses  15-18  we  find  that  the  mass  had  quite 
turned  away  from  the  apostle,  so  that  the  affection 
and  faithfalness  of  one  became  very  precious  to  him. 
What  a  change  already  since  the  beginning  of  the 
gospel !  Compare  the  Thessalonians,  the  Epliesians : 
they  were  the  same  people  (for  Ephesus  was  the 
capital  of  what  is  here  called  Asia)  among  whom  Paul 
had  preached,  so  that  all  Asia  had  heard  the  gospel ; 
and  see  how  they  had  all  now  forsaken  him  ! 

We  must  not  however  suppose  that  they  had  all 
abandoned  the  profession  of  Christianity;  but  their 
faith  had  become  weak,  and  they  did  not  like  to 
identify  themselves  with  a  man  who  was  in  disgrace 
with  the  authorities,  who  was  despised  and  persecuted, 
a  prisoner — a  man  whose  energy  brought  reproach 
and  personal  difficulties  upon  himself.  They  with- 
drew from  him,  and  left  him  to  answer  alone  for 
himself.  Sad  result  of  spiritual  decline !  But  what 
sentiments  should  animate  the  man  of  God  at  such  a 
moment  ?  He  must  be  strong  in  the  grace  that  is  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Christ  was  not  changed,  whatever  the 
case  might  be  with  men ;  and  he  who  suffered  from 
their  desertion  could,  without  being  discouraged,  ex- 
hort his  beloved  Timothy  to  persevere  steadily  in  the 
word.  Nor  do  we  find  anywhere  the  man  of  God 
called  to  more  full  and  unhesitating  courage  than  in 
this  epistle,  which  is  the  testimony  of  the  failure  and 
ruin  of  the  assembly. 

The  truth  was  the  especial  treasure  committed  to 
I. 


182  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   lUBLE. 

him ;  and  he  was  not  only  to  keep  it,  as  we  have  seen, 
but  to  take  care  that  it  was  propagated  and  com- 
municated to  others  after  him,  and  perhaps  still 
farther.  That  which  he  had  heard  from  Paul  in  the 
presence  of  many  witnesses  (who  co\ild  confirm  Timo- 
thy in  his  convictions  respecting  the  truth,  and  certify 
others  that  it  was  indeed  what  he  had  received  from 
Paul)  he  was  to  communicate  to  faithful  men,  who 
were  capable  of  teaching  others.  This  was  the  ordi- 
nary means.  It  is  not  the  Spirit  in  the  assembly,  so 
that  the  assembly  was  an  authority ;  it  is  no  longer 
revelation.  Timothy,  well  instructed  in  the  doctrine 
preached  by  the  apostle,  and  confirmed  in  his  views 
hj  many  other  witnesses  who  had  likewise  learned  of 
Paul,  so  that  it  was  common  to  all  as  known  received 
truth,  was  to  take  care  that  it  should  be  commu- 
nicated to  other  faithful  men.  Neither  had  this  any- 
thing to  do  with  giving  them  authority,  with  consecrat- 
ing them,  as  has  been  said.  It  is  the  communication 
to  them  of  the  truth  which  he  had  received  from  Paul. 

This  procedure  shuts  out  the  idea  of  the  assembly 
as  the  propagator  of  the  truth.  It  was  the  business 
of  the  faithful  son  in  the  faith  of  the  apostle,  of  the 
ministry. 

Timothy  himself  was  not  an  authority  either.  He 
was  an  instrument  for  the  communication  of  the  truth, 
and  was  to  enable  others  to  be  so  likewise:  a  very 
different  thing  from  being  the  rule  of  the  truth. 
That  which  he  had  heard — and  the  other  witnesses 
served  as  a  guarantee  against  the  introduction  of  any- 
thing false,  or  even  of  his  own  opinions,  if  he  had  been 
inclined  to  entertain  them — that  he  was  to  communicate. 

It  is  thus  that,  in  the  ordinary  sense,  ministry  is 
continued ;  care  is  taken  by  competent  persons  for  the 
communication,  not  of  authority,  but  of  the  truth,  to 
other  faithful  persons.  God  can  raise  up  any  one 
whom  He  chooses,  and  give  him  the  energy  of  His 


II  TIMOTHY.  18.1 

Spirit ;  and  where  this  is  found,  there  is  power  and  an 
effectual  work:  but  the  passage  we  are  considering 
supposes  the  careful  communication  of  the  truth  to 
persons  fit  for  this  work.  Both  principles  equally 
shut  out  the  idea  of  the  communication  of  official 
authority,  and  the  idea  of  the  assembly  being  either 
an  authority  with  regard  to  the  faith  or  the  pro- 
pagator of  the  truth.  If  God  raised  up  whom  He 
pleased,  in  whatever  way  He  pleased,  the  means  which 
He  employed  (when  there  was  no  special  operation  on 
His  part)  was  to  cause  the  truth  to  be  communicated 
to  individuals  capable  of  propagating  it.  This  is.  a 
widely  different  thing  from  bestowing  authority,  or 
the  exclusive  or  official  right  to  preach.  And  it  was 
known  revealed  truth  he  was  to  communicate,  that 
had  the  direct  authority  of  revelation — what  Paul's 
writings  can  alone  furnish  us  now,  or  of  course  other 
inspired  writings. 

The  apostle  goes  on  to  shew  the  qualities  that 
Timothy  ought  to  possess,  in  order  to  carry  on  the 
work  amid  the  circumstances  that  surrounded  him, 
and  in  which  the  assembly  itself  was  found.  He 
must  know  how  to  endure  hardships,  vexations,  diffi- 
culties, sorrows,  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ ;  he 
must  beware  of  entangling  himself  with  the  affairs  of 
life.  A  soldier,  when  in  service,  could  not  do  so,  but 
must  be  free  from  every  hindrance,  that  he  may  please 
the  one  who  had  called  him  to  arms.  So  also,  as  in 
the  lists,  he  must  fight  according  to  rule,  according  to 
that  which  became  the  Lord's  servant  and  was  con- 
formable to  the  Lord's  will.  And  he  must  labour 
first,  that  he  may  have  a  righb  to  enjoy  the  fruit  of 
his  labour.  These  are  the  practical  conditions  of 
divine  service  for  whosoever  engages  in  it.  He  must 
endure,  be  unentangled  in  the  world,  fight  lawfully, 
and  labour  on  first*  before  he  looked  for  fruits. 
-  Bead  "labouring  first." 
II. 


184  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

The  apostle  returns  to  the  elementary  but  funda- 
mental principles  of  the  truth,  and  to  the  sufferings  of 
ministry,  which  moreover  were  in  nowise  a  hindrance 
to  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  extending 
the  sphere  in  which  the  truth  was  propagated,  and 
the  word  of  God  made  known.  Nothing  could  re- 
strain the  power  of  that  instrument  of  the  work  of 
God. 

The  truth  of  the  gospel  (dogma  is  not  the  subject 
here)  was  divided  into  two  parts,  of  which  the  apostle 
speaks  also  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans :  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  promises ;  and  the  power  of  God  in 
resurrection.  "  Jesus  Christ,  of  the  seed  of  David ; 
raised  from  the  dead."  These,  in  fact,  are,  as  it  were, 
the  two  pivots  of  the  truth :  God  faithful  to  His  pro- 
mises (shewn  especially  in  connection  with  the  Jews) ; 
and  God  mighty  to  produce  an  entirely  new  thing  by 
His  creative  and  quickening  power,  as  manifested  in 
the  resurrection,  which  also  put  the  seal  of  God  upon 
the  Person  and  the  work  of  Christ. 

The  afflictions  found  in  the  path  of  service  in  the 
gospel  assume  here  a  high  and  peculiar  character  in 
the  mind  of  the  suffering  and  blessed  apostle.  It  is 
participation  in  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and,  in  the 
case  of  Paul,  to  a  very  remarkable  degree.  The  ex- 
pressions he  uses  are  such  as  might  be  employed  in 
speaking  of  Christ  Himself  as  regards  His  love.  As  to 
the  propitiation,  naturally  no  other  could  take  part  in 
that :  but  in  devotedness,  and  in  suffering  for  love  and 
for  righteousness,  we  have  the  privilege  of  suffering 
with  Him.  And  here  what  part  had  the  apostle  with 
these  sufferings  ?  "I  endure,"  He  says,  " all  things  for 
the  elect's  sakes."  This  is  truly  what  the  Lord  did. 
The  apostle  trod  closely  on  His  footsteps,  and  with  the 
same  purpose  of  love — "that  they  might  obtain  the 
salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  with  eternal  glory." 
Here  of  course  the  apostle  has  to  add,  "  which  is  in 


n  TIMOTHY.  185 

Christ  Jesus ;"  still,  the  language  is  marvellous  in  the 
lips  of  any  other  person  than  the  Lord  Himself.  For 
it  is  what  Christ  did. 

Observe  also  here,  that  the  greater  the  sufferings 
are  (how  small  are  ours  on  this  account !)  as  the  fruits 
of  this  love  for  the  objects  of  the  counsels  of  God,  the 
greater  is  our  privilege,  the  more  do  we  participate  in 
that  which  was  the  glory  of  Christ  here  below. 

This  thought  sustains  the  soul  in  affliction  of  this 
kind :  one  has  the  same  object  as  the  Lord  Himself. 
The  energy  of  love  in  preaching  the  gospel  addresses 
itself  to  the  whole  world.  Perseverance,  in  the  midst 
of  affliction  and  difficulties  and  desertion,  is  sustained 
by  the  feeling  that  one  is  labouring  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  God's  counsels.  One  endures  all  things 
for  the  elect,  for  God's  elect,  in  order  that  they  may 
have  salvation  and  eternal  glory.  This  feeling  was 
in  Paul's  heart.  He  knew  the  love  of  God,  and  he 
sought — at  the  cost  of  whatever  suffering  it  might  be 
in  the  tumultuous  sea  of  this  world — that  they  who 
were  the  objects  of  the  same  love  should  enjoy  the 
salvation  and  the  glory  which  God  bestowed.  This 
was  a  faithful  saying,  that  is,  that  which  he  had  just 
declared  ;  for  if  we  should  die  with  Christ,  we  should 
also  live  with  Him  ;  if  we  should  suffer,  we  should 
also  reign  with  Him.  If  any  denied  Him,  He  would 
also  deny  them ;  the  consequences  of  such  an  act 
remained  in  all  their  force,  they  were  linked  with  the 
immutability  of  His  nature  and  His  being,  and  were 
displayed  in  the  authority  of  His  judgment ;  He  could 
not  deny  Himself  because  others  were  unfaithful. 

Timothy  was  strengthened  to  maintain  these  great 
principles,  which  belonged  to  the  moral  nature  of  the 
Lord,  and  not  allow  himself  to  be  drawn  aside  by 
speculations  which  only  subverted  souls  and  corrupted 
the  faith.  He  was  to  shew  himself  a  workman  ap- 
proved of  God,  one  who,  being  filled  with  the  truth, 

II. 


18(3  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

and  knowing  how  to  unfold  it  in  its  various  parts, 
according  to  the  mind  and  purpose  of  God,  would  not 
be  ashamed  of  his  work  in  the  presence  of  those  who 
might  judge  it.  The  profane  and  useless  thoughts  of 
human  speculation  he  was  to  avoid.  They  could  not 
but  go  on  to  produce  ungodliness.  They  might  have 
a  great  show  of  depth  and  height  (as  in  the  case  of  the 
assertion,  that  the  resurrection  had  already  taken 
place,  which  in  a  fleshly  way  went  beyond  all  bounds 
with  regard  to  our  position  in  Christ) — these  doc- 
trines which  eat  like  a  canker.  Those  of  whom  the 
apostle  spoke  had  already  overthrown  the  faith  of 
some,  that  is,  their  conviction  as  to  the  truth  and  pro- 
fession of  the  truth.  But  here  the  soul  of  the  apostle 
found  its  refuge  in  that  which  is  immutable,  be  the 
failure  of  the  assembly  or  man's  unfaithfulness  ever 
so  great.  The  sure  foundation  of  God  remained.  It 
had  this  seal :  the  Lord  knew  them  that  were  His. 
This  was  God's  side,  which  nothing  could  touch.* 
The  other  was  man's:  he  who  professed  the  name  of 
the  Lord  was  to  depart  from  all  iniquity.  This  was 
man's  responsibility,  but  it  characterised  the  work  and 
fruit  of  grace  wherever  that  work  was  genuine  and 
the  true  fruit  borne. 

But  here  we  have  distinct  evidence  of  the  state 
of  things  which  this  epistle  contemplates ;  namely, 
that  the  outward  asseiijbly  had  taken  quite  a  new 
character,  very  different  from  that  which  it  had  at 
the  beginning ;  and  that  now  the  individual  was 
thrown  upon  his  personal  faithfulness  as  a  resource, 
and  as  a  means  of  escape  from  the  general  corruption. 
The  sure  foundation  of  God  remained — His  divine 
Knowledge   of    those  that   are   His;   and  individual 

*  This,  while  a  profound  source  of  comfort,  is  a  proof  of 
decline ;  for  men  ought  to  know  who  are  the  Lord's  too.  It  is 
not,  "  The  Lord  added  daily  to  the  assembly  such  as  should  be 
saved." 


II   TIMOTHY.  187 

separation  from  all  evil;  but  the  outward  assembly 
assumes,  in  the  eyes  of  the  apostle,  the  character  of  a 
great  house.  All  kinds  of  things  are  found  in  it, 
vessels  of  honour  and  vessels  of  dishonour,  precious 
and  vile.  The  man  of  God  was  to  purge  hmiself  from 
the  latter,  to  stand  apart  and  not  defile  himself  with 
that  which  was  false  and  corrupt.  This  is  a  principle 
of  all-importance,  which  the  Lord  has  given  us  in  His 
word.  He  allowed  the  evil  to  display  itself  in  apos- 
tolic times,  so  far  as  to  give  occasion  for  the  establish- 
ment of  this  principle  by  revelation,  as  that  which 
was  to  govern  the  Christian.  The  unity  of  the  as- 
sembly is  so  precious,  it  has  such  authority  over  the 
heart  of  man,  that  there  was  danger,  when  failure  had 
set  in,  lest  the  desire  for  outward  unity  should  induce 
even  the  faithful  to  accept  evil  and  walk  in  f ellow^sl:  ip 
with  it,  rather  than  break  this  unity.  The  principle 
therefore  of  individual  faithfulness,  of  individual 
responsibility  to  God,  is  established,  and  set  above  all 
other  considerations ;  for  it  has  to  do  with  the  nature 
of  God  Himself,  and  His  own  authority  over  the  con- 
science of  the  individual.  God  knoweth  them  that 
are  His :  here  is  the  ground  of  confidence.  I  do  not 
say  who  are.  And  let  those  that  name  the  name  of 
Jesus  separate  themselves  from  all  evil.  Here  I  get 
what  I  can  recognise.  To  maintain  in  practice  the 
possibility  of  union  between  that  name  and  evil  is  to 
blaspheme  it. 

The  whole  of  that  which  calls  itself  christian  is 
looked  at  here  as  a  great  house.  The  Christian  is  of 
it  outwardly,  in  spite  of  himself ;  for  he  calls  himself 
a  Christian,  and  the  great  house  is  all  that  calls  itself 
christian.  But  he  cleanses  himself  personally  from 
every  vessel  which  is  not  to  the  Lord's  honour.  This 
is  the  rule  of  christian  faithfulness ;  and  thus  per- 
sonally cleansed  from  fellowship  with  evil,  he  shall  be 
a  vessel  unto  honour  fit  for  the  Master's  use.     What- 


188  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

soever  is  contrary  to  the  honour  of  Christ,  in  those 
who  bear  His  name,  is  that  from  which  he  is  to 
separate  himself. 

Discipline  for  individual  faults  is  not  the  subject 
here,  nor  the  restoration  of  souls  in  an  assembly  that 
has  in  part  lost  its  spirituality ;  but  a  line  of  conduct 
for  the  individual  Christian  in  respect  of  that  which 
dishonours  the  Lord  in  any  way. 

These  instructions  are  solemn  and  important.  That 
which  makes  them  needful  is  sorrowful  in  its  nature  ; 
but  it  all  helps  to  exhibit  the  faithfulness  and  grace 
of  God.  The  direction  is  plain,  and  precious  when  we 
find  ourselves  in  similar  circumstances.  Individual 
responsibility  can  never  cease. 

When  the  Holy  Ghost  acts  energetically  and  triumphs 
over  the  power  of  the  enemy,  these  individuals  who 
are  gathered  together  in  the  assembly  develop  their 
life  in  it  according  to  God  and  His  presence,  and  the 
spiritual  power  which  exists  in  the  whole  body  acts 
upon  the  conscience,  if  needed,  and  guides  the  heart  of 
the  believer :  so  that  the  individual  and  the  assembly 
flow  on  together  under  the  same  influence.  The 
Holy  Ghost,  who  is  present  in  the  assembly,  sustains 
the  individual  at  the  height  of  God's  own  presence. 
Strangers  even  are  obliged  to  confess  that  God  is 
there.  Love  and  holiness  reign.  When  the  effect  of 
this  power  is  no  longer  found  in  the  assembly,  and  by 
degrees  Christendom  no  longer  answers  to  the  cha- 
racter of  the  assembly  as  God  formed  it,  yet  the 
responsibility  of  the  individual  to  God  has  not  ceased 
on  that  account.  It  can  never  either  cease  or  diminish, 
for  the  authority  and  the  rights  of  God  Himself  over 
the  soul  are  at  stake. 

But  in  a  case  like  this,  that  which  calls  itself  Chris- 
tian is  no  longer  a  guide,  and  the  individual  is  bound 
to  conform  himself  to  the  will  of  God,  by  the  power  of 
the  Spirit,  according  to  the  light  he  has  from  God. 


II  TIMOTHY.  189 

God  may  gather  the  faithful  together.  It  is  grace 
on  His  part ;  it  is  also  His  mind.  But  individual 
responsibility  remains — responsibility  not  to  break  the 
unity,  feeble  as  it  may  be,  wherever  it  is  possible 
according  to  God :  but  responsibility  to  preserve  the 
divine  character  of  Christianity  in  our  walk,  and  to 
respond  to  the  revelation  we  have  received  of  His 
nature  and  of  His  will. 

By  purging  himself  from  all  those  who  are  unto 
dishonour,  the  servant  of  God  shall  be  unto  honour, 
sanctified  and  prepared  for  every  good  work.  For 
this  separation  from  evil  is  not  merely  negative ;  it  is 
the  effect  of  the  realisation  of  the  word  of  God  in  the 
heart.  I  then  understand  what  the  holiness  of  God  is, 
His  rights  over  my  heart,  the  incompatibility  of  His 
nature  with  evil.  I  feel  that  I  dwell  in  Him  and  He 
in  me ;  that  Christ  must  be  honoured  at  all  costs ;  that 
that  which  is  like  Him  alone  honours  Him ;  that  His 
nature  and  His  rights  over  me  are  the  only  rule  of  my 
life.  That  which  thus  separates  me  unto  Him,  and 
according  to  what  He  is,  separates  me  thereby  from 
evil.  One  cannot  walk  with  those  who  dishonour 
Him,  and,  at  the  same  time,  honour  Him  in  one's  own 
walk. 

That  which  follows  shews  the  sanctifying  character 
of  this  exhortation.  The  apostle  says,  "  Flee  also 
youthful  lusts ;  but  seek  righteousness,  faith,  charity, 
peace,  with  them  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure 
heart."  This  is  to  breathe  the  pure  atmosphere  which 
is  found  in  the  Lord's  presence ;  in  which  the  soul 
enjoys  health  and  strength.  All  that  corrupts  is  far 
away.  And,  further,  we  find,  what  is  so  often  contested, 
that  we  can  and  are  to  distinguish  those  who  call  on 
the  name  of  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart.  We  do  not 
decide  who  are  the  Lord's :  He  knows  them.  But  we 
are  to  associate  ourselves  with  those  who  manifest 
themselves,  such  as  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure 


190  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

heart.  Those  I  am  to  know,  own,  and  walk  with. 
The  statement  that  I  cannot  know  who  these  are,  is  in 
defiance  of  an  express  rule  of  scripture,  applicable  to  a 
state  where,  through  corruption,  many  who  may 
possess  Christianity  are  not  so  manifested. 

As  we  find  throughout  these  epistles,  the  apostle 
exhorts  to  avoid  vain  questions,  in  which  there  is  no 
divine  instruction.  They  only  produce  barren  discus- 
sions and  strife ;  and  the  servant  of  the  Lord  is  not  to 
strive.  He  comes,  on  God's  part,  to  bring  the  truth  in 
peace  and  love.  He  is  to  maintain  this  character  in 
the  expectation  that  God,  in  His  grace,  will  give 
repentance  to  those  who  oppose  (for  it  is  the  heart 
and  conscience  that  are  in  question),  that  they  may 
acknowledge  the  truth. 

The  truth  of  God  is  not  a  thing  of  human  under- 
standing; it  is  the  revelation  of  that  which  God  is, 
and  of  His  counsels.  Now  we  cannot  have  to  do  with 
God  without  the  heart  and  conscience  being  engaged. 
It  is  not  the  revelation  to  us  of  God,  if  this  is  not  the 
case.  Christians  are  brought  into  connection  with  the 
divine  Being  Himself,  and  in  acts  which  ought  to  have 
the  most  powerful  effect  on  the  heart  and  conscience ; 
if  they  do  not,  both  the  one  and  the  other  are  in  a 
bad  state  and  hardened.  The  Spirit  of  God,  no  doubt, 
acts  on  the  understanding  and  by  it ;  but  the  truth 
lodged  in  it  is  addressed  to  the  conscience  and  to  the 
heart,  and  if  these  are  not  reached  by  the  truth, 
nothing  is  done.  Nor  indeed  is  anything  really 
understood  till  they  are.  For  in  divine  truth  things  are 
understood  before  words,  as  "  born  again."  (Compare 
John  viii.  43.)  On  the  other  hand,  by  means  of  error, 
by  occupying  the  nund  with  the  error,  Satan  shuts  God 
out  of  it,  and  leads  the  whole  man  captive,  so  that  he 
does  the  will  of  that  enemy  to  the  soul. 

Now  this  evil  influence  would  too  surely  be  exer- 
cised.    The  power  of  the  holy  truth  of  God  would  Ix: 


II  TIMOTHY.  191 

lost  in  the  assembly  and  among  Christians ;  and  those 
who  bore  this  name  would  become  (under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  enemy)  the  expression  of  the  will  and 
passions  of  man,  while  still  maintaining  the  forms  of 
godliness;  a  peculiar  condition,  which  betrays  in  a 
remarkable  way  the  influence  and  the  work  of  the 
enemy.  This  was  to  be  expected ;  and  they  would  be 
perilous  days. 

The  open  opposition  of  the  enemy  is  doubtless  a 
painful  thing,  but  he  deceives  souls  by  the  specious 
appearances  of  which  the  apostle  here  speaks — that 
which  bears  the  name  of  Christianity,  that  which 
before  men  has  the  character  of  godliness,  and  which 
the  flesh  will  accept  as  such  much  more  readily  than 
that  which,  because  it  is  true  godliness,  is  contrary  to 
the  flesh.  Nevertheless  all  the  worst  features  of  the 
human  heart  are  linked  with  the  name  of  Chris- 
tianity. What  then  does  the  testimony  become  ?  It 
is,  so  to  speak,  an  individual  prophecy,  clothed  in 
sackcloth. 

There  is  activity  in  this  perilous  evil  of  the  last 
days :  these  deceivers  would  creep  into  houses,  and 
gain  the  ear  of  feeble  souls,  who,  governed  by  their 
passions,  are  ever  learning  yet  never  learn.  Teachers 
like  these  resist  the  truth,  they  are  men  of  corrupt 
minds,  reprobate  as  to  the  faith ;  but  they  shall  pro- 
ceed no  farther.  God  will  make  manifest  their  folly 
and  their  falseness  by  means  even  of  their  own 
pretensions,  which  they  can  no  longer  maintain. 

The  man  of  G.od  is  to  turn  away  from  such  men, 
while  they  are  yet  deceiving  and  exercising  their 
influence.  God  will  expose  them  in  due  time.  All 
will  then  judge  them,  and  condemn  their  pretensions ; 
the  spiritual  man  does  so  while  they  are  deceiving  the 
others  in  security. 

We  may  remark  here  that  which  evidences  the  sad 
and  dangerous  character  of   the  days  of   which   the 

III. 


192  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

apostle  is  speaking.  If  we  compare  the  lists  of  sins 
and  abominations,  which  Paul  gives  at  the  beginning 
of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  as  characterising  heathen 
life  and  the  moral  deo^radation  of  men  durinsf  those 
times  of  darkness  and  demon-worship,  with  the  cata- 
logue of  sins  that  characterise  those  who  have  the 
form  of  godliness,  we  shall  find  that  it  is  nearly  the 
same,  and  morally  quite  the  same ;  only  that  some  of 
the  open  sins  which  mark  the  man  who  has  no  out- 
ward restraint  are  wanting  here,  the  form  of  godliness 
precluding  them  and  taking  their  place. 

It  is  a  solemn  thought,  that  the  same  degradation 
which  existed  among  heathens  is  reproduced  under 
Christianity,  covering  itself  with  that  name,  and  even 
assuming  the  form  of  godliness.  But  in  fact  it  is  the 
same  nature,  the  same  passions,  the  same  power  of  the 
enemy,  with  but  the  addition  of  hypocrisy.  It  is  only 
the  departure  from,  and  corruption  of,  the  true  doc- 
trine of  the  Mediator ;  as  Paganism  was  that  of  the 
true  doctrine  of  the  only  God. 

Different  directions  are  given  for  the  conduct  of  the 
man  of  God,  with  regard  to  the  vessels  unto  dis- 
honour, and  the  men  who  act  in  the  spirit  of  the  last 
days.  From  the  former  he  is  to  purge  himself:  he  is 
to  think  of  faithfulness  in  his  own  walk ;  and  by 
cleansing  himself  from  those  vessels  which  do  not 
honour  the  name  of  Christ,  which  (although  in  the 
great  house)  do  not  bear  the  stamp  of  a  pure  desire 
for  His  glory,  he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto  honour,  fit  for 
the  Master's  use.  By  keeping  apart  from  such  vessels, 
he  is  sheltered  from  the  influences  that  impoverish 
and  degrade  the  testimony  he  has  to  render  to  Christ ; 
he  is  pure  from  that  which  deteriorates  and  falsifies 
that  testimony. 

In  the  other  case — that  of  the  men  who  gave  the 
character  of  "  perilous  "  to  the  last  days,  the  corrupt 
opposers  of  the  truth,  bearing  the  name  of  godliness — = 


II  TIMOTHY.  193 

with  regard  to  these  his  testimony  is  to  be  distinct 
and  plain.  Here  he  is  not  merely  to  cleanse  himself ; 
he  testifies  his  moral  abhorrence,  his  loathing,  of  those 
who,  being  the  instruments  of  the  enemy,  bear  this 
character  of  formal  piety.  He  turns  away  from  them, 
and  leaves  them  to  the  judgment  of  God. 

Timothy  had  the  walk  and  spirit  of  the  apostle  for 
his  pattern.  He  had  been  much  with  him ;  he  had 
seen,  in  times  of  trial,  his  patience  and  his  sufferings, 
the  persecutions  he  had  endured  ;  but  the  Lord  had 
delivered  him  out  of  all.  It  would  be  the  same  with 
all  who  sought  to  live  accordmg  to  godliness,  which 
is  in  Christ  Jesus:*  they  should  endure  persecution. 
Evil  men  and  seducers  would  wax  worse  and  worse, 
deceiving  others,  and  being,  at  the  same  time,  deceived 
themselves. 

The  character  of  the  last  days  is  strongly  marked 
here,  and  gives  no  hope  for  Christianity  as  a  whole. 
The  progress  of  evil  is  described  as  developing  itself 
in  two  distinct  characters,  to  which  we  have  already 
alluded.  The  great  house — Christendom  as  a  whole — 
in  which  there  are  vessels  to  dishonour,  from  which 
we  are  to  purge  ourselves,  and  the  positive  activity  of 
corruption,  and  of  the  instruments  who  propagate  it 
and  resist  the  truth,  although  they  who  corrupt  them- 
selves assume  the  form  of  godliness.  Under  this  last 
aspect  the  wicked  will  go  on  growing  worse  and 
worse;  nevertheless  the  hand  of  God  in  power  will 
demonstrate  their  folly. 

We  may  distinguish,  in  this  second  category,  the 
general  character  of  pride  and  corruptness  in  all  who 
submit  to  this  malignant  influence,  and  those  who 
themselves  labour  to  extend  it.  Of  the  latter  of  this 
class,  the  apostle  says,  are  they  who  creep  into  houses. 

*  We  get  the  difference  of  the  state  of  things  in  this  case  also. 
It  is  not  all  Christians  who  will  be  persecuted,  but  all  who  will 
live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus. 

VOL.   V.  III.  O 


194  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

The  character  is  that  of  the  mass  who  are  seduced; 
but  there  are  seducers.  These  resist  the  truth,  and 
their  folly  shall  be  manifested.  It  may  be  that  God 
may  demonstrate  it,  wherever  there  is  faithfulness,  in 
order  to  save  His  own  from  it ;  but,  in  general,  their 
evil  work  will  go  on,  and  the  seduction  grow  worse 
and  worse,  until  the  end,  when  God  will  make  mani- 
fest the  folly  of  those  who  have  departed  from  Him, 
and  given  then:iselves  up  to  the  errors  of  the  human 
mind,  and  laboured  to  maintain  and  propagate  them. 

The  apostle  then  tells  Timothy  of  the  safeguard  on 
which  he  may  rely  to  preserve  himself,  through  grace, 
stedfast  in  the  truth,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 
salvation  of  God.  Security  rests  upon  the  certainty 
of  the  immediate  origin  of  the  doctrine  which  he  had 
received  ;  and  upon  the  scriptures  received,  as  authentic 
and  inspired  documents,  which  announced  the  will, 
the  acts,  the  counsels,  and  even  the  nature  of  God. 
We  abide  in  that  which  we  have  learnt,  because  we 
know  from  whom  we  have  learnt  it.  The  principle  is 
simple  and  very  important.  We  advance  in  divine 
knowledge,  but  (so  far  as  we  are  taught  of  God)  we 
never  give  up,  for  new  opinions,  that  which  we  have 
learnt  from  an  immediately  divine  source,  knowing 
that  it  is  so.  By  a  source  immediately  divine,  I 
mean,  a  person  to  whom  God  Himself  has  communi- 
cated the  truth  by  revelation  with  authority  to  pro- 
mulgate it.  In  this  case  I  receive  what  he  says 
(when  I  know  him  to  be  such)  as  a  divine  communi- 
cation. It  is  true  that  the  scriptures  alwaj^s  remain 
as  a  counter  proof,  but  when — as  in  the  case  of  the 
apostles — a  man  is  proved  to  be  the  minister  of  God, 
gifted  by  Him  for  the  purpose  of  communicating  His 
mind,  I  receive  what  he  says  in  the  exercise  of  his  min- 
istry as  coming  from  God.  It  is  not  the  assembly  that 
is  in  view  in  this  case.  It  cannot  be  the  vessel  of  divine 
truth  directly  communicated   to  it  from  God.     Indi- 


II  TIMOTHY.  195 

viduals  are  always  tliat.  We  have  seen  that  its  part 
is  to  confess  the  truth  when  communicated,  not  to 
communicate  it.  But  we  here  speak  of  a  person  to 
whom  and  by  whom  God  immediately  reveals  the 
truth — such  as  the  apostles  and  prophets.  God  has 
communicated  to  them,  as  elect  vessels  for  this  purpose, 
that  which  He  desired  to  communicate  to  the  world, 
and  they  have  so  communicated.  None  could  do  it  who 
had  not  received  it  himself  from  God  as  a  revelation : 
if  this  is  not  the  case,  the  man  himself  has  some  part 
in  it.  I  could  not  then  say,  "  I  know  of  whom  I  have 
learnt  it,"  as  knowing  that  it  came  immediately  from 
God  and  by  divine  revelation. 

When  God  had  something  to  communicate  to  the 
assembly  itself,  He  did  it  by  means  of  such  persons  as 
Paul,  Peter,  &c.  The  assembly  is  composed  of  indivi- 
duals ;  it  cannot  receive  a  divine  revelation  in  a  mass, 
as  the  assembly,  except  it  be  by  hearing  in  common 
a  divine  voice,  which  is  not  God's  way.  The  Hoh^ 
Ghost  distributes  to  every  one,  severally  as  He  will. 
There  are  prophets,  and  the  Spirit  says,  "  Separate 
unto  me  Barnabas  and  Paul."  Christ  has  given  gifts 
to  men,  some  apostles,  some  prophets,  &c.  Accordingly 
the  apostle  says  here,  not  "  where,"  but  "  of  luhom  " 
thou  hast  learnt  these  things. 

Here,  then,  is  the  first  foundation  of  certainty, 
strength  and  assurance  for  the  man  of  God  with 
regard  to  divine  truth.  It  has  not  been  revealed  to 
him  immediately.  It  was  Paul  and  other  instruments, 
whom  God  chose  for  this  special  favour.  But  he 
knows  of  whom  he  has  learnt  it ;  even  of  one  (here  it 
was  Paul)  to  whom  it  had  been  directly  made  known 
by  inspiration,  and  who  has  authority  from  God  to 
impart ;  so  that  they  who  learn  of  him  know  that  it  is 
divine  truth,  exactly  as  God  communicated  it  (compare 
1  Cor.  ii.),  and  in  the  form  in  which  He  was  pleased  to 
communicate  it. 

HI. 


196  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

There  is  another  means,  which  has  a  character  of  its 
own ;  the  scriptures,  which  are  as  such  the  foundation 
of  faith  to  the  man  of  God,  and  which  direct  him  in 
all  his  ways.  The  Lord  Jesus  Himself  said  (speaking 
of  Moses),  "  If  ye  believe  not  his  writings,  how  shall 
3-e  believe  my  words  f  His  words  were  the  words  of 
God ;  He  does  not  contrast  the  authority  of  what  He 
said  with  that  of  the  written  word,  but  the  means  of 
communication.  God  has  been  pleased  to  employ  that 
means  as  a  permanent  authority.  Peter  says  "  No  pro- 
phecy of  scripture  .,..'"  There  have  been  many 
prophecies  which  are  not  written ;  they  had  the  au- 
thority of  God  for  those  persons  to  whom  they  were 
addressed.  For  the  word  speaks  more  than  once  of 
prophets — who  must  therefore  have  prophesied — with- 
out communicating  their  prophecies  to  us.  They  were 
instruments  for  making  known  the  will  of  God,  at  the 
moment,  in  order  to  guide  His  people  in  their  actual 
circumstances,  without  its  being  a  revelation  necessary 
to  the  people  of  God  at  all  times,  or  applicable  either 
to  the  world,  to  Israel,  or  to  the  assembly  in  all  ages. 
It  was  not  a  general  and  permanent  revelation  from 
God  for  the  instruction  of  the  soul  at  all  periods. 

A  multitude  of  things,  spoken  by  Jesus  Himself, 
are  not  reproduced  in  the  scriptures  ;  so  that  it  is  not 
onl}'  a  question  of  from  whom  we  have  heard  a  truth, 
but  also  of  the  character  of  that  which  has  been  com- 
municated. When  it  is  for  the  permanent  profit  of 
the  people  or  the  assembly  of  God,  God  caused  it  to 
be  written  in  the  scriptures,  and  it  abides  for  the 
instruction  and  the  food  of  His  children  in  all  ages. 

The  expression,  "knowing  of  whom  thou  hast 
learned  them,"  establishes  us  on  personal  apostolic 
authority,  viewing  the  apostles  as  teachers  authorised 
by  the  Lord.  John  says,  "  They  who  are  of  God  hear 
us."  It  is  not  necessary  that  scripture  should  be 
written  by  apostles;  God  has  made  known  therein  His 


II  TIMOTHY.  197 

will  and  the  truth,  and  has  committed  the  sacred 
deposit  to  His  people  for  the  profit  of  all  ages.  The 
scriptures  have  authority  as  such.  And  it  is  not  that 
which,  as  a  spiritual  man,  one  may  receive  from 
them,  that  by  which  we  have  profited  (as  to  applica- 
tion to  one's  soul  that  is  indeed  all) ;  but  it  is  the 
entire  holy  scripture,  such  as  we  possess  it,  which  has 
this  authority. 

From  his  childhood  Timothy  had  read  the  holy 
scriptures;  and  these  writings,  such  as  he  had  read 
them  as  a  child,  guarded  him — as  divine  authority — 
against  error,  and  furnished  him  with  the  divine  truths 
needful  for  his  instruction.  To  use  them  aright,  faith 
in  Christ  was  requisite :  but  that  which  he  used  was 
the  scripture  known  from  his  youth.  The  important 
thing  to  observe  here  is  that  the  apostle  is  speaking  of 
the  scriptures,  as  they  are  in  themselves,  such  as  a 
child  reads  them ;  not  even  of  that  which  a  converted 
or  spiritual  man  finds  in  them,  but  simply  the  holy 
writings  themselves. 

It  may  perhaps  be  said,  that  Timothy  as  a  child 

possessed  only  the  Old  Testament.     Agreed  :  but  what 

we  have  here  is  the  character  of  all  that  has  a  right 

to  be  called  holy  scripture.     As  Peter  says  as  to  the 

writings  of  Paul,  these,  "  They  wrest,  as  they  do  also 

THE  OTHER  SCRIPTURES."*     From  the  moment  that  we 

acknowledoe  the  New  Testament  as  having  a  title  to 

^.  .  . 

that  name,  its  writings  possess  the  same  character  and 

have  the  same  authority  as  the  Old  Testament. 

The  scriptures  are  the  permanent  expression  of  the 

mind  and  will  of  God  furnished  as  such  with  His 

authority.      They   are    His    expiession   of    His   own 

thoughts.     They  edify,  they  are  profitable :  but  this  is 

not  all — they  are  inspired.     It  is  not  only  that  the 

*  This  too  is  the  real  sense  of  Eomans  xvi.  26,  where  we 
should  read,  "by  prophetic  writings." 

UI. 


198  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

truth  is  given  in  them  by  inspiration.  It  is  not  thia 
which  is  here  stated.     They  are  inspired. 

The  greater  part  of  the  New  Testament  is  com- 
prised in  the  first  source  of  authority,  "  knowing  of 
whom  thou  hast  learnt  them,"  namely,  all  that  which 
the  apostles  have  written  ;  because,  in  learning  the 
truth  therein,  I  can  say  I  know  from  whom  I  have 
learnt  it — I  have  learnt  it  from  Paul,  or  from  John,  or 
from  Peter,  &c.  But,  besides  this,  being  received  as 
scriptures,  they  have  the  authority  of  divine  writings, 
to  which,  as  a  form  of  communication,  God  lias  given 
the  preference  above  the  spoken  word.  They  are  the 
permanent  rule  by  which  every  spoken  word  is  to  be 
judged. 

In  a  word  the  scriptures  are  inspired.  They  teach, 
they  judge  the  heart,  they  correct,  they  discipline 
according  to  righteousness,  in  order  that  the  man  of 
God  may  be  perfect,  that  is,  thoroughly  instructed  in 
the  will  of  God,  his  mind  formed  after  that  will  and 
completely  furnished  for  every  good  work.  The  power 
for  performing  these  comes  from  the  actings  of  the 
Spirit.  Safeguard  from  error,  wisdom  unto  salvation, 
flow  from  the  scriptures ;  they  are  capable  of  supplying 
them.  We  are  to  abide  in  that  which  we  have  learnt 
from  the  apostles,  and  to  be  governed  by  the  writings 
of  God. 

Does  this  perfect  and  supreme  authority  of  the 
scriptures  set  aside  ministry  ?  By  no  means ;  it  is  the 
foundation  of  the  ministry  of  the  word.  One  is  a 
minister  of  the  word ;  one  proclaims  the  word — resting 
on  the  written  word — which  is  authority  for  all,  and 
the  warrant  for  all  that  a  minister  says,  and  impart- 
ing to  his  words  the  authority  of  God  over  the  con- 
science of  those  whom  he  teaches  or  exhorts.  There 
is,  in  addition  to  this,  the  activity  of  love  in  the  heart 
of  him  who  exercises  this  ministry  (if  it  be  real), 
and  the  powerful  action  of  the  Spirit,  if  he  be  filled 


11  TIMOTHY.  199 

with  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  that  which  the  word  says 
silences  all  opposition  in  the  heart  or  mind  of  the 
believer. 

It  was  thus  that  the  Lord  answered  Satan,  and 
Satan  himself  was  reduced  to  silence. 

He  who  does  not  submit  to  the  words  of  God 
thereby  shews  himself  to  be  a  rebel  against  God 
The  rule  given  of  God  is  in  the  scriptures ;  the  enei: 
getic  action  of  His  Spirit  is  in  ministry,  although  God 
can  equally  act  upon  the  heart  immediately  by  the 
w^ord  itself.  Nevertheless  ministry,  since  the  revela- 
tions of  God  were  completed,  could  not  be  an  authority, 
or  there  would  be  two  authorities;  and  if  two,  one 
must  be  a  needless  repetition  of  the  other,  or  else,  if 
they  differed,  no  authority  at  all. 

If  the  revelations  were  not  complete,  no  doubt  there 
might  be  more.  The  Old  Testament  left  untold  the 
history  of  Christ,  the  mission  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
formation  of  the  assembly;  because  these  facts  not 
being  yet  accomplished  could  not  be  the  subject  of  its 
historical  and  doctrinal  instructions,  and  the  assembly 
was  not  even  the  subject  of  prophecy.  But  all  is  now 
complete,  as  Paul  tells  us  that  he  was  a  minister  of 
the  assembly  to  complete  the  word  of  God.  (Col.  i.  25.) 
The  subjects  of  revelation  were  then  completed. 

Observe,  that  the  apostle  insists,  as  a  matter  of 
responsibility,  that  Timothy  should  devote  himself  to 
his  ministry  with  so  much  the  more  energy  that  the 
assembly  was  declining,  and  self-will  in  Christians 
was  gaining  the  ascendancy ;  not  that  he  throws  any 
doubt  upon  its  being  a  constant  duty  to  do  so  at  all 
times,  whether  happy  or  unhappy.  The  apostle,  as 
we  have  seen,  has  two  different  periods  in  view ;  the 
decline  of  the  assembly,  which  had  already  begun,  and 
the  still  worse  condition  that  was  yet  future.  The 
special  application  of  the  exhortation  here  is  to  the 
first  period.  "Be  instant,"  he  says,  "in  season,  out  of 

IV. 


200  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

season  . .  .  for  the  time  will  come  when  they  will  not 
endure  sound  doctrine  . . .  and  they  shall  turn  away  their 
ears  from  the  truth,  and  shall  be  turned  unto  fables." 

In  how  positive  and  distinct  a  way  the  apostle  sets 
the  fall  of  the  assembly  before  us  !  Its  impaired  con- 
dition in  his  day  was  to  him  but  a  point  of  progress 
(according  to  his  judgment  in  the  Spirit)  towards  a 
yet  more  entire  fall ;  when,  although  still  calling 
itself  christian,  the  mass  of  those  who  assumed  the 
name  of  Christ  would  no  longer  endure  the  sound 
doctrine  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But,  come  what  might, 
labouring  with  patience  and  diligence  and  energy  as 
long  as  they  would  hearken,  he  was  to  be  watchful,  to 
endure  afflictions,  to  seek  after  souls  still  unconverted 
(a  great  proof  of  faith  when  the  heart  is  burdened 
with  the  unfaithfulness  of  those  within),  and  fully  to 
exercise  his  ministry;  with  this  additional  motive, 
that  apostolic  energy  was  disappearing  from  the  scene. 
(Chap.  iv.  6.) 

But  there  is  yet  something  to  notice  at  the  begin- 
ning of  this  chapter.  Fulness  of  grace,  it  is  apparent, 
does  not  here  characterise  the  epistle.  His  exhortation 
to  Timothy  is  "before  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  will  judge  the  quick  and  dead  at  his  appearing 
and  his  kingdom."  We  have  already  spoken  of  this : 
the  appearing  of  Jesus  is  in  connection  with  responsi- 
bility;  His  coining  is  with  the  object  of  calling  us  to 
Himself  in  connection  with  our  privileges.  Here  it  is 
the  first  of  these  two  cases ;  not  the  assembly,  or  the 
Father's  house,  but  God,  the  appearing,  and  the 
kingdom.  All  that  is  in  relation  to  responsibility, 
government,  judgment,  is  gathered  together  in  one 
point  of  view.  The  apostle  however  is  not  speaking 
of  the  assembly,  nor  does  he  throughout  the  epistle. 
The  assembly  moreover  as  such  is  not  judged ;  she  is 
the  bride  of  the  Lamb.  Individuals  are  judged.  Chris- 
tendom which  bears  its  name  and  responsibility,  and 


II   TIMOTHY.  W\ 

necessarily  so  while  the  Holy  Ghost  is  here  helow,  is 
judged.  We  are  warned  of  it  in  Ephesus.  (Rev.  ii.) 
Nay,  judgment  begins  there.  This  is  the  assembly 
viewed  as  the  house,  not  the  body. 

The  portion  of  the  assembly,  and  even  of  its  mem- 
bers as  such,  is  grace  and  not  judgment.  She  goes  to 
meet  the  Lord  before  His  appearing.  Here  the  apostle 
speaks  of  His  appearing  and  His  kingdom.  It  is  as 
appearing  in  glory  and  clothed  with  the  authority  of 
the  kingdom  that  He  exercises  judgment.  The  pre- 
sentation of  the  assembly  to  Himself  completes  the 
work  of  grace  with  regard  to  that  assembly.  When 
the  Lord  appears,  we  shall  appear  with  Him  in  glory ; 
but  it  will  be  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  (as  we  see  in 
the  transfiguration),  and  He  will  judge  the  living. 

He  will  maintain  the  authority  of  His  kingdom,  as 
a  new  order  of  things,  for  a  long  period  ;  and  judgment 
will  be  exercised,  if  the  occasion  for  it  arises,  during 
its  whole  continuance,  for  a  king  shall  reign  in  right- 
eousness ;  judgment  and  righteousness  will  be  united. 
Before  giving  back  this  kingdom  to  God  the  Father, 
He  judges  the  dead,  for  all  judgment  is  committed  to 
the  Son.  So  that  the  kingdom  is  a  new  order  of 
things  founded  on  His  appearing,  in  which  judgment 
is  exercised.  The  kingdom  is  founded  by  the  ex- 
clusion of  Satan  from  heaven.  It  is  established  and  its 
authority  put  in  exercise  at  the  appearing  of  the  Lord. 

The  consciousness  that  this  judgment  is  going  to 
be  exercised  gives  an  impulse  to  love  in  the  carrying- 
out  of  niinistry,  gives  it  earnestness,  and  strengthens 
the  hands  by  the  sense  of  union  with  Him  who 
will  exercise  it  and  also  by  the  sense  of  personal 
responsibility. 

The  apostle  uses  his  near  departure  as  a  fresh 
motive  to  exhort  Timothy  to  the  full  exercise  of  his 
ministry.  His  own  heart  expands  at  the  thought  of 
that  dej)arture. 

IV. 


202  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

The  absence  therefore  of  apostolic  ministry,  so 
serious  a  fact  with  regard  to  the  assembly's  position, 
makes  the  duty  of  the  man  of  God  the  more  urgent. 
As  Paul's  absence  is  a  motive  for  working  out  our 
own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  so  is  it  also  a 
motive  for  him  who  is  engaojed  in  the  work  of  the 
gospel  to  devote  himself  more  than  ever  to  his  minis- 
try, in  order  to  supply  as  far  as  possible  the  lack  of 
apostolic  service  by  earnest  care  for  souls,  and  by 
instructing  them  in  the  truth  that  he  has  learnt. 

We  cannot  be  apostles,  or  lay  the  foundation  of  the 
assembly.  This  is  already  done.  But  we  may  build 
upon  that  foundation  by  the  truth  which  we  have 
received  from  the  apostle,  by  the  scriptures  which 
God  has  given  us,  by  an  unwearied  love  in  the  truth 
for  souls.  The  foundation  is  not  to  be  laid  a  second 
time.  We  give  its  value  to  the  foundation,  we  give 
it  its  place,  by  building  upon  it,  and  by  caring  for  the 
souls  and  the  assembly,  to  which  apostleship  has  given 
an  ever- abiding  place  and  foundation  before  God. 
This  is  what  we  have  to  do  in  the  absence  of  the  gift 
that  lays  the  foundation. 

The  character  that  God  appointed  has  already  been 
stamped  on  the  work :  the  one  foundation  has  been 
laid.  The  assembly  has  its  one  and  sole  place  accord- 
ing to  the  counsels  of  God.  The  rule  given  of  God  is 
in  the  word.  We  have  but  to  act  as  the  apostle  leads 
according  to  the  impulse  already  given  by  the  Spirit. 
We  cannot  have  apostolic  authority:  no  one  is  an 
apostle  in  any  such  sense.  This  could  not  be,  because 
we  do  not  lay  the  foundation;  it  would  be  to  deny 
that  which  has  already  been  done.  The  foundation 
has  been  laid.  We  can  labour  according  to  the 
measure  of  our  gift ;  and  so  much  the  more  de- 
votedly, in  proportion  as  we  love  the  work  which  the 
apostle  wrought,  and  because  he  is  no  longer  here  to 
sustain  it. 


II  TIMOTHY.  203 

As  to  the  apostle,  he  had  finished  his  work ;  if 
others  were  unfaithful,  he  had  been  faithful.  In  the 
good  fight  of  the  gospel  of  God  he  had  fought  to  tlie 
end,  and  successfully  resisted  all  the  attacks  of  tlie 
enemy.  He  had  finished  his  course :  it  only  remained 
for  him  to  be  crowned.  He  had  kept  the  faith  com- 
mitted to  him.  The  crown  of  righteousness,  that  is  to 
say,  the  one  bestowed  by  the  righteous  Judge  who 
acknowledged  his  faithfulness,  was  laid  up  and  kept 
for  him.  It  was  not  till  the  day  of  retribution  that 
he  would  receive  it.  We  see  plainly,  that  it  is  reward 
for  labour  and  for  faithfulness  that  is  here  meant. 
This — or  its  opposite — characterises  the  whole  epistle, 
and  not  the  privileges  of  grace. 

The  work  of  the  Spirit  through  us  is  rewarded  by 
the  crown  of  righteousness,  and  every  one  will  have  a 
reward  according  to  his  labour.  Christ  brings  us  all 
according  to  the  grace  of  God  into  the  enjoyment  of 
His  own  glory  to  be  with  Him  and  like  Him.  This  is 
our  common  portion  according  to  the  eternal  counsels 
of  God ;  but  a  place  is  prepared  by  the  Father  and 
given  by  the  Son  according  to  the  work  wrought  by 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  each  believer  in  his  par- 
ticular position.  It  is  not  Paul  only  who  will  receive 
this  crown  from  the  righteous  Judge ;  all  who  love  the 
Lord's  appearing  will  appear  with  Him  in  the  glory 
that  is  personally  destined  to  each,  and  that  is  ad- 
judged to  him  when  the  Lord  appears.  Detached 
from  this  world,  sensible  that  it  is  a  perverse  and 
rebellious  one,  feeling  how  much  the  dominion  of  Satan 
burdens  the  heart,  the  faithful  long  for  the  appearance 
of  Him  who  will  put  an  end  to  that  dominion,  to  re- 
bellion, oppression  and  misery,  by  bringing  in — in  His 
goodness  although  by  judgment — deliverance,  peace, 
and  freedom  of  heart,  on  the  earth. 

The  Christian  will  share  the  Lord's  glory  when  He 
shall  appear :  but  this  world  also  will  be  delivered. 

IV. 


20!'  TTIK   ROOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

We  see  here  too  that  the  privileges  of  the  assembly 
as  such  are  not  the  subject,  but  the  public  retribution 
manifested  when  Jesus  shall  appear  to  all ;  and  the 
public  establishment  of  His  glory.  The  heart  loves 
His  appearing;  not  only  the  removal  of  evil,  but  the 
appearance  of  Him  who  removes  it. 

In  that  which  follows  we  see  \vhat  progress  the  evil 
had  already  made,  and  how  the  apostle  counts  upon 
the  individual  affection  of  his  dear  son  in  the  faith. 
Probably  there  were  good  reasons  for  the  departure  of 
many,  certainly  for  that  of  some;  nevertheless  it  is 
true  that  the  first  thing  that  presents  itself  to  the 
apostle's  mind  is  the  departure  of  Demas  from  purely 
worldly  motives.  The  apostle  felt  himself  isolated. 
Not  only  had  the  mass  of  Christians  abandoned  him, 
but  his  com}  anions  in  labour  had  gone  away.  In  the 
providence  of  God  he  was  to  be  alone.  He  begs 
Timothy  to  come  soon.  Demas  had  forsaken  him. 
The  rest,  from  various  motives,  had  quitted  him  ;  some 
he  had  sent  away  in  connection  with  the  work.  It  is 
not  said  that  Demas  had  ceased  to  be  a  Christian — 
had  publicly  renounced  the  Lord;  but  it  was  not  in 
his  heart  to  bear  the  cross  with  the  apostle. 

In  the  midst  of  these  sorrows  a  ray  of  grace  and 
light  shines  through  the  darkness.  The  presence  of 
Mark — whose  service  Paul  had  formerly  refused,  be- 
cause he  had  shrunk  from  the  perils  of  labouring 
among  the  Gentiles  and  had  turned  back  to  Jerusalem 
• — is  now  desired  by  him,  because  he  was  useful  for 
the  ministry.  It  is  most  interesting  to  see,  and  a 
touching  proof  of  the  grace  of  God,  that  the  afflictions 
of  the  apostle  and  the  work  of  grace  in  Mark  combine 
to  set  before  us,  as  faithful  and  useful  to  Paul,  the 
one  who  once  had  failed,  and  with  whom  the  apostle 
would  then  have  nothing  to  do.  We  also  see  the 
aHcctions  and  confidence  displayed  in  the  smallest 
details  of  liic.     Full  of  power  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 


II  TIMOTHY.  205 

the  apostle  is  gentle,  intimate,  and  confiding,  with 
those  who  are  upright  and  devoted.  We  see  too  that 
at  the  close  of  his  life,  devoted  as  he  was,  the  occasion 
had  presented  itself  for  study  (in  connection  assuredly 
with  his  work),  and  for  writing  that  which  he  wished 
carefully  to  preserve — possibly  his  epistles. 

This  has  an  important  place  in  scriptural  instruction 
with  regard  to  the  life  of  the  apostle.  Paul  was  lost, 
so  to  speak,  for  the  greater  part,  in  the  power  of  the 
Spirit ;  but  when  alone,  with  sober  mind,  he  occupies 
himself  intelligently  and  carefully  about  the  things 
of  God. 

He  warns  Timothy  with  regard  to  a  man  who  had 
shewn  his  enmity,  and  puts  him  on  his  guard  against 
him. 

We  see  here  also  that  the  epistle  bears  the  character 
of  righteousness,  grace  having  had  its  course.  "  The 
Lord,"  he  says,  "  reward  him  according  to  his  deeds." 
As  for  those  who  had  not  courage  to  stand  by  him, 
when  he  had  to  answer  as  a  prisoner,  he  only  prays 
for  them.  He  had  not  been  discouraged.  His  heart, 
broken  by  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  assembly,  was 
strong  in  confessing  the  Lord  before  the  world,  and  he 
can  testify  that,  if  forsaken  by  men,  the  Lord  Himself 
stood  with  him  and  strengthened  him.  That  he  had 
to  answer  before  the  authorities  was  but  an  occasion 
to  proclaim  again  in  public  that  for  which  he  was 
made  a  prisoner.  Glorious  power  of  the  gospel  where 
faith  is  in  exercise !  All  that  the  enemy  can  do 
becomes  a  testimony,  in  order  that  the  great,  kings, 
those  who  were  otherwise  inaccessible,  should  hear  the 
word  of  truth,  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  faithful  witness  was  also  delivered  out  of  the 
lion's  mouth.  His  strong  and  simple  confidence 
counted  on  the  Lord  to  the  end.  He  would  pre- 
serve him  from  every  evil  Avork  unto  His  heavenly 
kingdom. 

i  \" 


206  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

it  the  time  of  his  departure  was  at  hand,  if  he  had 
to  fall  asleep  instead  of  being  changed,  he  had  not 
ceased  to  be  among  those  who  looked  for  the  Lord's 
appearing.  Meanwhile  he  was  going  to  be  with  Him, 
to  have  a  place  in  the  heavenly  kingdom. 

He  salutes  the  brethren  with  whom  Timothy  was 
connected,  and  begs  him  to  come  before  the  winter. 
We  also  learn  here,  that  the  miraculous  power  granted 
to  the  apostles  was  exercised  in  the  Lord's  service,  and 
not  for  their  private  interests,  nor  as  their  personal 
affection  might  suggest ;  for  Paul  had  left  Trophimus 
sick  at  Miletus. 

It  is  evident  that  this  epistle  was  written  when  the 
apostle  thought  his  departure  near  at  hand,  and  when 
the  faith  of  Christians  had  grievously  declined,  which 
was  proved  by  their  having  forsaken  the  apostle. 
His  faith  was  sustained  by  grace.  He  did  not  hide 
from  himself  that  all  was  going  wrong:  his  heart  felt 
it — was  broken  by  it;  he  saw  that  it  would  grow 
worse  and  worse.  But  his  own  testimony  stood  tirm  ; 
he  was  strong  for  the  Lord  through  grace.  The 
strength  of  the  Lord  was  with  him  to  confess  Christ, 
and  to  exhort  Timothy  to  so  much  the  more  diligent 
and  devoted  an  exercise  of  his  ministry,  because  the 
days  were  evil. 

This  is  very  important.  If  we  love  the  Lord,  if  we 
feel  what  He  is  to  the  assembly,  we  feel  that  in  the 
latter  all  is  in  ruin.  Personal  courage  is  not  weakened, 
for  the  Lord  remains  ever  the  same,  faithful,  and 
using  His  power  for  us :  if  not  in  the  assembly  which 
rejects  it,  it  is  in  those  who  stand  fast  that  He  will 
exercise  His  power  according  to  the  individual  need 
created  by  this  state  of  things. 

May  we  remember  this.  Insensibility  to  the  state 
of  the  assembly  is  not  a  proof  tliat  we  are  near  the 
Lord,  or  that  we  have  confidence  in  Him  ;  but  in  the 
c(jn;;ciousness  of  this  ruin,  faith,  the  sense  of  what 


II  TIMOTHY.  207 

Christ  is,  will  give  confidence  in  Him  amidst  the  ruin 
which  we  mourn.  Nevertheless  it  will  be  observed, 
that  the  apostle  speaks  here  of  the  individual,  of 
righteousness,  of  jucigiiient,  and  not  of  the  assembly. 
If  the  latter  is  spoken  of  outwardly  as  the  great 
house,  it  contains  vessels  to  dishonour,  from  which  we 
are  to  purge  ourselves.  Yet  the  apostle  foresaw  a  still 
worse  state  of  things — which  has  now  set  in.  But  the 
Lord  can  never  fail  in  His  faithfulness. 

The  first  of  Timothy  gives  directions  for  the  order  of 
the  assembly;  the  second,  for  the  j  atli  of  the  servant 
of  God  when  it  is  in  disorder  and  failure. 


TITUS. 

The  Epistle  to  Titus  is  occupied  with  the  mahitenance 
of  order  in  the  churches  of  God. 

The  especial  object  of  those  written  to  Timothy  was 
the  maintenance  of  sound  doctrine,  although  speaking 
of  other  things  with  regard  to  which  the  apostle  gives 
directions  for  the  conduct  of  Timothy.  This  the 
apostle  himself  tells  us.  In  the  First  Epistle  to 
Timothy  we  see  that  Paul  had  left  his  beloved  son  in 
the  faith  at  Ephesus,  in  order  to  watch  that  no  other 
doctrine  was  preached  there;  the  assembly  is  the 
pillar  and  support  of  the  truth.  In  the  Second  Epistle 
we  find  the  means  by  which  Christians  are  to  be 
strenothened  in  the  truth,  when  the  mass  have 
departed  from  it. 

Here,  in  Titus,  the  apostle  says  expressly  that  he 
had  left  him  in  Crete  to  set  in  order  things  that  were 
yet  wanting,  and  to  establish  elders  in  every  city. 
Although  more  or  less  the  same  dangers  presented 
themselves  to  the  mind  of  Paul  as  when  writing  to 
Timothy,  yet  we  find  that  the  apostle  enters  at  once 
upon  his  subject,  with  a  calmness  which  shews  that  his 
mind  was  not  pre-occupied  in  the  same  way  with  those 
dangers,  and  that  the  Spirit  could  engage  him  more 
entirely  with  the  ordinary  walk  of  the  assembly;  so 
that  this  epistle  is  much  more  simple  in  its  character. 
The  walk  that  becomes  Christians,  with  regard  to  the 
maintenance  of  order  in  their  relationships  to  each 
other,  and  the  great  principles  on  which  this  walk  is 
founded,  form  the  subject  of  the  book.  The  state  of 
the  assemblv  comes  but  little  before  us.     Truths  that 


TITUS.  209 

flow  more  entirely  from  the  christian  revelation,  and 
that  characterise  it,  have  more  place  in  this  epistle 
than  in  those  addressed  to  Timothy.  On  the  other 
hand,  prophecies  concerning  the  future  condition  of 
Christianity,  and  the  development  of  the  decline  that 
had  already  commenced,  are  not  repeated  here.  While 
stating  in  a  remarkable  way  certain  truths  with  re- 
spect to  Christianity,  the  tone  of  the  epistle  is  more 
calm,  more  ordinary. 

The  promise  of  life  is  particularly  spoken  of  here 
as  well  as  in  Timothy.  Moreover  this  promise  distin- 
guishes Christianity,  and  the  revelation  of  God  (as  the 
Father)  in  Christ,  from  Judaism. 

But  in  this  epistle  the  great  boundaries  of  Chris- 
tianity are  set  forth  at  the  outset.  The  faith  of  the 
elect,  the  truth  which  is  according  to  godliness,  the 
promise  before  the  world  began  of  eternal  life,  and 
the  manifestation  of  the  word  of  God  through  preach- 
ing, are  the  subjects  of  the  introduction.  The  title  of 
"  Saviour  "  is  here,  as  in  Timothy,  added  to  the  name 
of  God  as  well  as  to  that  of  Christ. 

This  introduction  is  not  without  importance.  That 
which  it  contains  is  presented  to  Titus  by  the  apostle 
as  characterising  his  apostleship,  and  as  the  special 
subject  of  his  ministry.  It  was  not  a  development  of 
Judaism,  but  the  revelation  of  a  life  and  of  a  promise 
of  life  which  subsisted  (that  is,  in  Christ,  the  object  of 
the  divine  counsels)  before  the  world  was.  Accord- 
ingly faith  was  found,  not  in  the  confession  of  the 
Jews,  but  in  the  elect  brought  by  grace  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  truth.  It  was  the  faith  of  the  elect :  this 
is  an  important  truth,  and  that  which  characterises 
faith  in  the  world.  Others  may  indeed  adopt  it  as  a 
system ;  but  faith  is  in  itself  the  faith  of  the  elect. 

Among  the  Jews  this  was  not  the  case.  The  public 
confession  of  their  doctrine,  and  confidence  in  the 
promises  of  God,  belonged  to  every  one  who  was  born 
VOL.  v.  I.  p 


210  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

an  Israelite.  Others  may  pretend  to  the  christian 
faith  ;  but  it  is  the  faith  of  the  elect.  Its  character  is 
such  that  human  nature  neither  embraces  it  nor  con- 
ceives it,  but  finds  it  to  be  a  stumbling-stone.  It 
discloses  a  relationship  with  God,  which  to  nature  is 
inconceivable  and  at  the  same  time  presumptuous  and 
insupportable.  To  the  elect  it  is  the  joy  of  their  soul, 
the  light  of  their  understanding,  and  the  sustainment 
of  their  heart.  It  places  them  in  a  relationship  with 
God  which  is  all  that  their  heart  can  desire,  but  which 
depends  entirely  on  that  which  God  is ;  aiid  this  the 
believer  desires.  It  is  a  personal  relationship  with 
God  Himself ;  therefore  it  is  the  faith  of  God's  elect. 
Hence  also  it  is  for  all  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  the 
Jews. 

This  faith  of  God's  elect  has  an  intimate  character 
in  relation  to  God  Himself.  It  rests  on  Him,  it  knows 
the  secret  of  His  eternal  counsels — that  love  which 
made  the  elect  the  object  of  His  counsels.  But  there 
is  another  character  connected  with  it,  namely,  confes- 
sion before  men.  There  is  the  revealed  truth  by 
which  God  makes  Himself  known,  and  claims  the 
submission  of  man's  mind  and  the  homage  of  his  heart. 
This  truth  places  the  soul  in  a  true  relationship  with 
God.     It  is  truth  according  to  godliness. 

The  confession  of  the  truth  therefore  is  an  impor- 
tant character  of  Christianity,  and  of  the  Christian. 
There  is  in  the  heart  the  faith  of  the  elect,  personal 
faith  in  God  and  in  the  secret  of  His  love ;  and  there 
is  confession  of  the  truth. 

Now  that  which  formed  the  hope  of  this  faith  was 
not  earthly  prosperity,  a  numerous  posterity,  the 
earthly  blessing  of  a  people  whom  God  acknowledged 
as  His  own.  It  was  life  eternal,  promised  of  God  in 
Christ  before  the  world  was,  outside  the  world  and 
the  divine  government  of  the  world  and  the  develop- 
ment of  the  character  of  Jehovah  in  that  government. 


TITUS.  211 

It  was  eternal  life.  It  is  in  connection  with  the 
nature  and  with  the  character  of  God  Himself;  and, 
having  its  source  in  Him,  proceeding  from  Him,  it 
was  the  thought  of  His  grace,  and  declared  to  be  such 
in  Christ,  before  a  world  existed  into  which  the  first 
man  was  introduced  in  responsibility  (his  failure 
in  which  is  his  history  up  to  Christ  the  second  Man, 
and  the  cross  in  which  He  bore  its  consequences  for 
us,  and  obtained  that  eternal  life  for  us  in  its  full 
glory  with  Himself),  and  which  was  the  sphere  of  the 
development  of  God's  government  over  that  which 
was  subject  to  Him — a  very  different  thing  from  the 
communion  of  a  life  by  which  one  participates  in  His 
nature,  and  which  is  its  reflection.  This  is  the  hope 
of  the  gospel  (for  we  are  not  speaking  of  the  assembly 
here),  the  secret  treasure  of  the  faith  of  the  elect,  of 
which  the  revealed  word  assures  us. 

"Promised  before  the  world  began"  is  a  remarkable 
and  important  expression.  One  is  admitted  into  the 
thoughts  of  God  before  the  existence  of  this  ch anoint 
and  mingled  scene,  which  bears  witness  of  the  frail  13- 
and  sin  of  the  creature — of  the  patience  of  God,  and 
His  ways  in  grace  and  in  government.  Eternal  life  is 
connected  with  the  unchangeable  nature  of  God ;  with 
counsels  which  are  as  abiding  as  His  nature,  with 
His  promises,  in  which  He  cannot  deceive  us,  and  to 
which  He  cannot  be  unfaithful.  Our  portion  in  life 
existed  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  not  only 
in  the  counsels  of  God,  not  only  in  the  Person  of  the 
Son,  but  in  the  promises  made  to  the  Son  as  our 
portion  in  Him.  It  was  the  subject  of  those  com- 
munications from  the  Father  to  the  Son,  of  which  we 
were  the  objects,  the  Son  being  their  depositary.* 
Marvellous  knowledge  which  has  been  given  us  of  the 

*  Compare  Proverbs  viii.  30,  31,  and  Luke  ii.  14,  and  Psalm 
xl.  6-8,  "hast  thou  opened"  being  really,  "thou  hast  dug  ears 

I. 


212  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

heavenly  communication  of  which  the  Son  was  the 
object,  in  order  that  we  might  understand  the  interest 
which  we  have  in  the  thoughts  of  God,  of  which  we 
were  the  objects  in  Christ  before  all  the  ages ! 

That  which  the  word  is  becomes  also  more  clear  to 
us  through  this  passage.  The  word  is  the  communi- 
cation, ill  time,  of  the  eternal  thoughts  of  God  Himself 
in  Christ.  It  finds  man  under  the  power  of  sin,  and 
reveals  peace  and  deliverance,  and  it  shews  how  he 
can  have  part  in  the  result  of  God's  thoughts.  But 
these  thoughts  themselves  are  nothing  else  than  the 
plan,  the  eternal  purpose,  of  His  grace  in  Chiist,  to 
bestow  on  us  everlasting  life  in  Christ — a  life  which 
existed  in  God  before  the  world  was.  The  word  is 
preached,  manifested  (that  is,  the  revelation  of  the 
thoughts  of  God  in  Christ).  Now  those  thoughts 
gave  us  eternal  life  in  Christ ;  and  this  was  promised 
before  the  ages.  The  elect,  believing,  know  it,  and 
possess  the  life  itself.  They  have  the  witness  in  them- 
iclvcs ;  but  the  word  is  the  public  revelation  on  which 
faith  is  founded,  and  which  has  universal  authority 
over  the  consciences  of  men,  whether  they  receive  it 
or  not.  Just  as  in  2  Timothy  i.  9,  10,  it  is  presented 
as  salvation,  but  then  made  manifest. 

It  will  be  observed  that  faith  here,  is  faith  in  a  per- 
sonally held,  known,  truth;  a  faith  which  only  the 
elect  can  have,  who  possess  the  truth  as  God  teaches 
it.  "The  faith"  is  used  also  for  Christianity  as  a 
system  in  contrast  with  Judaism.  Here  it  is  the 
secret  of  God  in  contrast  with  a  law  promulgated  to 
an  outward  people.  This  promise,  which  dated  from 
before  the  revealed  ages,  and  which  was  sovereign  in 
its  application,  was  especially  committed  to  the  apos- 
tle Paul  that  he  might  announce  it  by  preaching.     To 

for  me  " — that  is,  prepared  a  body,  the  place  of  obedience,  or  a 
servant  (Phil,   ii.)  ;    so   translated  by  LXX,  and  accepted  in 

Hebrews  as  just. 


TITUS.  213 

Peter  the  gospel  was  committed  more  as  the  fulfihnent 
of  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers,  which  Paul  also 
recognises,  with  the  evangelical  events  that  confirmed 
and  developed  them  by  the  power  of  God  manifested 
in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  the  witness  of  the  power 
of  this  life. 

John  presents  life  more  in  the  Person  of  Christ  and 
then  imparted  to  us,  the  characteristic  fruits  of  which 
he  sets  forth. 

We  shall  find  that  the  apostle  has  not  the  same 
intimacy  of  confidence  in  Titus  as  in  Timothy.  He 
does  not  open  his  heart  to  him  in  the  same  way. 
Titus  is  a  beloved  and  faithful  servant  of  God  and 
also  the  apostle's  son  in  the  faith ;  but  Paul  does  not 
open  his  heart  to  him  in  the  same  manner — does  not 
communicate  to  him  his  anxieties,  his  complainings — 
does  not  pour  out  his  soul  to  him — as  he  did  to 
Timothy.  To  tell  of  all  one  sees  that  is  heart-breaking 
and  disquieting  in  the  work  one  is  engaged  in — that 
is  the  proof  of  confidence.  One  has  conddence  with 
regard  to  the  work,  and  one  speaks  of  it  with  regard 
to  oneself,  with  regard  to  all,  and  there  is  no  restraint, 
no  measuring  how  far  one  ought  to  speak  of  oneself, 
of  what  one  feels,  of  all  things.  This  the  apostle  does 
with  Timothy,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  has  been  pleased 
to  portray  it  for  us.  In  writing  to  Timothy  doctrijie 
above  all  occupied  the  apostle's  mind  :  by  its  means 
the  enemy  wrought  and  endeavoured  to  ruin  the 
assembly.  Bishops  only  come  into  mind  as  an  acces- 
sory thing.  Here  they  have  a  primary  place.  Paul 
had  left  Titus  in  Crete  to  set  in  order  the  things  that 
were  yet  wanting,  and  to  ordain  elders  in  every  city, 
as  he  had  already  commanded  him.  It  is  not  here  a 
question  of  the  desire  any  one  might  have  to  become 
a  bishop,  nor  (in  that  view)  of  describing  the  character 
suitable  to  this  charge,  but  of  appointing  them ;  and 
for  this  task  Titus  was  furnished  with  authority  on 

L 


214  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  apostle's  part.  The  necessary  qualifications  are 
made  known  to  him,  in  order  that  he  might  be  able 
to  decide  according  to  apostolic  wisdom.  So  that  on 
the  one  hand  he  was  invested  by  the  apostle  with 
authority  to  appoint  them,  and  on  the  other  hand 
instructed  by  him  with  respect  to  the  requisite  quali- 
fications. Apostolic  authority  and  wisdom  concurred 
to  render  him  competent  to  perform  this  grave  and 
important  work. 

We  see  also  that  this  apostolic  delegate  was  autho- 
rised to  set  in  order  that  which  was  necessary  to  the 
welfare  of  the  assemblies  in  Crete.  Already  founded, 
they  yet  needed  directions  with  regard  to  many  de- 
tails of  their  walk ;  and  apostolic  care  was  requisite  to 
give  them  these,  as  well  as  for  the  establishment  of 
functionaries  in  the  assemblies.  This  task  the  apostle 
had  committed  to  the  approved  fidelity  of  Titus, 
furnished  with  his  own  authority  by  word  of  mouth 
and  here  in  writing ;  so  that  to  reject  Titus  was  to 
reject  the  apostle  and  consequently  the  Lord  who  had 
sent  him.  Authority  in  the  assembly  of  God  is  a 
serious  thing — a  thing  that  proceeds  from  God  Him- 
self. It  can  be  exercised  through  influence  by  the  gift  of 
God  ;  by  functionaries,  when  God  establishes  them  by 
instruments  whom  He  has  chosen  and  sent  for  this 
purpose. 

It  is  not  necessary  here  to  enter  upon  the  detail  of 
qualifications  that  were  needed  to  fill  the  office  of 
bishop  suitably.  They  are,  in  the  main,  the  same  as 
those  mentioned  in  the  epistle  to  Timothy.  They  are 
qualities,  not  gifts ;  qualities — outward,  moral,  and 
circumstantial — that  proved  the  fitness  of  the  indi- 
vidual for  the  charge  of  watching  over  others.  It 
may  perhaps  occasion  surprise  that  the  absence  of 
gross  misconduct  should  have  a  place  here ;  but  the 
assemblies  were  more  simple  than  people  think,  and 
the  persons  of  whom  they  were  composed  had  but 


TITUS.  215 

recently  come  out  from  the  most  deplorable  habits; 
and  therefore  a  previous  conduct  that  commanded  the 
respect  of  others  was  necessary  to  give  weight  to  the 
exercise  of  the  office  of  superintendence.  It  was  also 
needful  that  he  who  was  invested  with  this  charge 
should  be  able  to  convince  gainsayers.  For  they 
would  have  to  do  with  such,  especially  among  the 
Jews,  who  were  always  and  everywhere  active  in 
opposition  to  the  truth,  and  subtle  in  perverting  the 
mind. 

The  character  of  the  Cretans  occasioned  other  diffi- 
culties, and  required  the  exercise  of  peremptory  autho- 
rity ;  Judaism  mingled  itself  with  the  effect  of  this 
national  character.  It  was  needful  to  be  firm  and  to 
act  with  authority,  that  they  might  continue  sound  in 
the  faith. 

Moreover,  he  had  still  to  speak  concerning  ordin- 
ances and  traditions,  those  evil  plagues  in  the  church 
of  God  which  provoke  Him  to  jealousy,  and  which,  by 
exalting  man,  are  opposed  to  His  grace.  One  thing 
was  not  pure,  another  was  forbidden  by  an  ordinance. 
God  claims  the  heart.  To  the  pure  all  things  are 
pure ;  for  him  whose  heart  is  defiled  it  needs  not  to 
go  out  of  himself  to  find  that  which  is  impure;  but 
convenient,  in  order  to  be  able  to  forget  what  is 
within.  The  mind  and  conscience  are  already  corrupt. 
They  talk  of  knowing  God,  but  in  their  works  they 
deny  Him,  being  unprofitable  and  reprobate  as  regards 
every  work  really  good. 

Titus,  who  was  not  only  to  appoint  others  for  the 
purpose,  but,  being  there  clothed  with  authority,  was 
himself  to  watch  over  the  order  and  moral  walk  of 
the  Christians,  was  charged  (as  is  the  case  throughout 
these  three  epistles)  to  see  that  every  one,  according 
to  his  position,  walked  in  agreement  with  moral 
and  relative  propriety — an  important  thing,  and 
which  shelters  from  the  attacks  of  Satan,  and  from 

L 


216  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

confusion  in  the  assembly.  True  liberty  reigns  in  the 
assembly ;  moral  order  secures  this ;  and  the  enemy 
finds  no  iDetter  occasion  to  dishonour  the  Lord  and 
ruin  the  testimony  and  throw  all  into  disorder,  thus 
giving  the  world  occasion  to  blaspheme,  than  the 
forgetfulness  of  grace  and  holy  order  among  Chris- 
tians. Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves:  if  these  pro- 
prieties are  not  maintained  (and  they  are  beautiful 
and  precious),  then  the  liberty  (and  it  is  beautiful 
and  precious,  and  unknown  to  the  world,  who  are 
ignorant  of  what  grace  is),  the  excellent  liberty  of 
the  christian  life,  gi\^s  room  for  disorder  which  dis- 
honours the  Lord  and  throws  moral  confusion  into 
everything. 

Often,  in  perceiving  that  the  weakness  of  man  has 
given  occasion  to  disorder  where  christian  liberty 
reigns,  instead  of  seeking  the  true  remedy,  men  have 
destroyed  the  liberty ;  they  banish  the  power  and 
operation  of  the  Spirit — for  where  the  Spirit  is,  there 
is  liberty  in  every  sense — the  joy  of  the  new  relation- 
ships in  which  all  are  one.  But,  while  severing  every 
bond  for  the  Lord's  sake  when  necessary,  the  Spirit 
recognises  every  relationship  which  God  has  formed ; 
even  when  we  break  them — as  death  does — through 
the  exigency  of  the  call  of  Christ,  which  is  superior  to 
them  all.  But  while  we  are  in  them  (the  call  of 
Christ  apart),  we  are  to  act  suitably  to  the  rela- 
tionship. Age  and  youth,  husband  and  wife,  child 
and  parent,  slave  and  master,  all  have  their  own  pro- 
prieties to  maintain  towards  each  other,  a  behaviour  in 
accordance  with  the  position  in  which  we  stand. 

"  Sound  doctrine  "  takes  account  of  all  this,  and,  in 
its  warnings  and  exhortations,  maintains  all  these 
proprieties.  This  is  the  instruction  which  the  apostle 
here  gives  to  Titus,  with  regard  to  aged  men,  aged 
women,  young  women  (relatively  to  their  husbandsj 
their  children,  and  their  whole  life,  which  should  be 


TITUS.  217 

domestic  and  modest) ;  young  men,  to  whom  Titus  was 
to  be  alwrays  a  pattern ;  slaves,  with  their  masters  ; 
and  then  the  duties  of  all  towards  magistrates,  and 
indeed  towards  all  men.  But,  before  taking  up  this 
last  point,  he  establishes  the  great  principles  which 
are  the  foundation  of  the  conduct  of  the  saints  amongst 
themselves  in  this  world.  Their  conduct  towards 
magistrates  and  the  world  has  a  different  motive. 

The  conduct  of  Christians,  as  such,  in  the  assembly- 
has  for  its  basis  and  motive  the  special  doctrines 
of  Christianity.  We  find  these  doctrines  and  motives 
in  chapter  ii.  11-15,  which  speaks  of  that  conduct. 

The  particular  motive  for  the  character  of  their  walk, 
with  regard  to  the  world,  we  find  in  the  third  and 
following  verses  of  chapter  iii. 

Chapter  ii.  11-15  contains  a  remarkable  summary 
of  Christianity,  not  exactly  of  its  dogmas,  but  as  a 
practical  reality  for  men.  Grace  has  appeared.  It 
has  appeared,  not  limited  to  a  particular  people,  but 
to  all  men ;  not  charged  with  temporal  promises  and 
blessings  but  bringing  salvation.  It  comes  from  God 
to  men  with  salvation.  It  does  not  expect  righteous- 
ness from  men,  it  brings  salvation  to  those  that  need 
it.  Precious  and  simple  truth,  which  makes  us  know 
God,  which  puts  us  in  our  place,  but  according  to  the 
grace  which  has  overleaped  every  barrier  in  order  to 
address  itself,  in  the  sovereign  goodness  of  God,  to 
every  man  on  the  earth ! 

Having  brought  this  salvation,  it  instructs  us  per- 
fectly with  regard  to  our  walk  in  this  world ;  and  that 
in  relation  to  ourselves,  and  to  other  men,  and  to  God. 
Renouncing  all  ungodliness,  and  all  lusts  that  find 
their  gratification  in  this  world,  we  are  to  bridle  the 
will  of  the  flesh  in  every  respect  and  to  live  soberly ; 
we  are  to  acknowledge  the  claims  of  others  and  to  live 
righteously;  we  are  to  own  the  rights  of  God  over 
our  hearts  and  to  exercise  godliness. 

IL 


218  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

But  our  future  also  is  enlightened  by  grace.  It 
teaches  us  to  wait  for  the  blessed  hope,  and  the 
appearing  of  the  glory  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ. 

Grace  has  appeared.  It  teaches  us  how  to  walk 
here  below,  and  to  expect  the  appearing  of  the  glory 
in  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  And  our  hope 
is  well  founded.  Christ  is  justly  precious  to  us.  We 
can  have  full  confidence  of  heart  in  thinking  of  His 
appearing  in  glory,  as  well  as  the  most  powerful 
motive  for  a  life  devoted  to  His  glory.  He  gave 
Himself  for  us  to  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  to 
purify  for  Himself  a  people  who  should  belong  to 
Him  in  His  own  light  and  be  zealous — according  to 
His  will  and  His  nature — of  good  works. 

This  is  what  Christianity  is.  It  has  provided  for 
all,  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future,  according  to 
God.  It  delivers  us  from  this  world,  making  of  us  a 
people  set  apart  for  Christ  Himself,  according  to  the 
love  in  which  He  gave  Himself  for  us.  It  is  purifica- 
tion, but  a  purification  which  consecrates  us  to  Christ. 
We  belong  to  Him  as  His  peculiar  portion,  His  posses- 
sion in  the  world ;  animated  with  the  love  that  is  in 
Him,  in  order  to  do  good  to  others  and  bear  testimony 
to  His  grace.  This  is  a  precious  testimony  to  that 
which  Christianity  is,  in  its  practical  reality,  as  the 
work  of  the  grace  of  God. 

With  respect  to  the  conduct  of  Christians  towards 
the  world,  grace  has  banished  violence,  and  the  spirit 
of  rebellion  and  resistance  which  agitates  the  heart  of 
those  who  believe  not,  and  which  has  its  source  in 
the  self-will  that  strives  to  maintain  its  own  rights 
relatively  to  others. 

The  Christian  has  his  portion,  his  inheritance,  else- 
where ;  he  is  tranquil  and  submissive  here  and  ready 
to  do  good.  Even  when  others  are  violent  and  unjust 
towards  him,  he  bears  it  in  remembrance  that  once 


TITUS.  219 

it  was  no  otherwise  with  himself:  a  diflScult  lesson, 
for  violence  and  injustice  stir  up  the  heart;  but  the 
thought  that  it  is  sin,  and  that  we  also  were  formerly 
its  slaves,  produces  patience  and  piety.  Grace  alone 
has  made  the  difference,  and  according  to  that  grace 
are  we  to  act  towards  others. 

The  apostle  gives  a  grievous  summary  of  the  cha- 
racteristics of  man  after  the  flesh — that  which  we 
once  were.  Sin  was  foolishness — was  disobedience; 
the  sinner  was  deceived — was  the  slave  of  lusts,  filled 
with  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  others. 
Such  is  man  characterised  by  sin.  But  the  kindness 
of  God,  of  a  Saviour- God,  His  good-will  and  charity 
towards  men  (sweet  and  precious  character  of  God  !)* 
has  appeared.  The  character  that  He  has  assumed  is 
that  of  Saviour,  a  name  especially  given  Him  in  these 
three  epistles,  in  order  that  we  should  bear  its  stamp 
in  our  walk,  that  it  should  pervade  our  spirit.  Our 
walk  in  the  world  and  our  conduct  towards  others 
depend  on  the  principles  of  our  relationships  with 
God.  That  which  has  made  us  different  from  others 
is  not  some  merit  in  ourselves,  some  personal  superio- 
rity: we  were  sometime  even  as  they.  It  is  the 
tender  love  and  grace  of  the  God  of  mercy.  He  has 
been  kind  and  merciful  to  us:  we  have  known  what 
it  is,  and  are  so  to  others.  It  is  true  that  in  cleansing 
and  renewing  us  this  mercy  has  wrought  by  a  prin- 
ciple, and  in  a  sphere  of  a  life,  that  are  entirely  new, 
so  that  we  cannot  walk  with  the  world  as  we  did 
before ;  but  we  act  towards  others  who  are  still  in  the 
mire  of  this  world,  as  God  has  acted  towards  us  to 
bring  us  out  of  it,  that  we  might  enjoy  those  things 
which,  according  to  the  same  principle  of  grace,  we 

*  In  Greek  it  is  the  word  philanthropy,  which  in  scripture  is 
only  used  in  speaking  of  God ;  and  which  moreover  has  much 
greater  force  than  the  Enghsh  word,  because  phil  is  an  especiaJ 
affection  for  anything,  a  friendship. 

II. 


220  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

desire  that  others  also  should  enjoy.  The  sense  of 
what  we  once  were,  and  of  the  way  in  which  God  has 
acted  towards  us,  combine  to  govern  our  conduct 
towards  others. 

Now  when  the  kindness  of  a  Saviour-God  appeared, 
it  was  not  something  vague  and  uncertain;  He  has 
saved  us,  not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we 
have  done,  but  according  to  His  mercy  by  washing 
and  renewing  us.  This  is  tbe  double  character  of  the 
work  in  us,  the  same  two  points  which  we  find  in 
John  iii.  in  the  Lord's  discourse  with  Nicodemus ; 
except  that  here  is  added  that  which  has  now  its 
place  because  of  the  work  of  Christ,  namely,  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  also  shed  on  us  abundantly  to  be  the 
strength  of  that  new  life  of  which  He  is  the  source. 
The  man  is  washed,  cleansed.  He  is  washed  from  his 
former  habits,  thoughts,  desires,  in  the  practical  sense. 
We  wash  a  thing  that  exists.  The  man  was  morally 
bad  and  defiled  in  his  inward  and  outward  life.  God 
has  saved  us  by  purifying  us ;  He  could  not  do  it 
otherwise.  To  be  in  relationship  with  Himself  there 
must  be  practical  purity. 

But  this  purification  was  thorough.  It  was  not  the 
outside  of  the  vessel.  It  was  purification  by  means  of 
regeneration ;  identified  with  the  communication  of  a 
new  life  no  doubt,  which  is  the  source  of  new  thoughts, 
in  connection  with  God's  new  creation,  and  capable  of 
enjoying  His  presence  and  in  the  light  of  His  counten- 
ance, but  which  in  itself  is  a  passage  from  the  state 
we  were  in  into  a  wholly  new  one,  from  flesh  by  death 
into  the  status  of  a  risen  Christ. 

But  there  was  a  power  which  acted  in  this  new  life 
and  accompanies  it  in  the  Christian.  It  is  not  merely 
a  subjective  change,  as  they  say.  There  is  an  active 
divine  Agent  who  imparts  something  new,  of  which 
He  is  Himself  the  source — the  Holy  Ghost  Himself. 
It  is   God   acting  in  the  creature  (for  it  is  by  the 


TITUS.  221 

Spirit  that  God  alwaj^s  acts  immediately  on  the  crea- 
ture) ;  and  it  is  in  the  character  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
that  He  acts  in  this  work  of  renewal.  It  is  a  new 
source  of  thoughts  in  relationship  with  God  ;  not  only 
a  vital  capacity,  but  an  energy  which  produces  that 
which  is  new  in  us. 

It  has  been  a  question,  When  does  this  renewal  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  take  place  ?  Is  it  at  the  commence- 
ment, or  is  it  after  the  regeneration*  of  which  the 
apostle  speaks  ?  I  think  that  the  apostle  speaks  of  it 
according  to  the  character  of  the  work  ;  and  adds 
"shed  on  us"  (that  which  characterises  the  grace  of 
this  present  period)  to  shew  that  there  is  an  additional 
truth,  namely,  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  "  shed  on  us," 
continues  in  order  to  maintain  by  His  power  the 
enjoyment  of  the  relationship  into  which  He  has 
brought  us.  The  man  is  cleansed  in  connection  with 
the  new  order  of  things ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a 
source  of  an  entirely  new  life,  entirely  new  thoughts ; 
not  only  of  a  new  moral  being,  but  of  the  com- 
munication of  all  that  in  which  this  new  being  de- 
velops itself.  We  cannot  separate  the  nature  from 
the  objects  with  regard  to  which  the  nature  develops 
itself,  and  which  form  the  sphere  of  its  existence  and 
characterise  it. 

It  is  the  Holy  Ghost  who  gives  the  thoughts,  who 
creates  and  forms  the  whole  moral  being  of  the  new 
man.  The  thought  and  that  which  thinks  cannot  be 
separated,  morally,  when  the  heart  is  occupied  with  it. 
The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  source  of  all  in  the  saved  man: 
he  is  ultimatel}^  saved,  because  this  is  the  case  with  him. 

The  Holy  Ghost  does  not  only  give  a  new  nature ; 

'''  ■jraXiyytvtaia,  the  word  here  used,  is  not  being  born  again 
[dvaytvi'dij).  It  is  used,  besides  this  passa.t^e.  only  in  the  end  of 
Matthew  xix.  for  the  millennium.  The  renewing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  a  disiinct  thing  from  the  regeneration.  This  last  is  a 
change  of  one  state  of  things  to  another. 

IIL 


222  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

He  gives  it  us  in  connection  with  an  entirely  new 
order  of  things  ("  a  new  creation  "),  and  fills  us  as  to 
our  thoughts  with  the  things  that  are  in  this  new 
creation.  This  is  the  reason,  that,  although  we  are 
placed  in  it  once  for  all,  this  work — as  to  the  opera- 
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost — continues ;  because  He  ever 
communicates  to  us  more  and  more  of  the  things  of 
this  new  world  into  which  He  has  brought  us.  He 
takes  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  shews  them  to  us ; 
find  all  that  the  Father  has  is  Christ's.  I  think  that 
the  "  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  embraces  all  this ; 
because  He  says,  "which  he  has  shed  on  us  abun- 
dantly." So  that  it  is  not  only  that  we  are  born  of 
Him,  but  that  He  works  in  us,  communicating  to  us 
all  that  is  ours  in  Christ. 

The  Holy  Ghost  is  shed  on  us  abundantly  by  means 
of  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  in  order  that,  having 
been  justified  by  the  grace  of  this  Saviour,  we  should 
be  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  I 
think  that  the  antecedent  of  "  in  order  that "  is  "  the 
washing  of  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost ;"  and  that  the  sentence,  "  which  he  shed 
on  us  abundantly  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour," 
is  an  accessory  parenthesis  introduced  to  sl^ew  us  that 
we  have  the  fulness  of  the  enjoyment  of  these  things 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Thus  He  has  saved  us  by  this  renewing  that  we 
may  be  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  It 
is  nothing  outward,  earthly,  or  corporeal.  Grace  has 
given  us  eternal  life.  In  order  to  this,  we  have  been 
justified  by  the  grace  of  Christ.*  Thus  there  is 
energy,  power,  hope,  through  the  rich  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  In  order  to  our  participating  in  it,  we  have 
been  justified  by  His  grace,  and  our  inheritance  is  in 
the  incorruptible  joy  of  eternal  life. 

*  It  is  because  "Christ"  is  in  the  parenthesis,  and  not  in  the 
principal  sentence,  that  we  read  Utivov. 


TITUS.  228 

God  has  saved  us,  not  by  works — nor  by  means  of* 
anything  that  we  are,  but  by  His  mercy.  But  then  He 
has  acted  towards  us  according  to  the  riches  of  His  own 
grace,  according  to  the  thoughts  of  His  own  heart. 

With  these  things  the  apostle  desires  that  Titus 
should  be  occupied — with  that  which  brings  us  with 
thanksgiving  into  practical  connection  with  God  Him- 
self and  makes  us  feel  what  our  portion  is,  our 
eternal  portion,  before  Him.  This  acts  upon  the  con- 
science, fills  us  with  love  and  good  works,  makes  us 
respect  all  the  relationships  of  which  God  Himself  is 
the  centre.  We  are  in  relationship  with  God  according 
to  His  rights ;  we  are  before  God,  who  causes  every- 
thing that  He  has  Himself  established  to  be  respected 
by  the  conscience. 

Idle  questions  and  disputes  on  the  law  Titus  was  to 
avoid,  together  with  everything  that  would  destroy 
the  simplicity  of  our  relationship  with  God  according 
to  the  immediate  revelation  of  Himself  and  of  His 
will  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  still  the  Gnostic  Judaism 
setting  itself  up  against  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel ; 
it  is  the  law  and  human  righteousness,  and  that  which, 
by  means  of  intermediate  beings,  destroys  the  sim- 
plicity and  the  immediate  character  of  our  relationship 
with  the  God  of  grace. 

When  a  man  tried  to  set  up  his  own  opinions,  and 
by  that  means  to  form  parties  in  the  assembly,  after 
having  admonished  him  once  and  a  second  time,  he 
was  to  be  rejected;  his  faith  was  subverted.  He  sins,  he 
is  judged  of  himself.  He  is  not  satisfied  with  the  assem- 
bly of  God,  with  the  truth  of  God :  he  wants  to  make  a 
truth  of  his  c  vn.  Why  is  he  a  Christian,  if  Christianity, 
as  God  has  given  it,  does  not  suffice  him  ?  By  making 
a  party  for  his  own  opinions  he  condemns  himself. 

*  Here,  as  everywhere,  the  responsibility  of  raan  and  God's 
saving  grace,  by  which  purpose  also  is  accomplished,  are  clearly 
distinguished. 


224  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

We  have,  at  the  end  of  the  epistle,  a  little  glimpse 
of  the  christian  activity  which  the  love  of  God  pro- 
duces, the  pains  taken  that  the  flock  should  ^njoy  all 
the  help  with  which  God  supplies  the  assembly. 
Paul  wished  that  Titus  should  come  to  him  :  but  the 
Cretans  needed  his  services ;  and  the  apostle  makes 
the  arrival  of  Arteraas  or  Tychicus  (the  latter  well 
known  by  the  services  he  had  rendered  to  Paul) 
the  condition  of  the  departure  of  Titus  from  the 
field  in  which  he  was  labouring.  We  find  too  that 
Zenas,  a  lawyer,  and  ApoUos,  who  had  also  displayed 
his  active  zeal  at  Ephesus  and  Corinth,  were  disposed  to 
occupy  themselves  in  Crete  with  the  work  of  the  Lord. 

Observe  also  that  we  have  the  two  kinds  of 
labourers:  those  who  were  in  personal  connection 
with  the  apostle  as  fellow-labourers,  who  accompanied 
him,  and  whom  he  sent  elsewhere  to  continue  the 
work  he  had  begun,  when  he  could  no  longer  carry  it 
on  himself;  and  those  who  laboured  freely  and  in- 
dependently of  him.  But  there  was  no  jealousy  of 
this  double  activity.  He  did  not  neglect  the  flock 
that  were  dear  to  him.  He  was  glad  that  any  who 
were  sound  in  the  faith  should  water  the  plants  which 
he  himself  had  planted.  He  encourages  Titus  to  shew 
them  all  affection,  and  to  provide  whatever  they 
needed  in  their  journey.  This  thought  suggests  to 
him  the  counsel  that  follows ;  namely,  that  it  would 
be  well  for  Christians  to  learn  how  to  do  useful 
work  in  order  to  supply  the  wants  of  others  as  well 
as  their  own. 

The  apostle  ends  his  epistle  with  the  salutations 
that  christian  love  always  produces ;  but,  as  we  saw 
at  the  beginning,  there  is  not  here  the  same  expan- 
sion of  heart  that  we  And  in  Paul's  communications  to 
Timothy.  Grace  is  the  same  everywhere;  but  there 
are  special  affections  and  relationships  in  the  assembly 
of  God, 


PHILEMON. 

The  very  beautiful  and  interesting  Epistle  to  Phile- 
mon does  not  require  much  comment;  it  is  an  ex- 
pression of  the  love  which  works  by  the  Spirit  within 
the  assembly  of  God  in  all  the  circumstances  of 
individual  life. 

Written  for  the  purpose  of  awakening  in  Philemon 
sentiments  which  certain  events  had  a  tendency  to 
extinguish  in  his  heart,  this  epistle  is  suited  to  pro- 
duce those  feelings  in  the  reader  more  than  to  be  the 
object  of  explanation. 

It  is  a  fine  picture  of  the  way  in  which  the 
tenderness  and  the  strength  of  the  love  of  God,  work- 
ing in  the  heart,  occupies  itself  with  every  detail 
wherein  that  love  might  be  wounded,  or  that  might 
be  an  occasion  for  its  growth  and  manifestation.  In 
this  point  of  view  the  epistle  is  as  important  as  beau- 
tiful ;  for  this  development  of  tender  and  delicate 
consideration  in  the  midst  of  the  apostle's  gigantic 
labours,  and  of  the  immense  truths  that  formed  the 
basis  of  relationship  between  all  creatures  and  God  in 
Christ,  gives  a  very  peculiar  character  to  Christianity 
and  shews  its  divine  nature ;  since  He  who  reveals  the 
most  profound  truths,  and  puts  them  in  their  right 
place  in  the  circle  of  divine  thought,  does  so  as  speak- 
ing of  a  known  thing,  as  communicating  His  own 
thoughts ;  and  can  (being  the  Spirit  of  the  God  of 
love)  till  the  heart  with  considerations  which  love  only 
can  suggest,  with  a  dignity  which  manifests  their 
source,  and  with  a  delicacy  of  application  which  shews 
that,  whatever  be  the  grandeur  of  His  thoughts,  He  is 
at  liberty  to  consider  everything. 

When  the  human  mind  is  occupied  with   elevated 

VOL.  V.  Q 


226  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

subjects,  it  feels  their  weight,  and  bends  under  the 
load ;  it  is  absorbed ;  it  has  to  abstract  itself,  to  fix  its 
attention.  God  reveals  His  own  thoughts ;  and,  vast 
as  they  may  be  to  the  human  mind,  they  How  with 
the  clearness  and  connectedness  that  is  natural  to 
them,  when  He  communicates  them  by  His  chosen 
instrum?  ats.  The  latter  are  free  to  love ;  for  the  God 
who  emploj'-s  them  and  inspires  them  is  love.  It  is  a 
more  essential  part  of  their  task  to  present  Him  thus, 
than  even  to  speak  of  the  deep  things.  Accordingly, 
when  they  are  moved  by  that  love,  the  character  of 
Him  who  sends  them  is  demonstrated  as  that  of  the 
God  who  is  the  source  of  love,  by  a  perfect  considera- 
tion for  others,  and  the  most  delicate  attention  to  those 
things  which  their  hearts  would  feel. 

Moreover  this  love  develops  itself  in  relationships 
formed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself,  between  the 
members  of  the  body  of  Christ,  that  is  to  say,  between 
men.  Springing  from  a  divine  source,  and  always  fed 
by  it,  christian  affections  assume  the  form  of  human 
regard,  which,  by  exhibiting  love  and  the  opposite  of 
selfishness,  bear  the  stamp  of  their  origin.  Love,  free 
from  self,  can  and  does  think  of  all  that  concerns 
others  and  understands  what  will  affect  them. 

Onesimus,  a  fugitive  slave,  had  been  converted  by 
means  of  Paul  in  his  bonds.  Philemon,  a  rich  man  or 
at  least  one  of  easy  fortune,  received  the  assembly  in 
his  house  (his  wife  being  also  converted),  and  in  his 
measure  laboured  himself  in  the  Lord's  work.  Archip- 
pus  was  a  servant  of  the  Lord,  who  ministered  in  the 
assembly,  perhaps  an  evangelist ;  at  any  rate  he  took 
part  in  the  conflicts  of  the  gospel,  and  was  thus 
associated  with  Philemon  and  the  assembly. 

The  apostle,  in  sending  Onesimus  back,  addresses 
the  whole  assembly.  This  is  the  reason  that  we  have 
here,  "  grace  and  peace,"  without  the  addition  of 
"mercy,"  as  when  individuals  only  are  addressed  by 


PHILEMON.  227 

the  apostles.  His  appeal  on  behalf  of  Onesimus  is  to 
Philemon  ;  but  the  whole  assembly  is  to  interest  itself 
in  this  beloved  slave,  who  was  become  a  child  of  God. 
Their  christian  hearts  would  be  a  support  and  a 
guarantee  for  the  conduct  of  Philemon  ;  although  the 
apostle  expects  pardon  and  kindness  for  Onesimus 
from  the  love  of  Philemon  himself  as  a  servant  of 
God. 

Paul  (as  was  his  custom)  recognises  all  the  good 
that  was  in  Philemon,  and  uses  it  as  a  motive  to 
Philemon  himself,  that  he  might  let  the  feelings  of 
grace  flow  out  freely,  in  spite  of  anything  that  the 
return  of  Onesimus  might  excite  in  the  flesh  or  any 
displeasure  that  Satan  might  try  to  re-awaken  in  him. 
The  apostle  would  have  that  which  he  desired  for 
Onesimus  to  be  Philemon's  own  act.  The  enfranchise- 
ment of  his  former  slave,  or  even  his  kind  reception 
as  a  brother,  would  have  quite  a  difl'erent  bearing  in 
that  case,  than  if  it  had  arisen  from  a  command  on 
the  apostle's  part;  for  christian  aflection  and  the 
bonds  of  love  were  in  question.  He  gives  due  weight 
to  the  right  he  had  to  command,  but  only  in  order 
to  abandon  it,  and  to  give  more  force  to  his  request ; 
and  at  the  same  time  he  suggests  that  the  communion 
of  Philemon's  faith  with  the  whole  assembly  of  God 
and  with  the  apostle — that  is,  the  way  in  which  his 
faith  connected  him,  in  the  activities  of  christian  love, 
with  the  assembly  of  God  and  those  appointed  by  him 
to  labour  in  it,  and  with  the  Lord  Himself — which 
had  already  shewn  itself  so  honourably  in  Philemon, 
would  have  its  full  development  in  the  acknowledge- 
ment of  all  the  apostle's  rights  over  his  heart. 

In  verse  6  we  must  read  "  every  good  thing  which 
is  in  us." 

It  is  beautiful  to  see  the  mixture  of  aflfection  for 
Onesimus — which  shews  itself  in  an  anxiety  that 
makes  him  plead  every  motive  which  could  act  on  tlic 


228  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

heart  of  PhilemDii — with  the  christian  feeling  that 
inspired  him  with  full  confidence  in  the  kindly  affec- 
tions of  this  faithful  and  excellent  brother.  The 
return  of  his  fugitive  slave  was  indeed  likely  to  stir 
up  something  in  his  natural  heart ;  the  apostle  inter- 
poses his  letter  on  behalf  of  his  dear  child  in  the  faith, 
born  in  the  time  of  his  captivity.  God  had  interposed 
the  work  of  His  grace,  which  ought  to  act  on  the 
heart  of  Philemon,  producing  altogether  new  relation- 
ships with  Onesimus.  The  apostle  beseeches  him  to 
receive  his  former  slave  as  a  brother,  but  it  is  evident 
(ver.  12),  although  Paul  wished  it  to  be  the  spon- 
taneous act  of  the  master  whom  Onesimus  had 
wronged,  that  the  apostle  expected  the  affranchise- 
ment of  the  latter.  Be  that  as  it  may,  he  takes 
everything  upon  himself  for  his  dear  son.  According 
to  grace  Onesimus  was  more  profitable  to  Philemon, 
as  well  as  to  Paul,  than  formerly,  when  the  flesh  had 
made  him  an  unfaithful  and  valueless  servant;  and 
this  he  should  rejoice  in.  (Ver.  11.)  Paul  alludes 
to  the  name  of  "  Onesimus,"  which  means  "  profit- 
able." Finally  he  reminds  Philemon  that  he  was 
indebted  to  him  for  his  own  salvation — for  his  life  as 
a  Christian. 

Paul  at  this  moment  was  a  prisoner  at  Rome.  God 
had  brought  Onesimus  there  (whither  all  resorted)  to 
lead  him  to  salvation  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord, 
in  order  that  we  should  be  instructed,  and  that 
Onesimus  should  have  a  new  position  in  the  chris- 
tian assembly.*     It  was  apparently  towards  the  end 

=^  It  seems  to  me,  from  the  way  in  which  the  apostle  speaks, 
that  he  even  tliought  Onesimus  would  be  an  instrument  of  God 
in  the  assembl}^  useful  in  the  Lord's  service.  He  would  have 
retained  him  to  minister  to  himself  in  the  bonds  of  the  gospel; 
'>ut  he  respects  his  connection  with  Pliilemon.  It  was  also 
much  better  for  the  soul  of  Onesimus  that  he  should  submit 
himself  where  he  had  done  wi-ong ;  and  if  he  was  to  be  free,  that 
lie  sliould  receive  his  freedom  from  the  love  of  Philemon. 


PHILEMON  229 

of  the  apostle's  imprisonment.  He  hopes  at  least  soon 
to  be  released  and  tells  Philemon  to  prepare  him  a 
lodging. 

We  lind  the  names  again  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Colossians.  There  the  apostle  says,  "  Onesimiis,  who 
is  one  o£  you ;"  so  that,  if  it  be  the  same,  he  was  of 
Colosse.  It  seems  likely,  because  there  is  Archippus 
also,  who  is  exhorted  to  take  heed  to  his  ministry. 
If  it  be  so,  the  fact  that  he  speaks  thus  of  Onesimus 
to  the  Christians  at  Colosse  is  another  proof  of  his 
loving  care  for  this  new  convert.  He  lays  him  thus 
upon  the  hearts  of  the  assembly,  sending  his  letter  by 
him  and  Tj^chicus.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians 
there  are  no  salutations;  but  the  same  Tychicus  is  its 
bearer.  Timothy  is  joined  with  Paul  in  the  address  of 
the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  as  well  as  in  this  to 
Philemon.  It  was  not  so  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephe- 
sians; but  in  that  to  the  Philippians,  to  whom  the 
apostle  hoped  to  send  Timothy  ere  long,  their  two 
names  are  again  united. 

I  do  not  draw  any  conclusions  from  these  last  details; 
but  they  furnish  ground  for  inquiry  into  details.  Each 
of  the  four  epistles  was  written  during  the  apostle's 
captivity  at  Rome,  and  when  he  was  expecting  to  be 
delivered  from  that  captivity. 

Finally,  that  which  we  have  especially  to  remark  in 
the  Epistle  to  Philemon  is  the  love  which,  in  the 
intimate  centre  of  this  circle  (guarded  all  round  by  an 
unparalleled  development  of  doctrine)  reigned  and 
bore  fruit,  and  bound  the  members  of  Christ  together, 
and  spread  the  savour  of  grace  over  all  the  relation- 
ships in  which  men  could  stand  towards  each  other, 
occupying  itself  about  all  the  details  of  life  with  a 
perfect  propriety,  and  with  the  recognition  of  every 
riorht  that  can  exist  amonof  men  and  of  all  that  the 
human  heart  can  feel. 


HEBREWS. 

The  important  nature  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
demands  that  we  should  examine  it  with  peculiar  care. 
It  has  its  own  very  distinct  place.  It  is  not  the  pre- 
sentation of  christian  position  in  itself,  viewed  as  the 
fruit  of  sovereign  grace,  and  of  the  work  and  the 
resurrection  of  Christ,  or  as  the  result  of  the  union  of 
Christians  with  Christ,  the  members  of  the  body  with 
the  Head — a  union  which  gives  them  the  enjoyment 
of  every  privilege  in  Him.  It  is  an  epistle  in  which 
one  who  has  apprehended  indeed  the  whole  scope  of 
Christianity,  considered  as  placing  the  Christian  in 
Christ  before  God,  whether  individually  or  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  body,  looks  nevertheless  at  the  Lord  from 
here  below;  and  presents  His  Person  and  His  offices 
as  between  us  and  God  in  heaven,  while  we  are  in 
feebleness  on  earth,  for  the  purpose  of  detaching  us 
(as  walking  on  earth)  from  all  that  would  attach  us  in 
a  religious  way  to  the  earth  ;  even  when — as  was  the 
case  among  the  Jews — the  bond  had  been  ordained  by 
God  Himself. 

This  epistle  shews  us  Christ  in  heaven,  and  conse- 
quently that  our  religious  bonds  with  God  are  heavenly, 
although  we  are  not  yet  personally  in  heaven  ourselves 
nor  viewed  as  united  to  Christ  there.  Every  bond 
v/ith  the  earth  is  broken,  even  while  we  are  walking 
on  the  earth. 

These  instructions  naturally  are  given  in  an  epistle 
addressed  to  the  Jews,  because  their  religious  relation- 
ships had  been  earthly,  and  at  the  same  time  solemnly 
appointed  by  God  Himself.     The  heathen,  as  to  their 


HEBllEWS.  231 

religions,  had  no  formal  relationships  except  with 
demons. 

In  the  case  of  the  Jews  this  rupture  with  the  earth 
was  in  its  nature  so  much  the  more  solemn,  the  more 
absolute  and  conclusive,  from  the  relationship  having 
been  divine.  This  relationship  was  to  be  fully  ac- 
knowledged and  entirely  abandoned,  not  here  because 
the  believer  is  dead  and  risen  again  in  Christ,  hnf 
because  Christ  in  heaven  takes  the  place  of  all  earthly 
ligures  and  ordinances.  God  Himself,  who  had  insti- 
tuted the  ordinances  of  the  law,  now  established  other 
bonds,  different  indeed  in  character ;  but  it  was  still 
the  same  God. 

This  fact  gives  occasion  for  His  relationships  with 
Israel  being  resumed  by  Him  hereafter,  when  the 
nation  shall  be  re-established  and  in  the  enjoyment  of 
the  promises.  Not  that  this  epistle  views  them  as 
actually  on  that  ground ;  on  the  contrary  it  insists  on 
what  is  heavenly,  and  walking  by  faith  as  Abraham 
and  others  who  had  not  the  promises,  but  it  lays 
down  principles  which  can  apply  to  that  position,  and 
in  one  or  two  passages  it  leaves  (and  ought  to  leave) 
a  place  for  this  ultimate  blessing  of  the  nation.  The 
Epistle  to  the  Romans,  in  the  direct  instruction  which 
it  furnishes,  cannot  leave  this  place  for  the  blessings 
proper  to  the  Jewish  people.  In  its  point  of  view  all 
are  alike  sinners,  and  all  in  Christ  are  justified 
together  before  God  in  heaven.  Still  less  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  with  the  object  which  it  has 
in  view,  could  there  be  room  for  speaking  of  the 
future  blessing  of  God's  people  on  the  earth.  It  only 
contemplates  Christians  as  united  to  their  heavenly 
Head,  as  His  body ;  or  as  the  habitation  of  God  on 
earth  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Epistle  to  the  Romans, 
in  the  passage  that  shews  the  compatibility  of  this 
salvation  (which,  because  it  was  of  God,  was  for  all 
without  distinction)  with  the  faithfulness  of  God  to 


232  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

His  promises  made  to  the  nation,  touches  the  chord  of 
which  we  speak  even  more  distinctly  than  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews ;  and  shews  us  that  Israel  will — 
although  in  a  different  way  from  before — resume  their 
place  in  the  line  peculiar  to  the  heirs  of  promise  ;  a 
place  which,  through  their  sin,  was  partially  left 
vacant  for  a  time  to  allow  the  bringing  in  of  the 
Gentiles  on  the  principle  of  faith  into  this  blessed 
succession.  We  find  this  in  Romans  xi.  But  the 
object  in  both  epistles  is  to  separate  the  faithful 
entirely  from  earth,  and  to  bring  them  into  relation- 
ship religiously  with  heaven;  the  one  (that  to  the 
Romans)  as  regards  their  personal  presentation  to 
God  by  means  of  forgiveness  and  divine  righteousness, 
the  other  with  respect  to  the  means  that  God  has 
established,  in  order  that  the  believer,  in  his  walk 
here  below,  may  find  his  present  relationships  with 
heaven  maintained  and  hip  daily  connection  with  God 
preserved  in  its  irtegrity. 

I  have  said  preserved,  because  this  is  the  subject  of 
the  epistle;*  but  it  must  be  added,  that  these  relation- 
ships are  established  on  this  ground  by  divine  reve- 
lations, which  communicate  the  will  of  God  and  the 
conditions  under  which  He  is  pleased  to  connect 
Himself  with  His  people. 

We  should  also  remark,  that  in  the  Epistle  to  the 

*  It  will  be  found,  I  think,  that  in  Hebrews  the  exercise  of 
the  heavenly  priesthood  is  not  applied  to  the  case  of  a  fall  into 
sin.  It  is  for  mercy  and  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.  Its 
subject  is  access  to  God,  having  the  High  Priest  on  high;  and 
this  we  always  have.  The  conscience  is  always  perfect  (chaps. 
ix.,  X.)  as  to  imputation  and  thus  going  to  God.  In  1  John, 
where  communion  is  spoken  of,  which  is  interrupted  by  sin, 
we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father  if  any  man  sin — this  also 
founded  on  perfect  righteousness  and  propitiation  in  Him.  The 
priesthood  of  Christ  reconciles  a  perfect  heavenly  standing  with 
God,  with  a  weak  condition  on  earth  ever  liable  to  failure — gives 
comfort  and  dependence  in  the  path  through  the  desert. 


HEBREWS.  23S 

Hebrews,  although  the  relationship  of  the  people  with 
God  is  established  on  a  new  ground,  being  founded  on 
the  heavenly  position  of  the  Mediator,  they  are  con- 
sidered as  already  existing.  God  treats  with  a  people 
alreadj^  known  to  Him.  He  addresses  persons  in 
relationship  with  Himself,  and  who  for  a  long  period 
have  held  the  position  of  a  people  whom  God  had 
taken  out  from  the  world  unto  Himself.  It  is  not,  as 
in  Romans,  sinners  without  law  or  transgressors  of 
the  law,  between  whom  there  is  no  difference,  because 
all  have  alike  come  entirely  short  of  the  glory  of  God, 
ali  alike  are  the  children  of  wrath,  or,  as  in  Ephesians, 
an  entirely  new  creation  unknown  before.  They  were 
in  need  of  some  better  thing;  but  those  here  ad- 
dressed were  in  that  need  because  they  were  in 
relationship  with  God,  and  the  condition  of  their  rela- 
tionship with  Him  brought  nothing  to  perfection. 
That  which  they  po-^sessed  was  in  fa-t  nothing  but 
signs  and  fig-ures;  still,  the  people  were,  I  again  say,  a 
people  in  relationship  with  God.  Many  of  them  might 
refuse  the  new  method  of  blessing  and  grace,  and 
consequently  would  be  lost :  but  the  link  between 
the  people  and  God  is  accounted  to  subsist:  only 
that,  Messiah  having  been  revealed,  a  place  among 
that  people  could  not  be  had  but  in  the  recognition  of 
Messiah. 

It  is  very  important  for  the  understanding  of  this 
Epivstle  to  apprehend  this  point,  namely,  that  it  is 
addressed  to  Hebrews  on  the  ground  of  a  relationship 
which  still  existed,*  although  it  only  retained  its  force 
in  so  far  as  they  acknowledged  the  Messiah,  who  was 
its  corner-stone.     Hence  the  tirst  words  connect  their 

*  He  sanctifies  the  people  with  His  own  blood.  They  count 
the  blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  they  were  sanctified  an 
unholy  thing.  There  is  no  inward  sanctifying  operation  of  the 
Spirit  spoken  of  in  Hebrews,  though  there  are  exhortations  to 
the  pui'suit  of  holiness. 


234  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

present  state  with  previous  revelations,  instead  of 
breakinor  off  all  connection  and  introducing  a  new 
thing  as  yet  unrevealed. 

bume  remarks  on  the  form  of  the  epistle  will  help 
us  to  understand  it  better. 

It  does  not  contain  the  name  of  its  author.  The 
reason  of  this  is  touching  and  remarkable.  It  is  that 
the  Lord  Himself,  according  to  this  epistle,  was  the 
Apostle  of  Israel.  The  apostles  whom  He  sent  were 
only  employed  to  confirm  His  words  by  transmitting 
them  to  others,  God  Himself  confirming  their  testi- 
mony by  miraculous  gifts.  This  also  makes  us  under- 
stand that,  although  as  Priest  the  Lord  is  in  heaven 
for  the  exercise  of  His  priesthood  there,  and  in  order 
to  establish  on  new  ground  the  relationship  of  the 
people  with  God,  yet  the  communications  of  God  with 
His  people  by  means  of  the  Messiah  had  begun  when 
Jesus  was  on  earth  living  in  their  midst.  Conse- 
quently the  character  of  their  relationship  was  not 
union  with  Him  in  heaven  ;  it  was  relationship  with 
God  on  the  ground  of  divine  communications  and  of 
the  service  of  a  Mediator  with  God. 

Moreover  this  epistle  is  a  discourse,  a  treatise, 
rather  than  a  letter  addressed  in  the  exercise  of 
apostolic  functions  to  saints  with  whom  the  writer 
was  personally  in  connection.  The  author  takes  the 
place  of  a  teacher  rather  than  of  an  apostle.  He 
speaks  doubtless  from  the  height  of  the  heavenly 
calling,  but  in  connection  with  the  actual  position  of 
the  Jewish  people ;  nevertheless  it  was  for  the  purpose 
of  making  believers  at  length  understand  that  they 
must  abandon  that  position. 

The  time  for  judgment  on  the  nation  was  drawing 
near  ;  and  with  regard  to  this  the  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem had  great  significance,  because  it  definitely 
broke  off  all  outward  relationship  between  God  and 
the  Jewish  people.     There  was  no  longer  an  altar  or 


HEBREWS.  235 

sacrifice,  priest  or  sanctuary.  Every  link  was  then 
broken  by  judgment,  and  remains  broken  until  it 
shall  be  formed  again  under  the  new  covenant  accord- 
ing to  grace. 

Further,  it  will  be  found  that  there  is  more  contrast 
than  comparison.  The  veil  is  compared,  but  then, 
closing  the  entrance  to  the  sanctuary,  now,  a  new  and 
living  way  into  it ;  a  sacrifice,  but  then  repeated,  so  as 
to  say  sins  were  still  there,  now  once  for  all  so  that 
there  is  no  remembrance  of  sins;  and  so  of  every 
important  particular. 

The  author  of  this  epistle  (Paul,  I  doubt  not,  but 
this  is  of  little  importance)  employed  other  motives 
than  that  of  the  approaching  judginent  to  induce  the 
believing  Jews  to  abandon  their  Judaic  relationships. 
It  is  this  last  step  however  which  he  engages  them  to 
take ;  and  the  judgment  was  at  hand.  Until  now 
they  had  linked  Christianity  with  Judaism ;  there 
had  been  thousands  of  Christians  who  were  very 
zealous  for  the  law.  But  God  was  about  to  destroy 
that  system  altogether — already  in  fact  judged  by  the 
Jews'  rejection  of  Christ,  and  by  their  resistance  to 
the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Our  Epistle  en- 
gages believers  to  come  forth  entirely  from  that 
system  and  to  bear  the  Lord's  reproach,  setting  be- 
fore them  a  new  foundation  for  their  relationship 
with  God  in  a  High  Priest  who  is  in  the  heavens.  At 
the  same  time  it  links  all  that  it  says  with  the  testi- 
mony of  God  by  the  prophets  through  the  inter- 
medium of  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  speaking  during 
His  life  on  earth,  though  now  speaking  from  heaven. 

Thus  the  new  position  is  plainly  set  forth,  but 
continuity  with  the  former  is  also  established  ;  and  we 
have  a  glimpse,  by  means  of  the  new  covenant,  of 
continuity  also  with  that  which  is  to  come — a  thread 
by  which  another  state  of  things,  the  millennial  state, 
is  connected  with  the  whole  of  God's  dealings  with 


^36  THE  BOOKS  OF  TtlE  BIBLE. 

the  nation,  although  that  which  is  taught  and  deve- 
loped in  the  Epistle  is  the  position  of  believers  (of  the 
people),  formed  by  the  revelation  of  a  heavenly  Christ 
on  whom  depended  all  their  connection  with  God. 
They  were  to  come  forth  from  the  camp  ;  but  it  was 
because  Jesus,  in  order  to  sanctify  the  people  with  His 
own  blood,  suffered  without  the  gate.  For  here  there 
is  no  continuing  city :  we  seek  one  that  /is  to  come. 
The  writer  places  himself  among  the  remnant  of  the 
people  as  one  of  them.  He  teaches  with  the  full  light 
of  the  Holy  Ghosfc,  but  not  those  to  whom  he  had 
been  sent  as  an  apostle,  with  the  apostolic  authority 
which  such  a  mission  would  have  griven  him  over 
them.  It  will  be  understood  that  in  saying  this  we 
speak  of  the  relationship  of  the  writer,  not  of  the 
inspiration  of  the  writing. 

While  developing  the  sympathies  of  Christ  and  His 
sufferings,  in  order  to  shew  that  He  is  able  to  compas- 
sionate the  suffering  and  the  tried,  the  Epistle  does 
not  bring  forward  His  humiliation  nor  the  reproach  of 
the  cross,  till  quite  at  the  end  when — His  glory  having 
been  set  forth — the  author  engages  the  Jew  to  follow 
Him  and  to  share  His  reproach. 

The  glory  of  the  Messiah's  Person,  His  sympathies, 
His  heavenly  glory,  are  made  prominent  in  order  to 
strengthen  the  faltering  faith  of  the  Jewish  Christians, 
and  to  fortify  them  in  their  christian  position,  that 
they  might  view  the  latter  in  its  true  character ;  and 
that  they  themselves,  being  connected  with  heaven 
and  established  in  their  heavenly  calling,  might  learn 
to  bear  the  cross  and  to  separate  themselves  from  the 
religion  of  the  flesh,  and  not  draw  back  to  a  Judaism 
just  ready  to  pass  away. 

We  must  look  then  in  this  Epistle  for  the  character 
of  relationships  with  God,  formed  upon  the  revelation 
of  the  Messiah  in  the  position  which  He  had  taken  on 
high,   and   not   for   the   doctrine   of  a  new   nature 


HEBREWS.  257 

approach  to  God  in  the  holiest,  impossibk  in  Judaism, 
but  no  revelation  of  the  Father,  nor  union  with  Christ 
on  high. 

He  is  speaking  to  persons  who  were  familiar  with 
the  privileges  of  the  fathers. 

God  had  spoken  to  the  fathers  by  the  prophets  at 
different  times  and  in  different  ways ;  and  now,  at  the 
end  of  those  days,  that  is  to  say,  at  the  end  of  the 
days  of  the  Israelite  dispensation,  in  which  the  law 
ought  to  have  been  in  vigour,  at  the  end  of  the  times 
during  which  God  maintained  relationship  with  Israel 
(sustaining  them  with  a  disobedient  people  by  means 
of  the  prophets) — at  the  end  then  of  those  days  God 
had  spoken  in  the  Person  of  the  Son.  There  is  no 
breach  to  begin  a  wholly  new  system.  The  God  who 
had  spoken  before  by  the  prophets  now  went  on  to 
speak  in  Christ. 

It  was  not  only  by  inspiring  holy  men  (as  He  had 
done  before),  that  they  might  recall  Israel  to  the  law 
and  announce  the  coming  of  the  Messiah.  Himself 
had  spoken  as  the  Son — in  [His]  Son.  We  see  at 
once  that  the  writer  connects  the  revelation  made  by 
Jesus*  of  the  thoughts  of  God,  with  the  former  words 
addressed  to  Israel  by  the  prophets.  God  has  spoken, 
he  says,  identifying  himself  with  His  people,  to  us,  as 
He  spake  to  our  fathers  by  the  prophets. 

The  Messiah  had  spoken,  the  Son  of  whom  the 
scriptures  had  already  tes tilled.  This  gives  occasion 
to  lay  open,  according  to  the  scriptures,  the  glory  of 
this  Messiah,  of  Jesus,  with  regard  to  His  Person,  and 
to  the  position  He  has  taken. 

*  We  shall  see  that,  while  shewing  at  the  outset  that  the  sub- 
ject of  his  discourse  had  seated  Himself  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  he  speaks  also  of  the  communications  of  the  Lord  when  on 
earth.  But  even  here  it  is  in  contrast  av.lu  Moses  and  the 
angels  as  far  more  excellent.  All  has  in  view  the  deliverance  of 
the  belie vin^^  Jews  from  Judaism. 


238  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

And  here  we  must  always  remember,  that  it  is  the 
Messiah  of  whom  he  is  speaking — He  who  once  spoke 
on  the  earth.  He  declares  indeed  His  divine  glory ; 
but  it  is  the  glory  of  Him  who  has  spoken  which 
he  declares,  the  glory  of  that  Son  who  had  appeared 
according  to  the  promises  made  to  Israel. 

This  glory  is  twofold,  and  in  connection  with  the 
twofold  office  of  Christ.  It  is  the  divine  glory  of  the 
Person  of  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God.  The  solemn 
authority  of  His  word  is  connected  with  this  glory. 
And  then  there  is  the  glory  with  which  His  humanity 
is  invested  according  to  the  counsels  of  God — the 
glory  of  the  Son  of  man ;  a  glory  connected  with  His 
sufferings  during  His  sojourn  here  below,  which  fitted 
Him  for  the  exercise  of  a  priesthood  both  merciful 
and  intelligent  with  regard  to  the  necessities  and  the 
trials  of  His  people. 

These  two  chapters  are  the  foundation  of  all  the 
doctrine  of  the  epistle.  In  chapter  i.  we  find  the 
divine  glory  of  the  Messiah's  Person;  in  chapter  ii. 
1-4  (which  continues  the  subject),  the  authority  of 
His  word ;  and  from  5-18  His  glorious  humanity.  As 
man,  all  things  are  put  in  subjection  under  Him; 
nevertheless,  before  being  glorified,  He  took  part  in 
all  the  sufferings  and  in  all  the  temptations  to  which 
the  saints,  whose  nature  He  had  assumed,  are  sub- 
jected. With  this  glory  His  priesthood  is  connected : 
He  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted,  in  that 
He  Himself  hath  suffered  being  tempted.  Thus  He 
is  the  Apostle  and  the  High  Priest  of  the  "  called  " 
people. 

To  this  twofold  glory  is  joined  an  accessory  glory : 
He  is  Head,  as  Son,  over  God's  house,  possessing  this 
authority  as  the  One  who  created  all  things,  even  as 
Moses  had  authority  as  a  servant  in  the  house  of  God 
on  earth.  Now  the  believers,  whom  the  inspired 
writer  was  addressing,  were  this  house,  if  at   least 


HEBKEWS.  239 

they  held  fast  their  confession  of  His  name  unto  the 
end.  For  the  danger  of  the  Hebrew  converts  was  that 
of  losino'  their  confidence,  because  there  was  nothino- 
before  their  eyes  as  the  fulfihuent  of  the  promises. 
Cunsequently  exhortations  follow  (chap.  iii.  7 — iv.  13) 
wliich  refer  to  the  voice  of  tlie  Lord,  as  carrying  the 
word  of  God  into  the  midst  of  the  people,  in  order  that 
they  might  not  harden  their  hearts. 

From  chapter  iv.  14  the  subject  of  the  priesthood  is 
treated,  leading  to  the  value  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ, 
but  introducing  also  the  two  covenants  in  passing, 
and  insisting  on  the  change  of  the  law  necessarily 
consequent  upon  the  change  of  priesthood.  Then 
comes  the  value  of  the  sacrilice  very  fully  in  contrast 
with  the  figures  that  accompanied  the  old  ;  and  on 
which,  and  on  the  blood  which  was  shed  in  them,  the 
covenant  itself  was  founded.  This  instruction  on  the 
priesthood  continues  to  the  end  of  verse  18  in  chapter  x. 
The  exhortations  founded  thereon  introduce  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  endurance  of  faith,  which  leads  to  chapter 
xi.,  in  which  the  cloud  of  witnesses  is  reviewed, 
crowning  them  with  the  example  of  Christ  Himself, 
who  completed  the  whole  career  of  faith  in  spite  of 
every  obstacle,  and  who  shews  us  where  this  painful 
but  glorious  path  terminates.  (Chap.  xii.  2.) 

From  chapter  xii.  3  he  enters  more  closely  into  the 
trials  found  in  the  path  of  faith,  and  gives  the  most 
solemn  warning  with  regard  to  the  danger  of  those 
who  draw  back,  and  the  most  precious  encouragements 
to  those  who  persevere  in  it,  setting  forth  the  relation- 
ship into  which  we  are  brought  by  grace :  and  finally 
in  chapter  xiii.  he  exhorts  the  faithful  Hebrews  on 
several  points  of  detail,  and  in  particular  on  that  of 
unreservedly  taking  the  christian  position  under  the 
cross,  laying  stress  on  the  fact  that  Christians  alone 
had  the  true  worship  of  God,  and  that  they  who  chose 
to  persevere  in  Judaism  had  no  right  to  take  part  in 


240  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

it.  In  a  word,  he  would  have  them  to  separate  them- 
selves definitely  from  a  Judaism  which  was  already 
judged,  and  to  lay  hold  of  the  heavenly  calling,  bear- 
ing the  cross  here  below.  It  was  now  a  heavenly 
calling,  and  the  path  a  path  of  faith. 

Such  is  the  summary  of  our  Epistle.  We  return 
now  to  the  study  of  its  chapters  in  detail. 

Chapter  i.  We  have  said  that  in  chapter  i.  we  find 
the  glory  of  the  Person  of  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of 
God,  by  whom  God  has  spoken  to  the  people.  When 
I  say  "  to  the  people,"  it  is  evident  that  we  understand 
the  Epistle  to  be  addressed  to  the  believing  remnant, 
partakers,  it  is  said,  of  the  heavenly  calling,  but 
considered  as  alone  holding  the  true  place  of  the 
people. 

It  is  a  distinction  given  to  the  remnant,  in  view  of 
the  position  which  the  Messiah  took  in  connection 
with  His  people,  to  whom  in  the  first  instance  He 
came.  The  tried  and  despised  remnant,  viewed  as 
alone  really  having  their  place,  are  encouraged,  and 
their  faith  is  sustained  by  the  true  glory  of  their 
Messiah,  hidden  from  their  natural  eyes,  and  the  object 
of  faith  only, 

"  God "  (says  the  inspired  writer,  placing  himself 
among  the  believers  of  the  beloved  nation),  "  has 
spoken  to  us  in  the  person  of  his  Son."  Psalm  ii. 
should  have  led  the  Jews  to  expect  the  Son,  and 
they  ought  to  have  formed  a  high  idea  of  His  glory 
from  Isaiah  ix.,  and  other  scriptures,  which  in  fact 
were  applied  to  the  Messiah  by  their  teachers,  as  the 
rabbinical  writings  still  prove.  But  that  He  should 
be  in  heaven,  and  not  have  raised  His  people  to  the 
possession  of  earthly  glory — this  did  not  suit  the 
carnal  state  of  their  hearts. 

Now  it  is  heavenly  glory,  this  true  position  of  the 
Messiah  and  His  people,  in  connection  with  His  divine 


HEBREWS.  241 

right  to  their  attention  and  to  the  worship  of  the 
angels  themselves,  which  is  so  admirably  presented 
here,  where  the  Spirit  of  God  brings  out,  in  so  in- 
finitely precious  a  manner,  the  divine  glory  of  Christ, 
for  the  purpose  of  exhorting  His  people  to  belief  in  a' 
heavenly  position;  at  the  same  time  setting  forth  in 
what  follows  His  perfect  sympathy  with  us,  as  man, 
in  order  to  maintain  their  communion  with  heaven  in 
spite  of  the  difficulties  of  their  path  on  earth. 

Thus,  although  the  assembly  is  not  found  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  save  in  an  allusion  to  all 
comprised  in  the  millennial  glory  in  chapter  xii.,  the 
Saviour  of  the  assembly  is  there  presented  in  His 
Person,  His  work,  and  His  priesthood,  most  richly  to 
our  hearts  and  to  our  spiritual  intelligence  ;  and  the 
heavenly  calling  is  in  itself  very  particularly  deve- 
loped. 

It  is  also  most  interesting  to  see  the  way  in  which 
the  work  of  our  Saviour,  accomplished  for  us,  forms  a 
part  of  the  manifestation  of  His  divine  glory. 

"  God  has  spoken  in  the  Son,"  says  the  inspired 
author  of  our  Epistle.  He  is  then  this  Son.  First 
Tie  is  declared  Heir  of  all  things.  It  is  He  who  is 
to  possess  gloriously  as  Son  everything  that  exists. 
Such  are  the  decrees  of  God.  Moreover  it  is  by  Him 
that  God  created  the  worlds.*  All  the  vast  system  of 
this  universe,  those  unknown  worlds  that  trace  theii 
paths  in  the  vast  regions  of  space  in  divine  order  to 
manifest  the  glory  of  a  Creator- God,  are  the  work  of 
His  hand  who  has  spoken  to  us,  of  the  divine  Christ. 

In  Him  has  shone  forth  the  glory  of  God :  He  is  the 
perfect  impress  of  His  being.  We  see  God  in  Him,  in 
all  that  He  said,  in  all  that  He  did,  in  His  Person. 

*  A  particular  interpretation  has,  by  some,  been  given  to  the 
word  aiuivag  translated  "-worlds;"  but  it  is  certain  that  the  word 
is  used  b}^  the  LXX  (that  is,  in  the  Hellenistic  or  scriptural 
Greek)  for  the  physical  worlds. 

yoL,  V.  ;.  ^ 


242  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

Moreover  by  the  power  of  His  word  He  upholds  all 
that  exists.  He  is  then  the  Creator.  God  is  revealed 
in  His  Person.  He  sustains  all  things  by  His  word, 
which  has  thus  a  divine  power.  But  this  is  not  all 
(for  we  are  still  speaking  of  the  Christ) ;  there  is 
another  part  of  His  glory,  divine  indeed,  yet  mani- 
fested in  human  nature.  He  who  was  all  this  which 
we  have  just  seen,  when  He  had  by  Himself  (accom- 
plishing His  own  glory,*  and  for  His  glory)  wrought 
the  purification  of  our  sins,  seated  Himself  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  Here  is  in  full  the  per- 
sonal glory  of  Christ.  He  is  in  fact  the  Creator,  the 
revelation  of  God,  the  upholder  of  all  things  by  His 
word.  He  is  the  Redeemer.  He  has  by  Himself  purged 
our  sins ;  has  seated  Himself  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high.  It  is  the  Messiah  who  is  all  this. 
He  is  the  Creator- God,  but  He  is  a  Messiah  who  has 
taken  His  place  in  the  heavens  at  the  right  hand  of 
Majesty,  having  accomplished  the  purification  of  our 
sins.  We  perceive  how  this  exhibition  of  the  glory  of 
Christ,  the  Messiah,  whether  personal  or  that  of  posi- 
tion, would  bring  whoever  believed  in  it  out  of 
Judaism,  while  linking  itself  with  the  Jewish  promises 
and  hopes.  He  is  God,  He  has  come  down  from 
heaven,  He  has  gone  up  thither  again. 

Now  those  who  attached  themselves  to  Him  found 
themselves,  in  another  respect  also,  above  the  Jewish 
system.  That  system  was  ordained  in  connection 
with  angels;  but  Christ  has  taken  a  position  much 
higher  than  that  of  angels,  because  He  has  for  His 
own  proper  inheritance  a  name  (that  is,  a  revelation 
of  what  He  is)  which  is  much  more  excellent  than 
that  of  angels.     Upon  this  the  author  of  this  Epistle 

*  The  Greek  verb  has  here  a  peculiar  form,  which  gives  it  a 
reflective  sense,  causing  the  thing  done  to  return  into  the  doer, 
throwing  back  the  glory  of  the  thing  done  upon  the  one  who 

'lid  it. 


HEBEEWS.  243 

quotes  several  passages  from  the  Old  Testament  which 
speak  of  the  Messiah,  in  order  to  shew  that  which  He 
is  in  contrast  with-the  nature  and  the  relative  position 
of  angels.  The  significance  of  these  passages  to  a 
converted  Jew  is  evident,  and  we  readily  perceive  the 
adaptation  of  the  argument  to  such,  for  the  Jewish 
economy  was  under  the  administration  of  angels, 
according  to  their  own  belief — a  belief  fully  grounded 
on  the  word.*  And,  at  the  same  time,  it  was  their 
own  scriptures  which  proved  that  the  Messiah  was  to 
have  a  position  much  more  excellent  and  exalted  than 
that  of  angels,  according  to  the  rights  that  belonged 
to  Him  by  virtue  of  His  nature,  and  according  to  the 
counsels  and  the  revelation  of  God :  so  that  they  who 
united  themselves  to  Him  were  brought  into  connec- 
tion with  that  which  entirely  eclipsed  the  law  and  all 
that  related  to  it,  and  to  the  Jewish  economy  which 
could  not  be  separated  from  it,  and  whose  glory  was 
angelic  in  character.  The  glory  of  Christianity — and 
he  speaks  to  those  who  acknowledged  Jesus  to  be  the 
Christ — was  so  much  above  the  glory  of  the  law,  that 
the  two  could  not  be  really  united. 

The  quotations  begin  by  that  from  Psalm  ii.  God, 
it  is  written,  has  never  said  to  any  of  the  angels, 
"Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee." 
It  is  this  character  of  Sonship,  proper  to  the  Messiah, 
which,  as  a  real  relationship,  distinguishes  Him.  He 
was  from  eternity  the  Son  of  the  Father ;  but  it  is  not 
precisely  in  this  point  of  view  that  He  is  here  con- 
sidered. The  name  expresses  the  same  relationship, 
but  it  is  to  the  Messiah  born  on  earth  that  this  title  is 
here  applied.  For  Psalm  ii.,  as  establishing  Him  as 
King  in  Zion,  announces  the  decree  which  proclaims 
His  title.  "Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  be- 
gotten thee,"  is  His  relationship  in  time,  with  God.    It 

*  See  Psalm  Ixviii.  17 ;  Acts  vii.  53 ;  Galatians  iii.  10. 
I. 


244  THE    BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

depends,  I  doubt  not,  on  His  glorious  nature ;  but  this 
position  for  man  was  acquired  by  the  miraculous 
birth  of  Jesus  here  below,  and  demonstrated  as  true 
and  determined  in  its  true  import  by  His  resurrection. 
In  Psalm  ii.  the  testimony  borne  to  this  relationship 
is  in  connection  with  His  kingship  in  Zion,  but  it 
declares  the  personal  glories  of  the  King  acknowledged 
of  God.  By  virtue  of  the  rights  connected  with  this 
title,  all  kings  are  summoned  to  submit  themselves  to 
Him.  This  Psalm  then  is  speaking  of  the  government 
of  the  world,  when  God  establishes  the  Messiah  as 
King  in  Zion,  and  not  of  the  gospel.  But  in  the 
passage  quoted  (Heb.  i.  5),  it  is  the  relationship  of 
glory  in  which  Ha  subsists  with  God,  the  foundation 
of  His  rights,  which  is  set  forth,  and  not  the  royal 
rights  themselves. 

This  is  likewise  the  case  in  the  next  quotation :  "  I 
will  be  to  him  a  Father,  and  he  shall  be  to  me  a  Son." 
Here  we  plainly  see  that  it  is  the  relationship  in  which 
He  is  with  God,  in  which  God  accepts  and  owns  Him, 
and  not  His  eternal  relationship  with  the  Father :  "  I 
tv'dl  be  to  him  a  Father,"  &c.  Thus  it  is  still  the 
Messiah,  the  King  in  Zion,  the  Son  of  David ;  for 
these  words  are  applied  in  the  first  place  to  Solo- 
mon, as  the  son  of  David.  (2  Sam.  vii.  14  and  1  Chron. 
xvii.  13.)  In  this  second  passage  the  application  of 
the  expression  to  the  true  son  of  David  is  more  dis- 
tinct. A  relationship  so  intimate  (expressed,  one  may 
say,  with  so  much  affection)  was  not  the  portion  of 
angels.  The  Son  of  God,  acknowledged  to  be  so  by 
God  Himself — this  is  the  portion  of  the  Messiah  in 
connection  with  God.  The  Messiah  then  is  the  Son  of 
God  in  an  altogether  peculiar  wa}^,  which  could  not  be 
applied  to  angels. 

But  still  more: — when  God  introduces  the  Firstborn 
mto  the  world,  all  the  angels  are  called  to  worship 
Him.      God    presents    Him   to    the   world ;   but   the 


HEBREWS.  245 

highest  of  created  beings  must  then  cast  themselves  at 
His  feet.  The  angels  of  God  Himself — the  creatures 
that  are  nearest  to  Him — must  do  homage  to  the 
Firstborn.  This  last  expression  also  is  remarkable. 
The  Firstborn  is  the  Heir,  the  beginning  of  the  mani- 
festation of  the  glory  and  power  of  God.  It  is  in  this 
sense  that  the  word  is  used.  It  is  said  of  the  Son  of 
David,  "I  will  make  him  my  firstborn,  higher  than 
the  kings  of  the  earth."  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  27.)  Thus  the 
Messiah  is  introduced  into  the  v^^orld  as  holding  this 
place  with  regard  to  God  Himself.  He  is  the  First- 
born— the  immediate  expression  of  the  rights  and  the 
glory  of  God.     He  has  universal  pre-eminence. 

Such  is,  so  to  speak,  the  positional  glory  of  the 
Messiah.  Not  only  Head  of  the  people  on  earth,  as 
Son  of  David,  nor  even  only  the  acknowledged  Son  of 
God  on  the  earth,  according  to  Psalm  ii.,  but  the 
universal  Firstborn;  so  that  the  chief  and  most  exalted 
of  creatures,  those  nearest  to  God,  the  angels  of  God, 
the  instruments  of  His  power  and  government,  must 
do  homage  to  the  Son  in  this  His  position. 

Yet  this  is  far  from  being  all ;  and  this  homage 
itself  would  be  out  of  place  if  His  glory  were  not 
l)roper  to  Himself  and  personal,  if  it  were  not  con- 
nected with  His  nature.  Nevertheless  that  which  we 
liave  before  us  in  this  chapter  is  still  the  Messiah  as 
owned  of  God.  God  tells  us  what  He  is.  Of  the 
angels  He  says, "  He  maketh  his  angels  spirits,  and  his 
ministers  a  flame  of  fire."  He  does  not  make  His  Son 
anything:  He  recognises  that  which  He  is,  saying, 
"Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever."  The 
Messiah  may  have  an  earthly  throne  (which  also  is 
not  taken  from  Him,  but  which  ceases  by  His  taking 
possession  of  an  eternal  throne),  but  He  has  a  throne 
which  is  for  ever  and  ever. 

The  sceptre  of  His  throne,  as  Messiah,  is  a  sceptre 
of   righteousness.     Also   He   has,  when   here   below 

L 


246  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

personally  loved  righteousness  and  hated  iniquity: 
therefore  God  has  anointed  Him  with  the  oil  of 
gladness  above  His  fellows.  These  companions  are 
the  believing  remnant  of  Israel,  whom  He  has  made 
by  grace  His  fellows,  although  (perfectly  well-pleasing 
to  God  by  His  love  of  righteousness — and  that,  at  all 
costs)  He  is  exalted  above  them  all.  This  is  a  remark- 
able passage,  because,  while  on  the  one  hand  the 
divinity  of  the  Lord  is  fully  established  as  well  as 
His  eternal  throne,  on  the  other  hand  the  passage 
comes  down  to  His  character  as  the  faithful  man  on 
earth,  where  He  made  pious  men — the  little  remnant 
of  Israel  who  waited  for  redemption,  His  companions ; 
at  the  same  time  it  gives  Him  (and  it  could  not  be 
otherwise)  a  place  above  them. 

The  text  then  returns  to  the  glory  given  Him  as 
Man,  having  the  pre-eminence  here  as  in  all  things. 

I  have  already  remarked  elsewhere  that  while,  as 
we  read  in  Zechariah,  Jehovah  recognises  as  His 
fellow  the  humbled  man,  against  whom  His  sword 
awakes  to  smite ;  here,  where  the  divinity  of  Jesus  is 
set  forth,  the  same  Jehovah  owns  the  poor  remnant  of 
believers  as  the  fellows  of  the  divine  Saviour.  Mar- 
vellous links  between  God  and  His  people  ! 

Already  then  in  these  remarkable  testimonies  He 
has  the  eternal  throne  and  the  sceptre  of  righteousness: 
He  is  recognised  as  God  although  a  man,  and  glorified 
above  all  others  as  the  reward  of  righteousness. 

But  the  declaration  of  His  divinity,  the  divinity  of 
the  Messiah,  must  be  more  precise.  And  the  testi- 
mony is  of  the  greatest  beauty.  The  Psalm  that 
contains  it  is  one  of  the  most  complete  expressions  we 
find  in  scripture  of  the  sense  which  Jesus  had  of  His 
humiliation  on  earth,  of  His  dependence  on  Jehovah, 
and  that,  having  been  raised  up  as  Messiah  from 
among  men,  He  was  cast  down  and  His  days  shortened. 
If  Zion  were  re-built  (and  the  Psalm  speaks  propheti- 


HEBREWS.  247 

cally  of  the  time  when  it  shall  take  place),  where 
would  He  be,  Messiah  as  He  was,  if,  weakened  and 
humbled,  He  was  cut  off  in  the  midst  of  His  days  (as 
was  the  case)  ?  In  a  word,  it  is  the  prophetic  expres- 
sion of  the  Saviour's  heart  in  the  prospect  of  that 
which  happened  to  Him  as  a  man  on  the  earth,  the 
utterance  of  His  heart  to  Jehovah,  in  those  days  of 
humiliation,  in  presence  of  the  renewed  affection  of 
the  remnant  for  the  dust  of  Zion — an  affection  which 
the  Lord  had  produced  in  their  hearts,  and  which 
was  therefore  a  token  of  His  good- will  and  His  pur- 
pose to  re-establish  it.  But  how  could  a  Saviour  who 
was  cut  off  have  part  in  it  ?  (a  searching  question  for 
a  believing  Jew,  tempted  on  that  side).  The  words 
here  quoted  are  the  answer  to  this  question.  Humbled 
as  He  might  be,  He  was  the  Creator  Himself.  He 
was  ever  the  same;*  His  years  could  never  fail.  It 
was  He  who  had  founded  the  heavens :  He  would  fold 
them  up  as  a  garment,  but  He  Himself  would  never 
change. 

Such  then  is  the  testimony  rendered  to  the  Messiah 
by  the  scriptures  of  the  Jews  themselves — the  glory 
of  His  position  above  the  angels  who  administered  the 
dispensation  of  the  law  ;  His  eternal  throne  of  right- 
eousness ;  His  unchangeable  divinity  as  Creator  of  all 
things. 

One  thing  remained  to  complete  this  chain  of  glory 
— that  is,  the  place  occupied  at  present  by  Christ,  in 
contrast  still  with  the  angels  (a  place  that  depends,  on 
the  one  hand,  upon  the  divine  glory  of  His  Person  ;  on 
the  other,  upon  the  accomplishment  of  His  work). 
And  this  place  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  called 
Him  to  sit  there  until  He  had  made  His  enemies  His 

*  The  words  translated,  "  Thou  art  the  same,"  (Atta  Hu)  are 
by  many  learned  Hebraists  taken — at  least  Hu— as  a  name  of 
God.  At  any  rate,  as  unchangeably  the  same,  it  amounts  to  it. 
The  not  failing  years  are  endless  duration  when  become  a  man. 

I. 


^48  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

footstool.  Not  only  in  His  Person  glorious  and  divine, 
not  only  does  He  hold  the  first  place  with  regard  to 
all  creatures  in  the  universe  (we  have  spoken  of  this, 
which  will  take  place  when  He  is  introduced  into  the 
world),  but  He  has  His  own  place  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  in  the  heavens.  To  which  of  the  angels 
has  God  ever  said  this  ?  They  are  servants  on  God's 
part  to  the  heirs  of  salvation. 

Chapter  ii.  This  is  the  reason  why  it  is  so  much  the 
more  needful  to  hearken  to  the  word  spoken,  in  order 
that  they  should  not  let  it  pass  away  from  life  and 
memory. 

God  had  maintained  the  authority  of  the  word  that 
was  communicated  by  means  of  angels,  punishing  dis- 
obedience to  it,  for  it  was  a  law.  How  then  shall  we 
escape  if  we  neglect  a  salvation  which  the  Lord  Him- 
self has  announced  ?  Thus  the  service  of  the  Lord 
among  the  Jews  was  a  word  of  salvation,  which  the 
apostles  confirmed,  and  which  the  mighty  testimony  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  established. 

Such  is  the  exhortation  addressed  to  the  believing 
Jews,  founded  on  the  glory  of  the  Messiah,  whether 
with  regard  to  His  position  or  His  Person,  calling 
them  away  from  what  was  Jewish  to  higher  thoughts 
of  Christ. 

We  have  already  remarked  that  the  testimony,  of 
which  this  epistle  treats,  is  attributed  to  the  Lord 
Himself.  Therefore  we  must  not  expect  to  find  in  it 
the  assembly  (as  such),  of  which  the  Lord  had  only 
spoken  prophetically;  but  His  testimony  in  relation 
to  Israel,  among  whom  He  sojourned  on  the  earth, 
to  whatever  extent  that  testimony  reached.  That 
which  was  spoken  by  the  apostles  is  only  treated  here 
as  a  confirmation  of  the  Lord's  own  word,  God  having 
added  His  testimony  to  it  by  the  miraculous  manifes- 
tations of  the  Spirit,  who  distributed  His  gifts  to  each 
according  to  His  will. 


HEBREWS.  249 

The  glory  of  which  we  have  been  speaking  is  the 
personal  glory  of  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  David;  and 
His  glory  in  the  time  presents,  during  which  God  has 
called  Him  to  sit  at  His  right  hand.  He  is  the  Son 
of  God,  He  is  even  the  Creator ;  but  there  is  also  His 
glory  in  connection  with  the  world  to  come,  as  Son  of 
man.  Of  this  chapter  ii.  speaks,  comparing  Him  still 
with  the  angels ;  but  here  to  exclude  them  altogether. 
In  the  previous  chapter  they  had  their  place  :  the  law 
was  given  by  angels  ;  they  are  servants,  on  God's  part, 
of  the  heirs  of  salvation.  In  chapter  ii.  they  have  no 
place,  they  do  not  reign ;  the  world  to  come  is  not 
made  subject  to  them — that  is,  this  habitable  earth, 
directed  and  governed  as  it  will  be  when  God  shall 
have  accomplished  that  which  He  has  spoken  of  by 
tlie  prophets. 

The  order  of  the  world,  placed  in  relationship  with 
Jehovah  under  the  law,  or  "  lying  in  darkness,"  has 
been  interrupted  by  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  who 
has  taken  His  place  at  the  right  hand  of  God  on  high, 
His  enemies  being  not  yet  given  into  His  hand  for 
judgment;  because  God  is  carrying  on  His  work  oi 
grace,  and  gathering  out  the  assembly.  But  He  will 
yet  establish  a  new  order  of  things  on  the  earth ;  this 
will  be  "  the  world  to  come."  Now  that  world  is  not 
made  subject  to  angels.  The  testimony  given  in  the 
Old  Testament  with  regard  to  this  is  as  follows : 
"  What  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him  ;  or  the  son 
of  man  that  thou  visitest  him  ?  Thou  hast  made  him  a 
little  lower  than  the  angels ;  thou  hast  crowned  him 
with  glory  and  honour;  thou  hast  set  him  over  the 
works  of  thy  hands ;  thou  hast  put  all  things  under 
liis  feet."  Thus  all  things  without  exception  (save  He 
who  has  made  them  subject  to  Him),  are,  according  to 
the  purpose  of  God,  put  under  the  feet  of  man,  and  in 
particular  of  the  Son  of  man. 

When  studying  the  Book  of  Psalms,  we  saw  that 
II. 


250  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

which  I  recall  here,  namely,  that  this  testimony  in 
Psalm  viii.  is,  with  regard  to  the  position  and  domi- 
nion of  Christ  as  man,  an  advance  upon  Psalm  ii. 
Psalm  i.  sets  before  us  the  righteous  man,  accepted  of 
God,  the  godly  remnant  with  which  Christ  connected 
Himself ;  Psalm  ii.,  the  counsels  of  God  respecting  His 
Messiah,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  made  by  the  kings  and 
governors  of  the  earth.  God  establishes  Him  as  King 
in  Zion,  and  summons  all  the  kings  to  do  homage  to 
Him  whom  He  proclaimed  to  be  His  Son  on  the  earth. 
Afterwards  we  see  that  being  rejected  the  remnant 
suffer,  and  this  Psalm  ii.  is  what  Peter  quotes  to  prove 
the  rising  up  of  the  powers  of  the  earth,  Jewish  and 
Gentile,  against  Messiah.  (Acts  iv.  26.)  But  Psalm  viii. 
shews  that  all  this  only  served  to  enlarge  the  sphere 
of  His  glory.  Christ  takes  the  position  of  man  and 
the  title  of  Son  of  man,  and  enjoys  His  rights  accord- 
ing to  the  counsels  of  God ;  and,  made  lower  than  the 
angels,  He  is  crowned  with  glory  and  honour.  And 
not  only  are  the  kings  of  the  earth  made  subject  to 
Him,  but  all  things,  without  exception,  are  put  under 
His  feet.*  It  is  this  which  the  apostle  quotes  here. 
The  Christ  had  already  been  rejected,  and  His  being 
established  as  King  in  Zion  put  off  to  be  accomplished  at 
a  later  period.  He  had  been  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of 
God,  as  we  have  seen  ;  and  the  wider  title  had  accrued 
to  Him,  although  the  result  was  not  yet  accomplished. 
To  this  the  epistle  here  calls  our  attention.  We  see 
not  yet  the  accomplishment  of  all  that  this  Psalm 
announces,  namely,  that  all  things  should  be  put 
under  His  feet;  but  a  part  is  already  fulfilled,  a 
guarantee  to  the  heart  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  whole. 

.  *  Compare  the  answer  of  Christ  to  Nathanael  at  the  end  of 
John  i. ;  also  Matthew  xvii.  and  Luke  ix.,  where  the  disciples 
are  forbidden  to  announce  Him  as  the  Christ,  and  He  declares 
He  is  about  to  suffer  as  Son  of  man,  but  shews  them  the  coming 
glory. 


HEBREWS.  251 

Made  a  little  lower  than  the^angels  in  order  to  suffer 
death,  He  is  crowned  with  glory  and  honour.  He  has 
suftered  death,  and  He  is  crowned  in  reward  for  His 
work,  by  which  He  perfectly  glorified  God  in  the 
place  where  He  had  been  dishonoured,  and  saved  man 
(those  who  believe  in  Him)  where  man  was  lost.  For 
He  was  made  lower  than  the  angels,  in  order  that,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  He  should  taste  death  for  all  things. 
It  appears  to  me  that  the  words  "  for  the  suffering  of 
death,"  and  "a  little  lower  than  the  angels"  go  together; 
and  "  so  that  by  the  grace  of  God  "  is  a  general  phrase 
connected  with  the  whole  truth  stated. 

This  passage  then,  which  is  thus  applied  to  the 
Lord,  presents  Him  as  exalted  to  heaven  when  He  had 
undergone  the  death  which  gave  Him  a  right  to  all  in 
a  new  way  while  waiting  till  all  is  put  under  His  feet. 
But  there  is  another  truth  connected  with  this.  He 
had  undertaken  the  cause  of  the  sons  whom  God  is 
bringing  to  glory,  and  therefore  He  must  enter  into 
the  circumstances  in  which  they  were  found,  suffer  the 
consequences  thereof,  and  be  treated  according  to  the 
work  He  had  undertaken.  It  was  a  reality;  and  it 
was  fitting  that  God  should  vindicate  the  rights  of 
His  glor}',  and  should  maintain  it  with  reference  to 
those  who  had  dishonoured  Him,  and  that  He  should 
treat  the  one  who  had  taken  their  cause  in  hand,  and 
who  stood  before  Him  in  their  name,  as  representing 
them  in  that  respect.  God  would  bring  the  captain 
of  their  salvation  to  perfection  through  sufferings. 
He  was  to  undergo  the  consequences  of  the  situation 
into  which  He  had  come.  His  work  was  to  be  a 
reality,  according  to  the  measure  of  the  responsibility 
which  He  had  taken  upon  Himself,  and  it  involved 
the  glory  of  God  where  sin  was.  He  must  therefore 
suffer;  He  must  taste  death.  It  is  by  the  grace  of 
God  that  He  did  so — ^we,  because  of  sin ;  He,  because 
of  grace  for  sin. 

n. 


252  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

This  shews  us  the  Christ  standing  in  the  midst  of 
those  who  are  saved,  whom  God  brings  to  glory, 
although  at  their  head.  It  is  this  which  our  epistle 
sets  before  us — He  who  sanctifies  (the  Christ),  and 
they  who  are  sanctified  (the  remnant  set  apart  for 
God  by  the  Spirit)  are  all  of  one  :  an  expression,  the 
force  of  which  is  easily  apprehended,  but  difficult  to 
express,  when  one  abandons  the  abstract  nature  of 
the  phrase  itself.  Observe  that  it  is  only  of  sanctified 
persons  that  this  is  said.  Christ  and  the  sanctified 
ones  are  all  one  company,  men  together  in  the  same 
position  before  God.  But  the  idea  goes  a  little 
farther. 

It  is  not  of  one  and  the  same  Father ;  had  it  been 
so,  it  could  not  have  been  said,  '•  He  is  not  ashamed  to 
call  them  brethren."  He  could  not  then  do  otherwise 
than  call  them  brethren. 

If  we  say  "  of  the  same  mass  "  the  expression  may 
be  pushed  too  far,  as  though  He  and  the  others  were 
of  the  same  nature  as  children  of  Adam,  sinners 
together.  In  this  case  He  would  have  to  call  every 
man  His  brother;  whereas  it  is  only  the  children 
whom  God  has  given  Him,  "  sanctified  "  ones,  that  He 
so  calls.  But  He  and  the  sanctified  ones  are  all  as 
men  in  the  same  nature  and  position  together  before 
God.  When  I  say  "  the  same,"  it  is  not  in  the  same 
state  of  sin,  but  the  contrary,  for  they  are  the  Sanctifier 
and  the  sanctified,  but  in  the  same  truth  of  human 
position  as  it  is  before  God  as  sanctified  to  Him ;  the 
same  as  far  forth  as  man  when  He,  as  the  sanctified 
one,  is  before  God.  On  this  account  He  is  not  ashamed 
to  call  the  sanctified  His  brethren. 

This  position  is  entirely  gained  by  resurrection ;  for 
although,  in  principle,  the  children  were  given  to  Him 
before,  yet  He  only  called  them  His  brethren  when 
He  had  finished  the  work  which  enabled  Him  to  pre- 
sent them  with  Himself  before  God.     He  said  indeed 


HEBREWS.  253 

"mother,  sister,  brother;"  but  He  did  not  use  the 
term  "  my  brethren,"  until  He  said  to  Mary  of  Ma^dala, 
"  Go  to  my  brethren,  and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend  to 
my  Father  and  your  Father,  and  to  my  God  and  your 
God."  Also  in  Psalm  xxii.  it  is  when  He  had  been 
heard  from  the  horns  of  the  unicorn,  that  He  declared 
the  name  of  a  Deliverer-God  to  His  brethren,  and  that 
He  praised  God  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly. 

He  spoke  to  them  of  the  Father's  name  while  on 
earth,  but  the  link  itself  could  not  be  formed ;  He 
could  not  introduce  them  to  the  Father,  until  the 
grain  of  wheat,  falling  into  the  ground,  had  died; 
until  then  He  remained  alone,  whatever  might  be  the 
revelations  that  He  made  to  them;  and  in  fact.  He 
declared  the  name  of  His  Father  to  those  whom  He 
had  given  Him.  Still  He  had  actually  taken  the 
human  position,  and  He  Himself  was  in  this  relation- 
ship with  God.  He  kept  them  in  the  Father's  name, 
they  were  not  yet  united  to  Him  in  this  position  ;  but 
He  was  as  man  in  the  relationship  with  God  in  which 
they  also  should  be,  when  brought  in  by  redemption 
into  association  with  Himself.  That  which  He  does 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  Gospel  by  John  is  to  place 
His  disciples — in  the  explanations  He  gave  of  the  con- 
dition in  which  He  left  them — in  the  position  which 
He  in  fact  had  held  in  relationship  with  His  Father 
on  earth,  and  in  testimony  to  the  world,  the  glory  of 
His  Person  as  representing  and  revealing  His  Father 
being  necessarily  distinct.  And,  in  seeking  to  asso- 
ciate with  them,  He  associated  them  with  Himself  and 
Himself  with  them  when  He  ascended  to  heaven, 
although  no  longer  corporeally  subject  to  the  trials  of 
their  position.* 

*  This  however  in  relationship  with  God.  They  did  not  re- 
present nor  make  known  the  Father  as  He  did.  Also,  while  we 
are  brought  into  the  same  glory  with  Christ  and  the  same  rela- 
tionship with  the  Father,  the  personal  glory  of  Christ  as  Sop  is 


254  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

He  was  not  ashamed  then  to  call  them  brethren, 
saying,  though  risen,  yea,  only  when  risen,  "I  will 
declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren,  I  will  praise  thee 
in  the  midst  of  the  assembly."  And  speaking  of  the 
remnant  separated  from  Israel,  He  says,  ''Behold  I 
and  the  children  whom  God  hath  given  me  are  for 
signs  unto  the  two  houses  of  Israel;"  and  again,  "I 
will  put  my  trust  in  him  " — another  quotation  from 
Isaiah  viii.  So  in  the  Psalms,  especially  in  Psalm  xvi., 
He  declares  that  He  does  not  take  His  place  as  God — 
"my  goodness  extendeth  not  to  thee,"  but  that  He 
identifies  Himself  with  the  excellent  of  the  earth — 
that  all  His  delight  is  in  them.  This  is  again  the 
remnant  of  Israel  called  by  grace. 

Christ  associates  these  sanctified  men,  godly  men 
on  earth,  with  Himself.  In  the  passage  quoted  it  is 
still  His  place  on  earth :  His  sufferings.  His  exalta- 
tion, future  glory,  divinity  are,  as  we  have  seen, 
added  here. 

Having  taken  this  place  as  of,  but  at  the  head  of, 
the  chosen  band — their  servant  in  all  things.  He  must 
conform  Himself  to  their  position.  And  this  He  did : 
the  children  being  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood.  He 
took  part  in  the  same ;  and  this,  in  order  that  by  death 
He  might  put  an  end  to  the  dominion  of  him  who  had 
the  power  of  death,  and  deliver  those  who,  through 
fear  of  death,  had  been  subjected  all  their  life  to  the 
yoke  of  bondage. 

Here  also  (the  apostle  seeking  always  to  display  the 
glorious  and  efficacious  side,  even  of  that  which  was 
most  humbling,  in  order  to  accustom  the  weak  heart 
of  the  Jews  to  that  portion  of  the  gospel)  we  find  that 
the  Lord's  work  goes  far  beyond  the  limits  of  a  pre- 

always  carefully  secured.  It  has  been  justly  remarked  to  the 
same  pui-pose  by  another,  that  He  never  says  "our"  Father 
with  the  disciples.  He  tells  them  to  say  "our,"  but  says  "my 
and  your,"  and  it  is  much  more  precious. 


HEBREWS.  265 

sentation  of  the  Messiah  to  His  people.  Not  only  is 
He  glorious  in  heaven,  but  He  has  conquered  Satan  in 
the  very  place  where  he  exercised  his  sad  dominion 
over  man,  and  where  the  judgment  of  God  lay  heavily 
upon  man. 

Moved  by  a  profound  love  for  man,  the  Son — be- 
come the  Son  of  man — enters  in  heart  and  in  fact 
into  all  the  need,  and  submits  to  all  the  circumstances, 
of  man  in  order  to  deliver  him.  He  takes  (for  He  was 
not  in  it  before)  flesh  and  blood,  in  order  to  die, 
because  man  was  subjected  to  death ;  and  (in  order  to 
destroy  him  who  exercised  his  dominion  over  man 
through  death,  and  made  him  tremble  all  his  lifetime 
in  the  expectation  of  that  terrible  moment,  which 
testified  of  the  judgment  of  God,  and  the  inability  of 
man  to  escape  the  consequences  of  sin)  the  condition 
into  which  disobedience  to  God  had  plunged  him. 
For  verily  the  Lord  did  not  undertake  the  cause  of 
angels,  but  that  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and  in  order 
to  proclaim  the  work  that  was  necessary  for  them, 
and  to  represent  them  efficaciously  and  really  before 
God,  He  must  needs  put  Himself  into  the  position  and 
the  circumstances  into  which  that  seed  were  found, 
though  not  the  state  they  were  personally  in. 

It  will  be  remarked  here,  that  it  is  still  a  family 
owned  of  God,  which  is  before  our  eyes,  as  the  object 
of  the  Saviour's  aflfeetion  and  care — the  children 
whom  God  had  given  Him,  children  of  Abraham  after 
the  flesh,  if  in  that  condition  they  answered  to  the 
designation  of  "seed  of  Abraham"  (this  is  the  question 
of  John  viii.  37-39),  or  his  children  according  to  the 
Spirit,  if  grace  gives  it  them. 

These  truths  introduce  priesthood.  As  Son  of  man, 
He  had  been  made  a  little  less  than  the  angels,  and, 
crowned  already  with  glory  and  honour,  was  here- 
after to  have  all  things  put  under  His  feet.  This  we 
do  not  yet  see.     But  He  took  this  place  of  humiliation 

II. 


256  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

in  order  to  taste  death  for  the  whole  system  that  was 
afar  from  God,  and  to  gain  the  full  rights  of  the 
second  Man,  by  glorifying  God  there,  where  the  crea- 
ture had  failed  through  weakness,  and  where  also  tV.c 
enemy,  having  deceived  man  by  his  subtlety,  had 
dominion  over  him  (according  to  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God)  in  power  and  malice.  At  the  same  time 
he  tasted  death  for  the  special  purpose  of  delivering 
the  children  whom  God  would  bring  to  glory,  taking 
their  nature  and  gathering  them  together  as  sanctified 
ones  around  Himself,  He  not  being  ashamed  to  call 
them  brethren.  But  it  was  thus  that  He  was  to 
present  them  now  before  God,  according  to  the  efficacy 
of  the  work  which  He  had  accomplished  for  them  ;  He 
would  become  a  priest,  being  able  through  His  life  of 
humiliation  and  trial  here  below,  to  sympathise  with 
His  own  in  all  their  conflicts  and  difficulties. 

He  suffered — never  yielded.  We  do  not  suffer  when 
we  yield  to  temptation :  the  flesh  takes  pleasure  in  the 
things  by  which  it  is  tempted.  Jesus  suffered,  being 
tempted,  and  He  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are 
tempted.  It  is  important  to  observe  that  the  flesh, 
when  acted  upon  by  its  desires,  does  not  suffer.  Being 
tempted,  it,  alas  !  enjoys.  But  when,  according  to  the 
light  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  fidelity  of  obedience, 
the  Spirit  resists  the  attacks  of  the  enemy,  whether 
subtle  or  persecuting,  then  one  suffers.  This  the  Lord 
did,  and  this  we  have  to  do.  That  which  needs 
succour  is  the  new  n.an,  the  faithful  heart,  and  not  the 
flesh.  I  need  succour  against  the  flesh,  and  in  order 
to  mortify  all  the  members  of  the  old  man. 

Here  the  needed  help  refers  to  the  difficulties  of  the 
faithful  saint  in  fulfilling  all  the  will  of  God.  This  is 
where  he  suffers,  this  is  where  the  Lord — who  has 
suffered — can  succour  him.  He  trod  this  path.  He 
learnt  in  it  that  which  can  be  suffered  there  from  the 
enemy,  and  from  men,     A  human  heart  feels  it,  and 


HEBREWS.  257 

Jesus  had  a  human  heart.  Besides,  the  more  faithful 
the  heart  is,  the  more  full  of  love  to  God,  and  the  less 
it  has  of  that  hardness  which  is  the  result  of  inter- 
course with  the  world,  the  more  will  it  suffer.  Now 
there  was  no  hardness  in  Jesus.  His  faithfulness  and 
His  love  were  equally  perfect.  He  was  a  man  o{ 
sorrows,  acquainted  with  grief  and  weariness.  H< 
suffered  being  tempted.* 

Chapter  iii  Thus  the  Lord  is  set  before  us  as  the 
Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  believers  from  among  the 
Jews,  the  true  people.  I  say,  "from  among  the 
Jews,"  not  that  He  is  not  our  Priest,  but  that  here  the 
sacred  writer  places  himself  among  the  believing 
Jews,  saying  "  our ;"  and,  instead  of  speaking  of  him- 
self as  an  apostle,  he  points  out  Jesus  as  the  Apostle ; 
which  He  was  in  Person  among  the  Jews.  In  prin- 
ciple, it  is  true  of  all  believers.  That  which  He  has 
said  is  the  Lord's  word,  and  He  is  able  to  succour  us 
when  we  are  tempted.     We  are  His  house. 

For  we  have  here  a  third  character  of  Christ.  He 
is  a  "  Son  over  his  house."  Moses  was  faithful  in  all 
the  house  of  God  as  a  servant,  in  testimony  to  the 
things  that  were  afterwards  to  be  proclaimed.  But 
Christ  is  over  God's  house ;  but  it  is  not  as  a  servant 
but  as  a  Son.     He  has  built  the  house.     He  is  God. 

Moses  identified  himself  with  the  house,  faithful 
therein  in  all  things.  But  Christ  is  more  excellent; 
even  as  he  who  builds  the  house  is  more  excellent 
than  the  house.  But  He  who  builds  all  things  is  God. 
And  this  is  what  Christ  did.  For  in  fact  the  house 
(that  is,  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness)  was  a-figure 
of  the  universe;  and  Christ  passed  through  the  heavens, 

*  Four  distinct  grounds  may  be  noticed  in  the  chapter  for 
the  humihation  of  Jesus :  it  became  Grod — there  was  His  glory ; 
the  destruction  of  Satan's  power ;  reconciliation  or  really 
propitiation  by  His  death ;  and  capacity  for  sympathj^  in 
priesthood. 

VOL.  V.  in  s 


258  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

as  the  high  priest  passed  into  the  sanctuary.  All  was 
cleansed  with  blood,  even  as  God  will  reconcile  all 
things  by  Christ  in  the  neavens  and  on  the  earth.  In 
a  certain  sense  this  universe  is  the  house  of  God.  He 
deigns  to  inhabit  it.  Christ  created  it  all.  But  there 
is  a  house  which  is  more  properly  His  own.  We  are 
His  house,  taking  it  for  granted  that  we  persevere  to 
the  end. 

The  Hebrew  Christians  were  in  danger — being 
attracted  by  their  former  habits,  and  by  a  law  and 
ceremonies  which  God  Himself  had  established — of 
forsaking  a  Christianity,  in  which  Christ  was  not 
visible,  for  things  that  were  visible  and  palpable. 
The  Christ  of  Christians,  far  from  being  a  crown  of 
glory  to  the  people,  was  only  an  object  of  faith, 
so  that,  if  faith  failed.  He  was  deprived  of  all  import- 
ance to  them.  A  religion  that  made  itself  seen  (the 
"old  wine")  naturally  attracted  those  that  had  been 
accustomed  to  it. 

But  in  fact  Christ  was  much  more  excellent  than 
Moses;  as  he  who  has  built  the  house  had  more 
honour  than  the  house.  Now  this  house  was  the 
figure  of  all  things,  and  He  who  had  built  them  was 
God.  The  passage  gives  us  this  view  of  Christ  and  of 
the  house,  and  also  says,  that  we  are  this  house.  And 
Christ  is  not  the  servant  here  ;  He  is  the  Son  over 
God's  house. 

We  must  always  remember  that  which  has  been 
already  remarked,  namely,  that  in  this  epistle  we  have 
not  the  assembly  as  the  body  of  Christ  in  union  with 
Himself;  nor  even  the  Father  either,  except  as  a 
comparison  in  chapter  xii  It  is  God,  a  heavenly 
Christ  (who  is  the  Son  of  God),  and  a  people,  the 
Messiah  being  a  heavenly  Mediator  between  the 
people  and  God.  Therefore  the  proper  privileges  of 
the  assembly  are  not  found  in  this  epistle — they  flow 
from  our  union  with  Christ;  and  here  Christ  is  a 


HEBREWS.  259 . 

Person  apart,  who  is  between  us  and  God,  on  high 
while  we  are  here. 

There  are  still  a  few  remarks  which  we  may  add 
here  in  order  to  throw  light  on  this  point,  and  to 
assist  the  reader  in  understanding  the  first  two 
chapters,  as  well  as  the  principle  of*  the  instructions 
throughout  the  epistle. 

In  chapter  i.  Christ  accomplishes  by  Himself  as  a 
part  of  His  divine  glory  the  purification  of  sins,  and 
seats  Himself  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  This  work, 
observe,  is  done  by  Himself.  We  have  nothing  to  do 
with  it,  save  to  believe  in  and  enjoy  it.  It  is  a  divine 
work  which  this  divine  Person  has  accomplished  by 
Himself ;  so  that  it  has  all  the  absolute  perfection,  all 
the  force,  of  a  work  done  by  Him,  without  any 
mixture  of  our  weakness,  of  our  efforts,  or  of  our 
experiences.  He  performed  it  by  Himself,  and  it  is 
accomplished.  Thereupon  He  takes  His  seat.  He  is 
not  placed  there — He  seats  Himself  upon  the  throne 
on  high. 

In  chapter  ii.  we  see  another  point  which  cha- 
racterises the  epistle — the  present  state  of  the  glorified 
Man.  He  is  crowned  with  glory  and  honour ;  but  it  is 
with  a  view  to  an  order  of  things  which  is  not  yet 
accomplished.  It  is  the  Person  of  the  Man  Christ 
which  is  presented,  not  the  assembly  in  union  with 
Him,  even  when  He  is  beheld  as  glorified  in  the 
heavens.  This  glory  is  viewed  as  a  partial  accom- 
plishment of  that  which  belongs  to  Him,  according  to 
the  counsels  of  God,  as  the  Son  of  man.  Hereafter 
this  glory  will  be  complete  in  all  its  parts  by  the 
subdugation  of  all  things. 

The  present  glory  therefore  of  Christ  makes  us  look 
forward  to  an  order  of  things  yet  future,  which  will 
be  full  rest,  full  blessing.  In  a  word,  besides  the 
perfection  of  His  work,  the  epistle  sets  before  us  the 
sequel  of  that  which  belongs  to  the  Christ  in  Person, 


260  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  Son  of  man,  not  the  perfection  of  the  assembly  in 
Him.  And  this  embraces  the  present  time,  the 
character  of  which,  to  the  believer,  depends  on  Christ's 
being  now  glorified  in  heaven  while  waiting  for  a 
future  state,  in  which  all  things  will  be  subjected 
to  Him. 

In  this  chapter  ii.  we  see  also  that  He  is  crowned. 
He  is  not  seen  sitting  there  as  in  His  own  original 
right,  though  He  had  that  glory  before  the  world  was, 
but,  having  been  made  a  little  less  than  the  angels, 
God  crowns  Him.  We  also  plainly  see  that  although 
the  believing  Hebrews  are  especially  in  view,  and 
even  all  Christians  are  classed  under  the  title  of 
Abraham's  seed  on  the  earth,  yet  that  Christ  is 
viewed  nevertheless  as  the  Son  of  man,  and  not  as 
the  Son  of  David ;  and  the  question  is  put,  "  What  is 
man  ?"  The  answer  (the  precious  answer  for  us)  is, 
Christ  glorified,  once  dead  on  account  of  man's  con- 
dition. In  Him  we  see  the  mind  of  God  with  regard 
to  man. 

The  fact  that  Christians  themselves  are  viewed  as 
the  seed  of  Abraham  plainly  shews  the  way  in  which 
they  are  considered  as  forming  part  of  the  chain  of 
the  heirs  of  promise  on  earth  (as  in  Rom.  xi.),  and 
not  as  the  assembly  united  to  Christ  as  His  body  in 
heaven. 

The  work  is  perfect;  it  is  the  work  of  God.  He 
has  by  Himself  made  purification  of  sins.  The  full 
result  of  the  counsels  of  God  with  regard  to  the  Son 
of  man  is  not  yet  come.  Thus  the  earthly  part  can 
be  brought  in,  as  a  thing  foreseen,  as  well  as  the 
heavenly  part,  although  the  persons  to  whom  the 
epistle  is  addressed  had  part  in  the  heavenly  glory — - 
participated  in  the  heavenly  calling — in  connection 
with  the  present  position  of  the  Son  of  man. 

The  remnant  of  the  Jews,  as  we  have  said,  are  con- 
sidered as  continuing  the  chain  of  the  people  blessed 


HEBREWS.  261 

on  earth,  whatever  heavenly  privileges  they  may  also 
possess  or  whatever  their  especial  state  may  be  in 
connection  with  the  Messiah's  exaltation  to  heaven. 
We  have  been  grafted  into  the  good  olive-tree,  so  that 
we  share  all  the  advantages  here  spoken  of.  Our 
highest  position,  and  the  privileges  belonging  to  it, 
are  not  here  in  view.  Accordingly,  as  writing  to 
Hebrews  and  as  one  among  them,  he  addresses  them, 
that  is  to  say,  Christians  and  believing  Israelites.  This 
is  the  force  of  the  word  "  us  "  in  the  epistle ;  we  must 
bear  it  in  mind,  and  that  the  Hebrew  believers  always 
form  the  word  "  us,"  of  which  the  writer  is  also  a  part. 

As  I  have  said,  we  rightly  appropriate  it  to  our- 
selves in  principle  ;  but  to  have  a  clear  view  of  his 
meaning,  we  must  put  ourselves  at  the  point  of  view 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  taken. 

No  one  ought  to  harden  his  heart ;  but  this  word  is 
especially  addressed  to  Israel,  and  that  until  the  day 
when  Christ  shall  appear.  In  speaking  of  it,  the 
author  returns  to  the  word  that  had  formerly  been 
addressed  to  Israel ;  not  now  in  order  to  warn  them  of 
the  danger  they  would  incur  by  neglecting  it,  but  of 
the  consequences  of  departing  from  that  which  they 
had  acknowledged  to  be  true.  Israel,  when  delivered 
out  of  Egypt,  had  provoked  God  in  the  wilderness  (it 
was  indeed  the  case  also  of  Christians  in  this  world), 
because  they  were  not  at  once,  and  without  difficulty, 
in  Canaan.  Those  to  whom  he  wrote  were  in  danger 
of  forsaking  the  living  God  in  the  same  way ;  that  is, 
the  danger  was  there  before  their  eyes.  They  should 
rather  exhort  each  other,  while  it  was  still  called 
to-day,  in  order  that  they  might  not  be  hardened  by 
the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  This  word  "  to-day  "  is  the 
expression  of  the  patient  activity  of  God's  grace 
towards  Israel  even  unto  the  end.  The  people  were 
unbelieving ;  they  have  hardened  their  hearts ;  they 
have  done  so,  and  will  alas !  do  so  to  the  end,  until 

II  [. 


262  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

judgment  come  in  the  Person  of  the  Messiah-Jehovah, 
whom  they  have  despised.  But  until  then  God  loves 
to  reiterate,  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  my  voice."  It 
may  be  that  only  a  few  will  hearken ;  it  may  be  that 
the  nation  is  judicially  hardened,  in  order  to  admit 
the  Gentiles ;  but  the  word  "  to-day  "  still  resounds  for 
every  one  among  them  who  has  ears  to  hear,  until  the 
Lord  shall  appear  in  judgment.  It  is  addressed  to  the 
people  according  to  the  long-suffering  of  God.  For 
the  remnant  who  had  believed  it  was  an  especial 
warning  not  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  the  hardened 
people  who  had  refused  to  hearken — not  to  turn  back 
to  them,  forsaking  their  own  confidence  in  the  word 
which  had  called  them,  as  Israel  did  in  the  wilderness. 

As  long  as  the  "  to-day  "  of  the  call  of  grace  should 
continue,  they  were  to  exhort  one  another,  lest  un- 
belief should  glide  into  their  hearts  through  the 
subtlety  of  sin.  It  is  thus  that  the  living  God  is 
forsaken.  We  speak  thus  practically,  not  with  refer- 
ence to  the  faithfulness  of  God,  who  certainly  will  not 
allow  any  of  His  own  to  perish,  but  with  regard  to 
practical  danger,  and  to  that  which  would  draw  us 
away — as  to  our  responsibility — from  God,  and  for 
ever,  if  God  did  not  intervene,  acting  in  the  life  which 
He  has  given  us,  and  which  never  perishes. 

Sin  separates  us  from  God  in  our  thoughts;  we 
have  no  longer  the  same  sense  either  of  His  love,  His 
power,  or  His  interest  in  us.  Confidence  is  lost. 
Hope,  and  the  value  of  unseen  things,  diminish  ;  while 
the  value  of  things  that  are  seen  proportionately 
increases.  The  conscience  is  bad ;  one  is  not  at  ease 
with  God.  The  path  is  hard  and  difficult;  the  will 
strengthens  itself  against  Him.  We  no  longer  live  by 
faith ;  visible  things  come  in  between  us  and  God,  and 
take  possession  of  the  heart.  Where  there  is  life,  God 
warns  by  His  Spirit  (as  in  this  epistle),  He  chastises 
and  restores.    Where  it  was  only  an  outward  influence, 


HEBREWS.  263 

a  faith  devoid  of  life,  and  the  conscience  not  reached, 
it  is  abandoned. 

It  is  the  warning  against  so  doing  that  arrests  the 
living.  The  dead — they  whose  consciences  are  not 
engaged,  who  do  not  say,  "  To  whom  shall  we  go  ? 
thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life" — despise  the 
warning  and  perish.  This  was  the  case  with  Israel  in 
the  wilderness,  and  God  sware  unto  them  that  they 
should  not  enter  into  'His  rest.  (Num.  xiv.  21-23.) 
And  why  ?  They  had  given  up  their  confidence  in 
Him.  Their  unbelief — when  the  beauty  and  excellence 
of  the  land  had  been  reported  to  them — deprived  them 
of  the  promised  rest. 

The  position  of  the  believers  to  whom  this  epistle  is 
addressed  was  the  same  as  this,  although  in  connec- 
tion with  better  promises.  The  beauty  and  excellence 
of  the  heavenly  Canaan  had  been  proclaimed  to  them. 
They  had,  by  the  Spirit,  seen  and  tasted  its  fruits; 
they  were  in  the  wilderness ;  they  had  to  persevere  to 
maintain  their  confidence  unto  tno  end. 

Observe  here — for  Satan,  and  our  own  conscience 
when  it  has  not  been  set  fr^^e,  often  make  use  of  this 
epistle — that  doubting  Christians  are  not  here  con- 
templated, or  persons  who  have  not  yet  gained  entire 
confidence  in  God :  to  those  who  are  in  this  condition 
its  exhortations  and  warnings  have  no  application. 
These  exhortations  are  to  preserve  the  Christian  in  a 
confidence  which  he  has,  and  to  persevere,  not  to  tran- 
quillise  fears  and  doubts.  This  use  of  the  epistle  to 
sanction  such  doubts  is  but  a  device  of  the  enemy. 
Only  I  would  add  here  that,  although  the  full  know- 
ledge of  grace  (which  in  such  a  case  the  soul  has 
assuredly  not  yet  attained)  is  the  only  thing  that  can 
deliver  and  set  it  free  from  its  fears,  yet  it  is  very 
important  in  this  case  practically  to  maintain  a  good 
conscience,  in  order  not  to  furnish^  the  enemy  with  a 
special  means  of  attack. 

III. 


264  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Chapter  iv.  The  apostle  goes  on  to  apply  this  part 
of  Israel's  history  to  those  whom  he  was  addressing, 
laying  stress  on  two  points:  1st,  That  Israel  had 
failed  of  entering  into  rest  through  unbelief;  2nd, 
That  the  rest  was  yet  to  come,  and  that  believers 
(those  who  were  not  seeking  rest  here,  but  who  ac- 
cepted the  wilderness  for  the  time  being)  should  enter 
into  it. 

He  begins  by  saying,  "  Let  us  fear  lest,  a  promise 
being  left  us  of  entering  into  his  rest,  any  should 
seem  to  come  short  of  it,"  not  attain  to  it.  For  we 
have  been  the  objects  of  the  proclamation  of  glad 
tidings,  as  they  were  in  times  past.  But  the  word 
addressed  to  them  remained  fruitless,  not  being  mixed 
with  faith  in  them  that  heard  it :  for  we  which  have 
believed  do  enter  into  rest.  The  rest  itself  is  yet  to 
come,  and  it  is  believers  who  enter  into  it.  For  a  rest 
of  God  there  is,  and  there  are  some  who  enter  into  it : 
inasmuch  as  it  is  written,  "  They,"  that  is,  those  (point- 
ing out  a  certain  class  who  are  to  be  excluded)  "  shall 
not  enter  into  my  rest. 

God  had  wrought  in  creation,  and  then  rested  from 
His  works  when  He  had  finished  them.  Thus,  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world.  He  has  shewn  that  He 
had  a  rest,  as  in  the  passage  already  quoted,  '*  If  they 
shall  enter  into  my  rest ;"  but  this,  shewing  that  the 
entering  in  was  yet  in  question,  shewed  that  into 
God's  rest  in  the  first  creation  man  had  not  entered. 
Two  things  then  are  evident — some  were  to  enter  in, 
and  the  Israel  to  whom  it  was  first  proposed  did  not 
enter  in  because  of  their  unbelief.  Therefore  He  again 
fixes  a  day,  saying,  in  David,  long  after  the  entrance 
into  Canaan,  "  To-day — as  it  is  written — to-day,  if  ye 
will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts." 

Here  a  natural  objection  occurs  to  which  the  pas- 
sage gives  a  complete  answer,  without  speaking  of  the 
objection  itself.     The  Israelites  had  indeed  fallen  in 


HEBREWS.  265 

the  wilderness,  but  Joshua  had  brought  the  people 
into  Canaan  which  the  unbelievers  never  reached ; 
the  Jews  were  there,  so  that  they  did  enter  into  the 
rest  as  to  which  the  others  failed.  The  answer  is 
evident.  It  was  long  after  this  that  God  said  by 
David,  "I  sware  in  my  wrath,  if  they  shall  enter  into 
my  rest."  If  Joshua  had  given  rest  to  Israel,  David 
could  not  afterwards  have  spoken  of  another  day. 
There  remains  therefore  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God. 
It  is  yet  to  come ;  but  it  is  assured  by  the  word  of 
God — a  truth,  the  bearing  of  which  is  immediately 
seen  with  rea^ard  to  the  connection  of  the  believino- 
Jews  with  the  nation,  in  the  midst  of  which  they 
were  tempted  to  seek  a  rest  that,  for  the  moment, 
faith  did  not  afford  them,  and  being  enfeebled  saw 
but  dimly  before  it.  To  have  God's  rest  one  must 
persevere  in  faith.  Present  apparent  rest  was  not 
the  true  rest.  God's  rest  was  still  to  be  waited  for. 
Faith  alone  acknowledged  this,  and  sought  for  none 
in  the  wilderness,  trusting  to  the  promise.  God  still 
said  "  To-day." 

The  state  of  the  people  was  worse  than  the  rest 
that  Joshua  gave  them ;  which,  as  their  ow^n  Psalms 
prove,  was  no  rest  at  all. 

As  to  the  order  of  the  verses,  the  exhortation  in 
verse  11  depends  on  tli^  whole  course  of  what  pre- 
cedes, the  argument  having  been  completed  by  the 
testimony  of  David  coming  after  Joshua.  After  the 
creation  God  indeed  rested;  but  He  said  after  that, 
"  If  they  shall  enter  into  my  rest,"  So  that  men  had 
not  entered  into  that  rest.  Joshua  entered  into  the 
land;  but  the  word  by  David,  coming  -long  after, 
proves  that  the  rest  of  God  was  not  yet  attained. 
Nevertheless  this  same  testimony,  which  forbade  the 
entrance  into  rest  because  of  unbelief,  shewed  that 
some  are  to  enter  in:  otherwise  there  was  no  need 
of  declaring  the  exclusion  of  others  for  an  especial 

IV. 


266  THE   BOOKS  OP  THE   BIBLE. 

cause,  nor  warning  men  that  they  might  escape 
what  hindered  their  entering  in.  No  parenthesis  is 
needed. 

Now,  as  long  as  any  one  had  not  ceased  from  his 
works,  he  had  not  entered  into  rest;  he  who  has 
entered  into  it  has  ceased  from  work,  even  as  God 
ceased  from  His  own  works  when  He  entered  into 
His  rest.  "Let  us  therefore  use  all  diligence"  is  the 
exhortation  of  the  faithful  witness  of  God,  "that 
we  may  enter  into  that  rest" — the  rest  of  God — in 
order  that  we  may  not  fall  after  the  sanre  example  of 
unbelief. 

We  should  especially  observe  here,  that  it  is  the 
rest  of  God  which  is  spoken  of.  This  enables  us  to 
understand  the  happiness  and  perfection  of  the  rest. 
God  must  rest  in  that  which  satisfies  His  heart.  This 
was  the  case  even  in  creation — all  was  very  good. 
And  now  it  must  be  in  a  perfect  blessing  that  perfect 
love  can  be  satisfied  with,  with  regard  to  us,  who  will 
possess  a  heavenly  portion  in  the  blessing  which  we 
shall  have  in  His  own  presence,  in  perfect  holiness 
and  perfect  light.  Accordingly  all  the  toilsome  work 
of  faith,  the  exercise  of  faith  in  the  wilderness,  the 
warfare  (although  there  are  many  joys),  the  good 
works  practised  there,  labour  of  every  kind  will 
cease.  It  is  not  only  that  we  shall  be  delivered  from 
the  power  of  indwelling  sin ;  all  the  efforts  and  all  the 
troubles  of  the  new  man  will  cease.  We  are  already 
set  free  from  the  law  of  sin ;  then  our  spiritual  exer- 
cise for  God  will  cease.  We  shall  rest  from  our  works 
— not  evil  ones.  We  have  already  rested  from  our 
works  with  regard  to  justification,  and  therefore  in 
that  sense  we  have  now  rest  in  our  consciences ,  but 
that  is  not  the  subject  here — it  is  the  Christian's  rest 
from  all  his  works.  God  rested  from  His  works — 
assuredly  good  ones — and  so  shall  we  also  then  with 
Rim. 


HEBREWS.  267 

We  are  now  in  the  wilderness ;  we  also  wrestle  with 
wicked  spirits  in  heavenly  places.  A  blessed  rest 
remains  for  us,  in  which  our  hearts  will  repose  in  tlie 
presence  of  God,  where  nothing  will  trouble  the 
perfection  of  our  rest,  where  God  will  rest  in  the 
perfection  of  the  blessing  He  has  bestowed  on  His 
people. 

The  great  thought  of  the  passage  is,  that  there 
remains  a  rest  (that  is  to  say,  that  the  believer  is  not 
to  expect  it  here)  without  saying  where  it  is.  And  it 
does  not  speak  in  detail  of  the  character  of  the  rest, 
because  it  leaves  the  door  open  to  an  earthly  rest  for 
the  earthly  people  on  the  ground  of  the  promises, 
although  to  christian  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling- 
God's  rest  is  evidently  a  heavenly  one. 

The  apostle  then  sets  before  us  the  instrument 
which  God  employs  to  judge  the  unbelief  and  all  the 
workings  of  the  heart  which  tend,  as  we  have  seen, 
to  lead  the  believer  into  departure  from  the  position 
of  faith,  and  to  hide  God  from  him  by  inducing  him  to 
satisfy  his  flesh  and  to  seek  for  rest  in  the  wilderness 

To  the  believer  who  is  upright  in  heart  this  judg- 
ment is  of  great  value,  as  that  which  enables  him  to 
discern  all  that  has  a  tendency  to  hinder  his  progress 
or  make  him  slacken  his  steps.  It  is  the  word  of 
God,  which — being  the  revelation  of  God,  the  expres- 
sion of  what  He  is,  and  of  all  that  surrounds  liim, 
and  of  what  His  Vv^ill  is  in  all  the  circumstances  that 
surround  us — judges  everything  in  the  heart  which  is 
not  of  Him.  It  is  more  penetrating  than  a  two-edged 
sword.  Living  and  energetic,  it  separates  all  that  is 
most  intimately  linked  together  in  our  hearts  and 
minds.  Whenever  nature — the  ''soul"  and  its  feelings — 
mingles  with  that  which  is  spiritual,  it  brings  the 
edge  of  the  sword  of  the  living  truth  of  God  between 
the  two,  and  judges  the  hidden  movements  of  the 
heart  respecting  them.     It  discerns,  all  the  thoughts 

IV. 


268  THE  *BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

and  intentions  of  the  heart.  But  it  has  another  cha- 
racter, coming  from  God  (being,  as  it  were,  His  eye 
upon  the  conscience),  it  brings  us  into  His  presence ; 
and  all  that  it  forces  us  to  discover,  it  sets  in  our  con- 
science before  the  eye  of  God  Himself.  Nothing  is 
hidden,  all  is  naked  and  manifested  to  the  eye  of  Him 
with  whom  we  have  to  do.* 

Such  is  the  true  help,  the  mighty  instrument  of 
God  to  judge  everything  in  us  that  would  hinder  us 
from  pursuing  our  course  through  the  wilderness  with 
joy,  and  with  a  buoyant  heart  strengthened  by  faith 
and  confidence  in  Him.  Precious  instrument  of  a 
faithful  God,  solemn  and  serious  in  its  operation  ;  but 
of  priceless  and  infinite  blessing  in  its  effects,  in  its 
consequences. 

It  is  an  instrument  which,  in  its  operations,  does 
not  allow  "  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind  " 
liberty  to  act;  which  does  not  permit  the  heart  to 
deceive  itself;  but  which  procures  us  strength,  and 
places  us  without  any  consciousness  of  evil  in  the 
presence  of  God,  to  pursue  our  course  with  joy  and 
spiritual  energy.  Here  the  exhortation,  founded  on 
the  power  of  the  word,  concludes. 

But  there  is  another  succour,  one  of  a  different  cha- 
racter, to  aid  us  in  our  passage  through  the  wilderness; 
and  that  is  priesthood — a  subject  which  the  epistle 
here  begins  and  carries  on  through  several  chapters. 

We  have  a  High  Priest  who  has  passed  through  the 
heavens — as  Aaron  through  the  successive  parts  of  the 
tabernacle — Jesus,  the  Son  of  David. 

He  has,  in  all  things,  been  tempted  like  ourselves, 
sin  apart;  so  that  He  can  sympathise  with  our  infir- 
mities. The  word  brings  to  light  the  intents  of  the 
heart,  judges  the  will,  and  all  that  has  not  God  for  its 

*  The  connection  between  the  word  addressed  to  man  an 
God  Himself  is  very  remarkable  here. 


HEBREWS.  269 

object  and  its  source.  Then,  as  far  as  weakness  is 
concerned,  we  have  His  sympathy.  Christ  of  course 
had  no  evil  desires :  He  was  tempted  in  every  way, 
apart  from  sin.  Sin  had  no  part  in  it  at  all.  But  I 
do  not  wish  for  sympathy  with  the  sin  that  is  in  me ; 
I  detest  it,  I  wish  it  to  be  mortified — ^judged  unspar- 
ingly. This  the  word  does.  For  my  weakness  and 
my  difficulties  I  seek  sympathy ;  and  I  find  it  in  the 
priesthood  of  Jesus.  It  is  not  necessary,  in  order  to 
sympathise  with  me,  that  a  person  should  feel  at  the 
same  moment  that  which  I  am  feeling — rather  the 
contrary.  If  I  am  suffering  pain,  I  am  not  in  a  con- 
dition to  think  as  much  of  another's  pain.  But  in 
order  to  sympathise  with  him  I  must  have  a  nature 
capable  of  appreciating  his  pain. 

Thus  it  is  with  Jesus,  when  exercising  His  priest- 
hood. He  is  in  every  sense  beyond  the  reach  of 
pain  and  trial,  but  He  is  man ;  and  not  only  has  He 
the  human  nature  which  in  time  suffered  grief,  but 
He  experienced  the  trials  a  saint  has  to  go  through 
more  fully  than  any  of  ourselves  ;  and  His  heart,  free 
and  full  of  love,  can  entirely  sympathise  with  us, 
according  to  His  experience  of  ill,  and  according  to 
the  glorious  liberty  which  He  now  has,  to  provide 
and  care  for  it.  This  encourages  us  to  hold  fast  our  pro- 
fession in  spite  of  the  difficulties  that  beset  our  path ; 
for  Jesus  concerns  Himself  about  them,  according  to  His 
own  knowledge  and  experience  of  what  they  are,  and 
according  to  the  power  of  His  grace. 

Therefore,  our  High  Priest  being  there,  we  can  go 
with  all  boldness  to  the  throne  of  grace,  to  find  mercy 
and  the  grace  suited  to  us  in  all  times  of  need : 
mercy,  because  we  are  weak  and  wavering;  needful 
grace,  because  we  are  engaged  in  a  warfare  which 
God  owns. 

Observe,  it  is  not  that  we  go  to  the  High  Priest. 
It  is  often  done,  and  God  may  have  compassion ;  but 

IV, 


270  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE, 

it  is  a  proof  that  we  do  not  fully  understand  grace.  The 
Priest,  the  Lord  Jesus,  occupies  Himself  about  us — 
sympathises  with  us,  on  the  one  hand ;  and  on  the 
other,  we  go  directly  to  the  throne  of  grace. 

The  Spirit  does  not  here  speak  positively  of  falls ; 
we  find  that  in  1  -John  ii.  There  also  it  is  in  connec- 
tion with  communion  with  His  Father,  here  with 
access  to  God.  His  purpose  here  is  to  strengthen  us, 
to  encourage  us  to  persevere  in  the  way,  conscious  of 
the  sympathies  which  we  possess  in  heaven,  and  that 
the  throne  is  always  open  to  us. 

Chapter  v.  The  epistle  then  develops  the  priest- 
hood of  the  Lord  Jesus,  comparing  it  with  that  of 
Aaron ;  but,  as  we  shall  see,  with  a  view  to  bring  out 
the  difference  rather  than  the  resemblance  between 
them,  although  there  is  a  general  analogy,  and  the  one 
was  a  shadow  of  the  other. 

This  comparison  is  made  in  chapter  v.  1-10.  The 
line  of  argument  is  then  interrupted,  though  the 
ground  of  argument  is  enlarged  and  developed,  till  the 
end  of  chapter  vii.,  where  the  comparison  with  Mel- 
chizedec  is  pursued  ;  and  the  change  of  law,  consequent 
on  the  change  of  priesthood,  is  stated,  which  in- 
troduces the  covenants  and  all  that  relates  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  Jews. 

A  priest  then  as  taken  from  among  men  (he  is  not 
here  speaking  of  Christ,  but  of  that  with  which  he 
compares  Him)  is  ordained  for  men  in  things  pertain- 
ing to  God,  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts  and  sacrifices 
for  sins;  he  is  able  to  feel  the  miseries  of  others 
because  he  is  himself  compassed  with  infirmity,  and 
offers  therefore  for  himself  as  well  as  for  the  people. 
Moreover  no  one  takes  this  honour  to  himself,  but 
receives  it,  as  Aaron  did,  being  called  of  God.  The 
epistle  will  speak  farther  on  of  the  sacrifice — here  of 
the  person  of  the  priest,  and  of  the  order  of  the 
priesthood. 


HEBREWS.  271 

So  the  Christ  glorified  not  Himself  to  become  a 
High  Priest.  The  glory  of  His  Person,  manifested  as 
man  on  the  earth,  and  that  of  His  function,  are  both 
of  them  plainly  declared  of  God  :  the  first,  when  He 
said,  "Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten 
thee "  (Ps.  ii.) ;  the  second,  in  these  words,  "  Thou  art 
a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedec." 
(Ps.  ex.)  Such  then  in  ooth  personal  and  official  glory 
is  the  High  Priest,  the  expected  Messiah,  Christ. 

But  His  glory  (although  it  gives  Him  His  place  in 
honour  before  God,  and  consequent  on  redemption,  so 
that  He  can  undertake  the  people's  cause  before  God 
according  to  His  will)  does  not  bring  Him  near  to  the 
miseries  of  men.  It  is  His  history  on  earth  which 
makes  us  feel  how  truly  able  He  is  to  take  part  in 
them.  "  In  the  days  of  his  flesh,"  that  is,  here  below, 
He  went  into  all  the  anguish  of  death  in  dependence 
on  God,  making  His  request  to  Him  who  was  able  to 
save  Him  from  it.  For,  being  here  in  order  to  obey 
and  to  suffer.  He  did  not  save  Himself.  He  submitted 
to  everything,  obeyed  in  everything,  and  depended  on 
God  for  everything. 

He  was  heard  because  of  His  fear.  It  was  proper 
that  He  who  took  death  on  Himself,  as  answering  for 
others,  should  feel  its  whole  weight  upon  His  soul. 
He  would  neither  escape  the  consequences  of  that 
which  He  had  undertaken  (compare  chap,  ii.),  nor  fail 
in  the  just  sense  of  what  it  was  thus  to  be  under  the 
hand  of  God  in  judgment.  His  fear  was  His  piety, 
the  right  estimation  of  the  position  in  which  sinful 
man  was  found,  and  what  must  come  from  God  because 
of  it.  For  Him  however  to  suffer  the  consequences  of 
this  position  was  obedience.  And  this  obedience  was 
to  be  perfect,  and  to  be  tried  to  the  utmost. 

He  was  the  Son,  the  glorious  Son  of  God.  But 
though  this  was  so.  He  was  to  learn  obedience  (and 
to  Him  it  was  a  new  thing),  what  it  was  in  the  world, 

V. 


272  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

by  all  that  He  suffered.  And,  having  deserved  all 
glory,  He  was  to  take  His  place  as  the  glorified  Man — 
to  be  perfected;  and  in  that  position  to  become  the 
cause  of  eternal  salvation  (not  merely  temporal  de- 
liverances) to  them  that  obey  Him ;  a  salvation  which 
should  be  connected  with  the  position  that  He  had 
taken  in  consequence  of  His  work  of  obedience, 
saluted  by  God  as  "  High  Priest  after  the  order  of 
Melchizedek." 

That  which  follows  to  the  end  of  chapter  vi.  is  a 
parenthesis  which  refers  to  the  condition  of  those  to 
whom  the  epistle  is  addressed.  They  a»3  blamed  for 
the  dulness  of  their  spiritual  intelligence,  and  encou- 
raged at  the  same  time  by  the  promises  of  God ;  the 
whole  with  reference  to  their  position  as  Jewish 
believers.  Afterwards  the  line  of  instruction  with 
regard  to  Melchizedec  is  resumed. 

For  the  time,  they  ought  to  have  been  able  to 
teach :  nevertheless  they  needed  that  some  one  should 
teach  them  the  elements  of  the  oracles  of  God — 
requiring  milk  instead  of  meat. 

We  may  observe  that  there  is  no  greater  hindrance 
to  progress  in  spiritual  life  and  intelligence  than 
attachment  to  an  ancient  form  of  religion,  which, 
being  traditional  and  not  simply  personal  faith  in  the 
truth,  consists  always  in  ordinances,  and  is  conse- 
quently carnal  and  earthly.  Without  this  people  may 
be  unbelievers;  but  under  the  influence  of  such  a 
system  piety  itself — expended  in  forms — makes  a 
barrier  between  the  soul  and  the  light  of  God :  and 
these  forms  which  surround,  pre-occupy,  and  hold  the 
affections  captive,  prevent  them  from  enlarging  and 
becoming  enlightened  by  means  of  divine  revelation. 
Morally  (as  the  apostle  here  expresses  it)  the  senses 
are  not  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evil. 

But  the  Holy  Ghost  will  not  limit  Himself  to  the 
narrow  circle  and  the  weak  and  futile  sentiments  of 


HEBREWS.  273 

human  tradition,  nor  even  to  those  truths  which,  in  a 
state  like  this,  one  is  able  to  receive.  In  such  a  case 
Christ  has  not  His  true  place.  And  this  our  epistle 
here  developes. 

Milk  belongs  to  babes,  solid  food  to  those  who  are 
of  full  age.  This  infancy  was  the  soul's  condition 
under  the  ordinances  and  requirements  of  the  law. 
(Compare  Gal.  iv.  1,  seqq.)  But  there  was  a  revela- 
tion of  the  Messiah  in  connection  with  these  two 
states — of  infancy  and  of  manhood.  And  the  develop- 
ment of  the  word  of  righteousness,  of  the  true  practical 
relationships  of  the  soul  to  God  according  to  His 
character  and  ways,  was  in  proportion  to  the  revela- 
tion of  Christ,  who  is  the  manifestation  of  that 
character,  and  the  centre  of  all  those  ways.  Therefore 
it  is  that,  in  chapter  v.  12,  13,  the  epistle  speaks  of 
the  elements,  the  beginning,  of  the  oracles  of  God,  and 
of  the  word  of  righteousness  ;  in  chapter  vi.  1,  of  the 
word  of  the  beginning,  or  of  the  first  principles,  of  Christ. 

Chapter  vi.  Now  the  Spirit  will  not  stop  at  this 
point  with  Christians,  but  will  go  on  to  that  full  reve- 
lation of  His  glory  which  belongs  to  them  that  are  of 
full  age  and  indeed  forms  us  for  that  state. 

We  easily  perceive  that  the  inspired  writer  tries  to 
make  the  Hebrews  feel  that  he  was  placing  them  on 
higher  and  more  excellent  ground,  by  connecting  them 
with  a  heavenly  and  invisible  Christ ;  and  that  Juda- 
ism kept  them  back  in  the  position  of  children.  This 
moreover  characterises  the  whole  epistle. 

Nevertheless  we  shall  find  two  things  here  :  on  the 
one  hand,  the  elements  and  the  character  of  doctrine 
that  belonged  to  infancy,  to  "the  beginning  of  the 
word  of  Christ,"  in  contrast  with  the  strength  and 
heavenly  savour  that  accompanied  the  christian  re- 
velation ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  what  the  revelation 
of  Christ  Himself  is  in  connection  with  this  last 
spiritual  and  christian  system.     • 

VOL.   V.  VL  T 


274  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

But  the  epistle  distinguishes  between  this  system 
and  the  doctrine  of  the  Person  of  Christ,  even  looked 
at  as  man,*  although  the  present  position  of  Christ 
gives  its  character  to  the  christian  system.  The 
distinction  i«  made — not  that  the  condition  of  souls 
does  not  depend  on  the  measure  of  the  revelation 
of  Christ  and  of  the  position  He  has  taken,  but — 
because  the  doctrine  of  His  Person  and  glory  goes 
much  farther  than  the  present  state  of  our  relationship 
with  God. 

The  things  spoken  of  in  chapter  vi.  1,  2,  had  their 
place,  because  the  Messiah  was  then  yet  to  come :  all 
was  in  a  state  of  infancy.  The  things  spoken  of  in 
verses  4,  5  are  the  privileges  that  Christians  enjoyed 
in  virtue  of  the  work  and  the  glprification  of  the 
Messiah.  But  they  are  not  in  themselves  the  "per- 
fection" mentioned  in  verse  1,  and  which  relates 
rather  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Person  of  Christ  Him- 
self. The  privileges  in  question  were  the  effect  of  the 
glorious  position  of  His  Person  in  heaven. 

It  is  important  to  attend  to  this,  in  order  to  under- 
stand these  passages.  In  the  infancy  spoken  of  in 
verses  1,  2,  the  obscurity  of  the  revelations  of  the 
Messiah,  announced  at  most  by  promises  and  pro- 
phecies, left  worshippers  under  the  yoke  of  ceremonies 
and  figures,  although  in  possession  of  some  funda- 
mental truths.  His  exaltation  made  way  for  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  here  below :  and  on  this  the 
responsibility  of  souls  which  had  tasted  it  depended. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Person  and  the  glory  of  Jesus 
forms  the  subject  of  revelation  in  the  epistle,  and  was 
the  means  of  deliverance  for  the  Jews  from  the  whole 

*  The  Sonship  of  Christ  however,  here  below,  cannot  be 
separated  from  His  eternal  Sonship,  for  this  lends  its  character 
DO  the  relationship  in  which  He  stands  as  Son  on  earth  in  time. 
The  passage  in  the  text  refers  to  verses  5  and  8,  compared  with 
U  and  10  of  chapter  v.   Cofnpare  also  the  beginning  of  John  xvii. 


HEBREWS.  275 

system  which  had  been  such  a  heavy  burden  on  their 
hearts ;  it  should  prevent  their  forsaking  the  state 
described  in  verses  4  and  5,  in  order  to  return  into  the 
weakness  and  (Christ  having  come)  the  carnal  state  of 
verses  1  and  2. 

The  epistle  then  does  not  desire  to  establish  again 
the  true  but  elementary  doctrines  which  belonged  to 
the  times  when  Christ  was  not  manifested,  but  to  go 
forward  to  the  full  revelation  of  His  glory  and  posi- 
tion according  to  the  counsels  of  God  revealed  in  the 
word. 

The  Holy  Ghost  would  not  go  back  again  to  these 
former  things,  because  new  things  had  been  brought  in 
in  connection  with  the  heavenly  glory  of  the  Messiah, 
namely,  Christianity  characterised  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghosfc. 

But  if  any  one  who  had  been  brought  under  that 
power,  who  had  known  it,  should  afterwards  abandon 
it,  he  could  not  be  renewed  again  to  repentance.  The 
former  things  of  Judaism  must  be,  and  were,  left 
behind  by  that  into  which  he  had  entered.  Christians 
could  not  deal  with  souls  by  them ;  and,  as  for 
the  new  things,  he  had  given  them  up.  All  God's 
means  had  been  employed  for  him  and  had  produced 
nothing. 

Such  a  one — of  his  own  will — crucified  for  himself 
the  Son  of  God.  Associated  with  the  people  who  had 
done  so,  he  had  acknowledged  the  sin  which  his 
people  had  committed,  and  owned  Jesus  to  be  the 
Messiah.  But  now  he  committed  the  crime,*  knowingly 
and  of  his  own  will. 

The  judgment,  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  repent- 
ance from  dead  works,  had  been  taught.  Under  that 
order  of  things  the  nation  had  crucitied  their  Messiah. 

*  I  do  not  think  "  afresh"  ought  to  be  inserted:  the  emphasis 
is  on  doing  it  for  himself, 

VI, 


276  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Now  power  had  come ;  which  testified  of  the  glorifica- 
tion of  the  crucified  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  in 
heaven ;  and  which  by  miracles  destroyed  (at  least  in 
detail)  the  power  of  the  enemy  who  was  still  reigning 
over  the  world.  These  miracles  were  a  partial  antici- 
pation of  the  full  and  glorious  deliverance  which 
should  take  place  in  the  world  to  come,  when  the 
triumphant  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  should  entirely 
destroy  all  the  power  of  the  enemy.  Hence  they  are 
called  the  "powers  of  the  world  to  come." 

The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  miracles  wrought 
in  the  bosom  of  Christianity,  Avere  testimonies  that 
the  power  which  was  to  accomplish  that  deliverance 
— althoiigh  still  hidden  in  heaven — existed  neverthe- 
less in  the  glorious  Person  of  the  Son  of  God.  The 
power  did  not  yet  accomplish  the  deliverance  of  this 
world  oppressed  by  Satan,  because  another  thing  was 
being  done  meanwhile.  The  light  of  God  was  shining, 
the  good  word  of  grace  was  being  preached,  the 
heavenly  gift  (a  better  thing  than  the  deliverance  of 
the  world)  was  being  tasted  ;  and  the  sensible  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  made  itself  known,  while  waiting 
for  the  return  in  glory  of  the  Messiah  to  bind  Satan, 
and  thus  accomplish  the  deliverance  of  the  world 
under  His  dominion. 

Speaking  generally,  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  consequence  of  the  Messiah's  being  glorified  above, 
was  exercised  on  earth  as  a  present  manifestation  and 
anticipation  of  the  great  deliverance  to  come.  The 
revelation  of  grace,  the  good  word  of  God,  was 
preached ;  and  the  Christian  lived  in  the  sphere  where 
these  things  displayed  themselves,  and  was  subjected 
to  the  influence  exercised  in  it.  This  made  itself  to 
be  felt  by  those  who  were  brought  in  among  Christians. 
Even  where  there  was  no  spiritual  life,  these  influences 
were  felt. 

But,  after  having  been  the  subject  of  this  influence 


HEBREWS.  277 

of  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  after  having  tasted 
the  revelation  thus  made  of  the  goodness  of  God,  and 
experienced  the  proofs  of  His  power,  if  any  one  then 
forsook  Christ,  there  remained  no  other  means  for 
restoring  the  soul,  for  leading  it  to  repentance.  The 
heavenly  treasures  were  already  expended  :  he  had 
given  them  up  as  worthless  ;  he  had  rejected  the  full 
revelation  of  grace  and  power,  after  having  known  it. 
What  means  could  now  be  used  ?  To  return  to 
Judaism,  and  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ  in  it,  when  the  truth  had  been  revealed,  was 
impossible  :  and  the  new  light  had  been  known  and 
rejected.  In  a  case  like  this  there  was  only  the  flesh ; 
there  was  no  new  life.  Thorns  and  briars  were  being- 
produced  as  before.  There  was  no  real  change  in  the 
man's  state. 

When  once  we  have  understood  that  this  passage  is 
a  comparison  of  the  power  of  the  spiritual  system 
with  Judaism,  and  that  it  speaks  of  giving  up  the 
former,  after  having  known  it,  its  difficulty  disappears. 
The  possession  of  life  is  not  supposed,  nor  is  that 
question  touched.  The  passage  speaks,  not  of  life,  but 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  a  power  present  in  Christianity. 
To  "  taste  the  good  word  "  is  to  have  understood  how 
precious  that  word  is ;  and  not  the  having  been 
quickened  by  its  means.*  Hence  in  speaking  to  the 
Jewish  Christians  he  hopes  better  things  and  things 
which  accompany  salvation,  so  that  all  these  things 
could  be  there  and  yet  no  salvation.  Fruit  there 
could  not  be.     That  supposes  life. 

The  apostle  does  not  however  apply  what  he  says 
to  the  Hebrew  Christians:  for,  however  low  their 
state  might  be,  there  had  been  fruits,  proofs  of  life, 
which  in  itself  no  mere  power  is ;  and  he  continues  his 

*  So  in  Matthew  xiii.  some  with  joy  receive  it,  but  there  was 
"U)  root. 


278  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

discourse  by  giving  them  encouragement,  and  motives 
for  perseverance. 

It  will  be  observed,  then,  that  this  passage  is  a  com- 
parison between  that  which  was  possessed  before  and 
after  Christ  was  glorified — the  state  and  privileges  of 
professors,  at  these  two  periods,  without  any  question 
as  to  personal  conversion.  When  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  was  present,  and  there  was  the  full  reve- 
lation of  grace,  if  any  forsook  the  assembly,  fell  away 
from  Christ,  and  turned  back  again,  there  was  no 
means  of  renewing  them  to  repentance.  The  inspired 
writer  therefore  would  not  again  lay  the  foundation 
of  former  things  with  regard  to  Christ — things  ah^eady 
grown  old — but  would  go  on,  for  the  profit  of  those 
who  remained  stedfast  in  the  faith. 

We  may  also  remark  how  the  epistle,  in  speaking  of 
christian  privileges,  does  not  lose  sight  of  the  future 
earthly  state,  the  glory  and  the  privileges  of  the 
millennial  world.  The  miracles  are  the  miracles  of  the 
world  to  come ;  they  belong  to  that  period.  The 
deliverance  and  the  destruction  of  Satan's  power 
should  then  be  complete;  those  miracles  were  deliver- 
ances, samples  of  that  power.  We  saw  this  point 
brought  into  notice  (chap.  ii.  5)  at  the  beginning  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  epistle ;  and  in  chapter  iv.  the  rest 
of  God  left  vague  in  its  character,  in  order  to  embrace 
both  the  heavenly  part  and  the  earthly  part  of  our 
Lord's  millennial  reign.  Here  the  present  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  characterises  the  ways  of  God,  Chris- 
tianity ;  but  the  miracles  are  a  foretaste  of  the  coming 
age,  in  which  the  whole  world  will  be  blessed. 

In  the  encouragements  that  it  gives  them,  the 
epistle  already  calls  to  mind  the  principles  by  which 
the  father  of  the  faithful  and  of  the  Jewish  nation  had 
walked,  and  the  way  in  which  God  had  strengthened 
him  in  his  faith.  Abraham  had  to  rest  on  promises, 
without  possessing  that  which  was  promised ;  and  this, 


HEBREWS.  ^79 

with  regard  to  rest  and  glory,  was  the  state  in  wliicli 
the  Hebrew  Christians  tl.n  were.  But  at  the  same 
time,  in  order  to  give  full  assurance  to  the  heart,  God 
had  confirmed  His  word  by  an  oath,  in  order  that  they 
who  build  upon  this  hope  of  promised  glory  might 
have  strong  and  satisfying  consolation.  And  this 
assurance  has  received  a  still  greater  confirmation.  It 
entered  into  that  within  the  veil,  it  found  its  sanction 
in  the  sanctuary  itself,  whither  a  forerunner  had 
entered,  giving  not  only  a  word,  an  oath,  but  a 
personal  guarantee  for  the  fulfilment  of  these  pro- 
mises, and  the  sanctuary  of  God  as  a  refuge  for  the 
heart ;  thus  giving,  for  those  who  had  spiritual  under- 
standing, a  heavenly  character  to  the  hope  which  they 
cherished;  while  shewing,  by  the  character  of  Him 
who  had  entered  into  heaven,  the  certain  fulfilment  of 
all  the  Old  Testament  promises,  in  connection  with  a 
heavenly  Mediator,  who,  by  His  position,  assured  that 
fulfilment ;  establishing  the  earthly  blessing  upon  the 
firm  foundation  of  heaven  itself,  and  giving  at  the 
same  time  a  higher  and  more  excellent  character  to 
that  blessing  by  uniting  it  to  heaven,  and  making  it 
flow  from  thence. 

We  have  thus  the  double  character  of  blessing  which 
this  book  again  presents  to  our  mind,  in  connection 
with  the  Person  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  whole  linked 
by  faith  with  Jesus. 

Jesus  has  entered  into  heaven  as  a  Forerunner.  He 
is  there.  We  belong  to  that  heaven.  He  is  there  as 
High  Priest.  During  the  present  time  therefore  His 
priesthood  has  a  heavenly  character  ;  nevertheless  He 
is  priest,  personally,  after  the  order  of  Melchizedec. 
It  sets  aside  then  the  whole  Aaronic  order,  though  the 
priesthood  be  exercised  now  after  the  analogy  of 
Aaron's,  but,  by  its  nature,  points  out  in  the  future  a 
royalty  which  is  not  yet  manifested.  Now  the  very 
fact  that  this  future  royalty  was  connected  with  the 

VI. 


280  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

Person  of  Him  who  was  seated  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  on  high,  according  to  Psalm  ex.  fixed  the 
attention  of  the  Hebrew  Christian,  when  tempted  to 
turn  back,  on  Him  who  was  in  the  heavens,  and  made 
him  understand  the  priesthood  which  the  Lord  is 
now  exercising ;  it  delivered  him  from  Judaism,  and 
strengthened  him  in  the  heavenly  character  of  the 
Christianity  which  he  had  embraced. 

Chapter  vii.  The  epistle,  returning  to  the  subject  of 
Melchizedec,  reviews  therefore  the  dignity  of  his  per- 
son and  the  importance  of  his  priesthood.  For  on 
priesthood,  as  a  means  of  drawing  nigh  to  God,  the 
whole  system  connected  with  it  depended. 

Melchizedec  then  (a  typical  and  characteristic  per- 
son, as  the  use  of  his  name  in  Psalm  ex.  proves)  was 
king  of  Salem,  that  is  king  of  peace,  and,  by  name, 
king  of  righteousness.  Righteousness  and  peace  cha- 
racterise his  reign.  But  above  all  he  was  priest  of 
the  Most  High  God.  This  is  the  name  of  God  as 
supreme  Governor  of  all  things — Possessor,  as  is  added 
in  Genesis,  of  heaven  and  earth.  It  is  thus  that 
Nebuchadnezzar,  the  humbled  earthly  potentate,  ac- 
knowledged Him.  It  was  thus  He  revealed  Himself 
to  Abraham,  when  Melchizedec  blessed  the  patriarch 
after  he  had  conquered  his  enemies.  In  connection 
with  his  walk  of  faith,  the  name  of  God  for  Abraham 
was  "  The  Almighty."  Here  Abraham,  victorious  over 
the  kings  of  the  earth,  is  blessed  by  Melchizedec,  by 
the  king  of  righteousness,  in  connection  with  God  as 
Possessor  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  Most  High.  This 
looks  onward  to  the  royalty  of  Christ,  a  Priest  upon 
His  throne,  when  by  the  will  and  the  power  of  God 
He  shall  have  triumphed  over  all  His  enemies — a  time 
not  yet  arrived — first  fulfilled  in  the  millennium,  as  it 
is  commonly  expressed,  though  this  rather  refers  to 
the  earthly  part.  Abraham  gave  tithes  to  Melchizedec. 
His  royalty  was  not  all,  for  Psalm  ex.  is  very  clear  in 


HEBREWS.  281 

describing  Melchizedec  as  priest,  and  as  possessing  a 
lasting  and  uninterrupted  priestliood.  He  had  no 
sacerdotal  parentage  from  whom  he  derived  his  priest- 
hood. As  a  priest,  he  had  neither  father  nor  mother ; 
unlike  the  sons  of  Aaron,  he  had  no  genealogy 
(compare  Ezra  ii.  62) ;  he  had  no  limits  assigned  to 
the  term  of  his  priestly  service,  as  was  the  case  with 
the  sons  of  Aaron.  (Num.  iv.  3.)  He  was  made  a 
priest,  like — in  his  priestly  character — to  the  Son  of 
God ;  but,  as  yet,  the  latter  is  in  heaven. 

The  fact  that  he  received  tithes  from  Abraham,  and 
that  he  blessed  Abraham,  shewed  the  high  and  pre- 
eminent dignity  of  this  otherwise  unknown  and 
mysterious  personage.  The  only  thing  that  is  testified 
of  him — without  naming  father  or  mother,  commence- 
ment of  life,  or  death  that  may  have  taken  place — is, 
that  he  lived. 

The  dignity  of  his  person  was  beyond  that  of 
Abraham,  the  depositary  of  the  promises ;  that  of  his 
priesthood  was  above  Aaron's,  who  in  Abraham  paid 
the  tithes  which  Levi  himself  received  from  his 
brethren.  The  priesthood  then  is  changed,  and  with 
it  the  whole  s^'stem  that  depended  on  it. 

Psalm  ex.  interpreted  by  faith  in  Christ — for  the 
epistle,  we  need  not  say,  speaks  always  to  Christians 
— is  still  the  point  on  which  its  argument  is  founded. 
The  first  proof  then,  that  the  whole  was  changed,  is 
that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Messiah  (a  Priest  after  the 
order  of  Melchizedec),  did  not  spring  evidently  from 
the  sacerdotal  tribe,  but  from  another,  namely,  that  of 
Judah.  For  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  they  be- 
lieved. But,  according  to  the  Jewish  scriptures,  the 
Messiah  was  such  as  He  is  here  presented ;  and  in  that 
case  the  priesthood  was  changed,  and  with  it  the 
whole  system.  And  this  was  not  only  a  consequence 
that  must  be  drawn  from  the  fact  that  the  Messiah 
was  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  although  a  Priest;  but  it 

VII. 


282  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

was  requisite  that  another  priest  than  the  priest  of 
Aaron's  family  should  arise,  and  one  after  the  simili- 
tude of  Melchizedec,  who  should  not  be  after  the  law 
of  a  commandment  which  had  no  more  power  than 
the  flesh  to  which  it  was  applied,  but  who  should  be 
according  to  the  power  of  a  never  ending  life.  The 
testimony  of  the  psalm  to  this  was  positive :  "  Thou 
art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek." 

For  there  is  in  fact  a  disannulling  of  the  command- 
ment that  existed  previously,  because  it  wa.  unprofit- 
able (for  the  law  brought  nothing  to  perfection) ;  and 
there  is  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope,  by  which  we 
draw  nigh  to  God. 

Precious  difference !  A  commandment  to  man,  sinful 
and  afar  from  God,  replaced  by  a  hope,  a  confidence, 
founded  on  grace  and  on  divine  promise,  through 
which  we  can  come  even  into  God's  presence. 

The  law,  doubtless,  was  good ;  but  separation  still 
subsisted  between  man  and  God.  The  law  made 
nothing  perfect.  God  was  ever  perfect,  and  human 
perfection  was  required ;  all  must  be  according  to 
what  divine  perfection  required  of  man.  But  sin  was 
there,  and  the  law  was  consequently  Avithout  power 
(save  to  condemn) ;  its  ceremonies  and  ordinances 
were  but  figures,  and  a  heavy  yoke.  Even  that  which 
temporarily  relieved  the  conscience  brought  sin  to 
mind  and  never  made  the  conscience  perfect  towards 
God.  They  were  still  at  a  distance  from  Him.  Grace 
brings  the  soul  to  God,  who  is  known  in  love  and  in  a 
I'ighteousness  which  is  for  us. 

The  character  of  the  new  priesthood  bore  the  stamp, 
in  all  its  features,  of  its  superiority  to  that  which 
existed  under  the  order  of  the  law  and  with  which 
the  whole  system  of  the  law  either  stood  or  fell. 

The  covenant  connected  with  the  new  priesthood 
answered  likewise  to  the  superiority  of  the  latter  over 
the  former  priesthood. 


HEBREWS.  283 

The  priesthood  of  Jesus  was  established  by  oath  ; 
that  of  Aaron  was  not.  The  priesthood  of  Aaron 
passed  from  one  person  to  another,  because  death  put 
an  end  to  its  exercise  by  the  individuals  who  were 
invested  with  it.  But  Jesus  abides  the  same  for  ever ; 
He  has  a  priesthood  that  is  not  transmitted  to  others. 
Thus  He  saves  completely,  and  to  the  end,  those  that 
come  unto  God  by  Him,  seeing  that  He  ever  lives  to 
intercede  for  them. 

Accordingly  "  such  a  high  priest  became  us."  Glo- 
rious thought !  Called  to  be  in  the  presence  of  God, 
to  be  in  relationship  with  Him  in  the  heavenly  glory, 
to  draw  near  to  Him  on  high,  where  nothing  that 
defiles  can  enter,  we  needed  a  High  Priest  in  the  place 
to  which  access  was  given  us  (as  the  Jews  in  the 
earthly  temple),  and  such  a  One  as  the  glory  and 
purity  of  heaven  required.  What  a  demonstration 
that  we  belong  to  heaven,  and  of  the  exalted  nature 
of  our  relationship  with  God  !  Such  a  Priest  became 
lis :  "  Holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners, 
exalted  above  the  heavens  " — for  so  are  we,  as  to  our 
position,  having  to  do  with  God  there — a  Piiest  who 
needs  not  to  renew  the  sacrifices,  as  though  any  work 
to  put  away  sin  still  remained  to  be  done,  or  their  sins 
could  still  be  imputed  to  believers ;  for  then  it  would 
be  impossible  to  stay  in  the  heavenly  sanctuary.  As 
having  once  for  all  completed  His  work  for  the  putting 
away  of  sin,  our  Priest  offered  His  sacrifice  once  for 
all  when  He  offered  up  Himself. 

For  the  law  made  high  priests  who  had  the  infir- 
mities of  men,  for  they  were  men  themselves ;  the  oath 
of  God,  which  came  after  the  law,  establishes  the  Son, 
when  He  is  perfected  for  ever,  consecrated  in  heaven 
unto  God. 

We  see  here  that,  although  there  was  an  analogy 
and  the  figures  of  heavenly  things,  there  is  more  of 
contrast  than  of  comparison  in  this  epistle.     The  legal 

VII. 


284  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

priests  had  the  same  infirmities  as  other  men;  Jesus 
has  a  glorified  priesthood  according  to  the  power  of 
an  endless  life. 

The  introduction  of  this  new  priesthood,  exercised 
in  heaven,  implies  a  change  in  the  sacrifices  and  in 
the  covenant.  This  the  inspired  writer  develops  here, 
setting  forth  the  value  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and 
the  long-promised  new  covenant.  The  direct  connec- 
tion is  with  the  sacrifices ;  but  he  turns  aside  for  a 
moment  to  the  two  covenants,  a  so  wide-embracing 
and  all-weighty  consideration  for  the  christian  Jews 
who  had  been  under  the  first. 

Chapter  viii.  in  this  respect  is  simple  and  clear ;  the 
last  verses  only  give  room  for  a  few  remarks. 

The  sum  of  the  doctrine  we  have  been  considering 
is,  that  we  have  a  High  Priest  who  is  seated  on  the 
throne  of  the  Majesty  in  the  heavens,  a  Minister  of  the 
heavenly  sanctuary  which  is  not  made  with  hands. 
As  such,  He  must  have  an  offering  to  present  there. 
Jesus,  were  He  on  earth,  would  not  be  a  Priest ;  there 
were  priests  on  earth  according  to  the  law,  in  which 
all  things  were  but  figures  of  the  heavenly  things ;  as 
Moses  was  told  to  make  all  according  to  the  pattern 
that  was  shewn  him  in  the  mount.  But  the  ministry 
of  Jesus  is  more  excellent,  because  He  is  the  Mediator 
of  a  better  covenant,  spoken  of  in  Jeremiah  xxxi., 
which  is  here  quoted ;  a  clear  and  simple  proof  that 
the  first  covenant  was  not  to  continue. 

We  again  find  here  that  particular  development  of 
the  truth  which  was  called  for  by  the  character  of  the 
persons  to  whom  this  letter  was  addressed. 

The  first  covenant  was  made  with  Israel ;  the  second 
must  be  so  likewise,  according  to  the  prophecy  of 
Jeremiah.  The  epistle  however  in  this  passage  only 
makes  use  of  the  fact  that  there  was  to  be  a  second 
covenant,  in  order  to  demonstrate  that  the  first  was  to 
last  no  longer.     It  had  grown  old,  and  was  to  vanish 


HEBREWS.  285 

away.  He  recites  the  terms  of  the  new  covenant. 
We  shall  find  that  he  makes  use  of  it  afterwards.  In 
that  which  follows,  he  contrasts  the  services  that 
belonged  to  the  lirst  with  the  perfect  work  on  which 
Christianity  is  founded.  Thus  the  extent  and  the 
value  of  the  work  of  Christ  are  introduced. 

Although  there  is  no  difficulty  here,  it  is  important 
to  have  lio-ht  with  reo-ard  to  these  two  covenants, 
because  some  have  very  vague  ideas  on  this  point,  and 
many  souls,  putting  themselves  under  covenants — 
that  is,  in  relationship  with  God  under  conditions  in 
which  He  has  not  placed  them — lose  their  simplicity, 
and  do  not  hold  fast  grace  and  the  fulness  of  the 
work  of  Christ,  and  the  position  He  has  acquired  for 
them  in  heaven. 

A  covenant  is  a  principle  of  relationship  with  God 
on  the  earth — conditions  established  by  God  under 
which  man  is  to  live  with  Him.  The  word  may 
perhaps  be  used  figuratively,  or  by  accommodation. 
It  is  applied  to  details  of  the  relationship  of  God  with 
Israel,  and  so  to  Abraham  {Gen.  xv.),  and  like  cases ; 
but,  strictly  speaking,  there  are  but  two  covenants,  in 
which  God  has  dealt  with  man  on  earth,  or  will — the 
old  and  the  new.  The  old  was  established  at  Sinai. 
The  new  covenant  is  mtide  also  with  the  two  houses  of 
Israel.* 


*  We  have  also,  at  the  end  of  the  epistle,  the  expression 
•'  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant."  "  Covenant"  he  uses, 
I  doubt  not  (as  the  word  "law"'  also  is  used),  because  it  was 
commonly  employed  as  the  condition  of  relationship  with  God, 
and  "eternal"  is  characteristic  of  the  Hebrews.  There  have 
been,  and  will  be,  covenants  in  time  and  for  the  earth;  but  we 
have  eternal  conditions  of  relationship  with  God,  of  which  the 
blood  of  Christ  is  the  expression  and  security,  founded  in 
everlastinf^  grace,  and  righteousness  as  well  as  gi-ace,  by  that 
precious  blood,  in  which  all  the  character  and  all  the  purpose  of 
God  has  been  made  good  and  glorified,  as  well  as  our  sins  been 
put  away. 

VIII, 


286  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

The  gospel  is  not  a  covenant,  but  the  revelation  of 
the  salvation  bf  God.  It  proclaims  the  great  salva- 
tion. We  enjoy  indeed  all  the  essential  privileges  of 
the  new  covenant,  its  foundation  being  laid  on  God's 
part  in  the  biood  of  Christ,  but  we  do  so  in  spirit,  not 
according  to  the  letter. 

The  new  covenant  will  be  established  formally  with 
Israel  in  the  millennium.  Meanwhile  the  old  covenant 
is  judged  by  the  fact  that  there  is  a  new  one. 

Chapter  ix.  The  epistle,  recounting  some  particular 
circumstances  which  characterised  the  first  covenant, 
shews  that  neither  were  sins  put  awa}',  nor  was  tlie 
conscience  purged  by  its  means,  nor  the  entrance  into 
the  holiest  granted  to  the  worshippers.  The  veil 
concealed  God.  The  high  priest  went  in  once  a  year 
to  make  reconciliation — no  one  else.  The  way  to 
God  in  holiness  was  barred.  Perfect,  as  pertaining 
to  the  conscience,  they  could  not  be  through  the  blood 
of  bulls  and  of  goats.  These  were  but  provision ary 
and  figurative  ordinances,  until  God  took  up  the 
real  work  itself,  in  order  to  accomplish  it  fully  and 
for  ever. 

But  this  brings  us  to  the  focus  of  the  light  which 
God  gives  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  this  epistle.  Be- 
fore proving  by  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament 
the  doctrine  that  he  announced,  and  the  discontinuance 
of  the  legal  sacrifices — of  all  sacrifice  for  sin,  the 
writer,  with  a  heart  full  of  the  truth  and  of  the 
importance  of  that  truth,  teaches  the  value  and  the 
extent  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  (still  in  contrast  with 
the  former  offerings,  but  a  contrast  that  rests  on  the 
intrinsic  value  of  the  offering  of  Christ).  These  three 
results  are  presented : — first,  the  opened  way  into  the 
sanctuary  was  manifested,  that  is,  access  to  God  Him- 
self, where  He  is  ;  second,  the  purification  of  the  con- 
science ;  third,  an  eternal  redemption  (I  may  add  the 
promise  of  an  eternal  inheritance). 


HEBREWS.  287 

One  feels  the  immense  importance,  the  inestimable 
value,  of  the  first.  The  believer  is  admitted  into 
God's  own  presence  by  a  new  and  living  way  which 
He  has  cons-^crated  for  us  through  the  veil,  that  is  to 
say.  His  flesh ;  has  constant  access  to  God,  immediate 
access  to  the  place  where  He  is,  in  the  light.  What 
complete  salvation,  what  blessedness,  what  security ! 
For  how  could  we  have  access  to  God  in  the  light, "^if 
everything  that  would  separate  us  from  Him,  were 
not  entirely  taken  away  through  Him  who  was  once 
offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many  ?  But  here  it  is  the 
precious  and  perfect  result,  in  this  respect,  which  is 
revealed  to  us,  and  formally  proved  in  chapter  x.,  as  a 
right  that  we  possess,  that  access  to  God  Himself  is 
entirely  and  freely  open  to  us.  We  are  not  indeed 
told  in  this  passage  that  we  are  seated  there,  for  it  is 
not  our  union  with  Christ  that  is  the  subject  of  this 
epistle,  but  our  access  to  God  in  the  sanctuary.  And 
it  is  important  to  note  this  last,  and  it  is  as  precious 
in  its  place  as  the  other.  We  are  viewed  as  on  earth, 
and  being  on  earth  we  have  free  and  full  access  to 
God  in  the  sanctuary.  We  go  in  perfect  liberty  to 
God,  where  His  holiness  dwells,  and  where  nothing 
that  is  contrary  to  Him  can  be  admitted.  What 
happiness!  What  perfect  grace!  What  a  glorious 
result,  supreme  and  complete !  Could  anything 
better  be  desired,  remembering  too  that  it  is  our 
dwelling-place  ?  This  is  our  position  in  the  presence 
of  God  through  the  entrance  of  Christ  into  the 
sanctuary. 

The  second  result  shews  us  the  personal  state  we 
are  brought  into,  in  order  to  the  enjoyment  of  our 
position ;  that  we  may,  on  our  part,  enter  in  freely. 
It  is  that  our  Saviour  has  rendered  our  conscience 
perfect,  so  that  we  can  go  into  the  sanctuary  without 
an  idea  of  fear,  without  one  question  as  to  sin  arising 
iu  our  minds.     A  perfect  conscience  is  not  an  innocent 

IX. 


288  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

conscience  which,  happy  in  its  unconsciousness,  does  not 
know  evil,  and  does  not  know  God  revealed  in  holi- 
ness. A  perfect  conscience  knows  God ;  it  is  cleansed, 
and,  having  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  according 
to  the  light  of  God  Himself,  it  knows  that  it  is 
purified  from  all  evil  according  to  His  purity.  Now 
the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats,  and  the  washings  re- 
peated under  the  law,  could  never  make  the  conscience 
perfect.  They  could  sanctify  carnally,  so  as  to  enable 
the  worshipper  to  approach  God  outwardly,  yet  only 
afar  off,  with  the  veil  still  unrent.  But  a  real  purifi- 
cation from  sin  and  sins,  so  that  the  soul  can  be  in  the 
presence  of  God  Himself  in  the  light  without  spot, 
with  the  consciousness  of  being  so,  the  offerings  under 
the  law  could  never  produce.  They  were  but  figures. 
But,  thanks  be  to  God,  Christ  has  aecomplislied  the 
work  ;  and,  present  for  us  now  in  the  heavenly  and 
eternal  sanctuary,  He  is  the  witness  there  that  our 
sins  are  put  away  ;  so  that  all  conscience  of  sin  before 
God  is  destroyed,  because  we  know  that  He  who  bore 
our  sins  is  in  the  presence  of  God,  after  having  accom- 
plished the  work  of  expiation.  Thus  we  have  the 
consciousness  of  being  in  the  light  without  spot.  We 
have  the  purification  not  only  of  sins  but  of  the  con- 
science, so  that  we  can  use  this  access  to  God  in  full 
liberty  and  joy,  presenting  ourselves  before  Him  who 
has  so  loved  us. 

The  third  result,  which  seals  and  characterises  the 
two  others,  is  that  Christ,  having  once  entered  in, 
abides  in  heaven.  He  has  gone  into  the  heavenly 
sanctuary  to  remain  there  by  virtue  of  an  eternal 
redemption,  of  blood  that  has  everlasting  validity. 
The  work  is  completely  done,  and  can  never  change 
in  value.  If  our  sins  are  effectually  put  away,  God 
glorified,  and  righteousness  complete,  that  which  once 
availed  to  effect  this  can  never  naot  avail.  The  blood 
shed  once  for  all  is  ever  efficacious, 


HEBREWS.  289 

Our  High  Priest  is  in  the  sanctuary,  not  with  the 
blood  of  sacrifices,  which  are  but  figures  of  the  true. 
The  work  has  been  done  which  puts  sin  away.  This 
redemption  is  neither  temporal  nor  transitciry.  It  is 
the  redemption  of  the  soul,  and  for  eternity,  according 
to  the  moral  efficacy  of  that  which  has  been  done. 

Here  tlien  are  the  three  aspects  of  the  result  of  O^ 
work  of  Christ :  immediate  access  to  God ;  a  purge:; 
conscience  ;  an  eternal  redemption. 

Three  points  remain  to  be  noticed  before  enter- 
ing on  the  subject  of  the  covenants,  which  is  here 
resumed. 

First,  Christ  is  a  High  Priest  of  good  things  to  come. 
In  saying  "  things  to  come,"  the  starting-point  is  Israel 
under  the  law  before  the  advent  of  our  Lord.  Never- 
theless, if  these  good  things  were  now  acquired,  if  it 
could  be  said,  "we  have  them,"  because  Christianity 
was  their  fulfilment,  it  could  hardly  be  still  said — 
when  Christianity  was  established — "good  things  to 
come."  They  are  yet  to  come.  These  "  good  things  " 
consist  of  all  that  the  Messiah  will  enjoy  when  He 
reigns.  This  also  is  the  reason  that  the  earthly  things 
have  their  place.  But  our  present  relationship  with 
Him  is  only  and  altogether  heavenly.  He  acts  as 
Priest  in  a  tabernacle  which  is  not  of  this  creation :  it 
is  heavenly,  in  the  presence  of  God,  not  made  with 
hands.     Our  place  is  in  heaven. 

In  the  second  place,  "  Christ  offered  himself,  by  the 
eternal  Spirit,*  without  spot,  to  God."  Here  the 
precious  offering  up  of  Christ  is  viewed  as  an  act  that 


*  The  reader  will  remark  how  anxiously,  so  to  speak,  the 
Epistle  here  attaches  the  epithet  "eternal"  to  everything.  It 
was  not  a  temporary  or  earthly  ground  of  relationship  with  God, 
but  an  eternal  one ;  so  of  redemption ;  so  of  inheritance.  Cor- 
responding to  this,  as  to  the  work  on  earth,  it  is  once  for  all.  It 
is  not  unimportant  to  notice  this  as  to  the  nature  of  the  work. 
Hence  the  epithet  attached  even  to  the  Spirit. 

VOL.  V.  IX.  U 


290  THE    BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

He  performed  as  man,  though  in  the  perfection  and 
value  of  His  Person.  He  offered  Himself  to  God — but 
as  moved  by  the  power,  and  according  to  the  perfec- 
tion of  the  Eternal  Spirit.  All  the  motives  that 
governed  this  action,  and  the  accomplishment  of  the 
fact  according  to  those  motives,  were  purely  and  per- 
fectly those  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  that  is,  absolutely  divine 
in  their  perfection,  but  of  the  Holy  Ghost  acting  in  a 
man  (a  man  without  sin  who,  born  and  living  ever  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  had  never  known  sin ; 
who,  being  exempt  from  it  by  birth,  never  allowed  it  to 
enter  into  Him) ;  so  that  it  is  the  Man  Christ  who 
offers  Himself.     This  was  requisite. 

Thus  the  offering  was  in  itself  perfect  and  pure,  with- 
out defilement;  and  the  act  of  offering  was  perfect, 
whether  in  love  or  in  obedience,  or  in  the  desire  to 
glorify  God,  or  to  accomplish  the  purpose  of  God. 
Nothing  mingled  itself  with  the  perfection  of  His 
intent  in  offering  Himself. 

Moreover,  it  was  not  a  temporary  offering,  which 
applied  to  one  sin  with  which  the  conscience  was 
burdened  and  which  went  no  farther  than  that  one, 
an  offering  which  could  not,  by  its  nature,  have  the 
perfection  spoken  of,  because  it  was  not  the  Person 
offering  up  Himself,  nor  was  it  absolutely  for  God, 
because  there  was  in  it  neither  the  perfection  of  will 
nor  of  obedience.  But  the  offering  of  Christ  was  one 
which,  being  perfect  in  its  moral  nature,  being  in  itself 
perfect  in  the  eyes  of  God,  was  necessarily  eternal  in 
its  value.  For  this  value  was  as  enduring  as  the 
nature  of  Go(^  who  was  glorified  in  it. 

It  Avas  ma/  e,  not  of  necessity,  but  of  free  will,  and 
in  obedience.  It  was  made  by  a  man  for  the  glory  of 
God,  but  through  the  Eternal  Spirit,  ever  the  same  in 
its  nature  and  value. 

All  being  thus  perfectly  fulfilled  for  the  glory  of 
Go  1>  t)  e  conscience  of  every  one  that  comes  to  Him 


HEBREWS.  291 

by  this  offering  Is  purged ;  dead  works  are  blotted  out 
and  set  aside  ;  we  stand  before  God  on  the  ground  of 
that  which  Christ  has  done. 

And  here  the  tliird  point  comes  in.  Being  perfectly 
cleansed  in  conscience  from  all  that  man  in  his  sinful 
nature  produces,  and  having  to  do  with  God  in  light 
and  in  love,  there  being  no  question  of  conscience 
with  Him,  we  are  in  a  position  to  serve  the  living 
God.  Precious  liberty !  in  which,  happy  and  without 
question  before  God  according  to  His  nature  in  light, 
we  can  serve  Pi.im  according  to  the  activity  of  His 
nature  in  love.  Judaism  knew  no  more  of  this  than 
it  did  of  perfection  in  conscience.  Obligation  towards 
God  that  system  indeed  maintained ;  and  it  offered  a 
certain  provision  for  that  which  was  needed  for  out- 
ward failure.  But  to  have  a  perfect  conscience,  and 
then  to  serve  God  in  love,  according  to  His  will — of 
this  it  knew  nothing. 

This  is  christian  position :  the  conscience  perfect  by 
Christ,*  according  to  the  nature  of  God  Himself  ;  the 
service  of  God  in  liberty,  according  to  His  nature  of 
love  acting  towards  others. 

For  the  Jewish  system,  in  its  utmost  advantages, 
jras  characterised  by  the  holy  place.  There  were 
duties  and  obligations  to  be  fulfilled  in  order  to  draw 
near,  sacrifices  to  cleanse  outwardly  him  who  drew 
aear  outwardly.  Meanwhile  God  was  always  con- 
cealed. No  one  entered  into  "  the  holy  place :"  it  is 
implied  that  the  "  must  holy "  was  inaccessible.  No 
sacrifice  had  yet  been  offered  which  gave  free  access, 
and  at  all  times.  God  was  concealed :  that  He  was  so 
characterised  the  position.  They  could  not  stand  before 
Him.  Neither  did  He  manifest  Himself.  They  served 
Him  out  of  His  presence  without  going  in. 

*  For  in  Christ  we  are  the  righteousness  of  God.  His  bk<y1 
cleanses  us  on  God's  part.  Jesus  wrought  out  the  puriticntio:. 
Dt"  sins  by  Himself,  and  glorified  God  in  so  doin^, 

'X. 


292  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

It  is  important  to  notice  this  truth,  that  the  whole 
system  in  its  highest  and  nearest  access  to  God  was 
characterised  by  the  holy  place,  in  order  to  understand 
the  passage  before  us. 

Now  the  first  tabernacle — Judaism  as  a  system — is 
identified  with  the  first  part  of  the  tabernacle,  and 
that  open  only  to  the  priestly  part  of  the  nation,  the 
second  part  (that  is,  the  sanctuary)  only  shewing,  by 
the  circumstances  connected  with  it,  that  there  was  no 
access  to  God.  When  the  author  of  the  epistle  gof  s 
on  to  the  present  position  of  Christ,  he  leaves  the 
earthly  tabernacle — it  is  heaven  itself  he  then  speaks 
of,  a  tabernacle  not  made  with  hands,  nor  of  this 
creation,  into  which  he  introduces  us. 

The  first  tent  or  part  of  the  tabernacle  gave  the 
character  of  the  relationship  of  the  people  with  God, 
and  that  only  by  a  priesthood.  They  could  not  reach 
God.  When  w^e  approach  God  Himself,  it  i's  in 
heaven ;  and  the  entire  first  system  disappears.  Every- 
thing was  ofi'ered  as  a  figure  in  the  first  system, 
and  even  as  a  figure  shew^ed  that  the  conscience  was 
not  yet  set  free,  nor  the  presence  of  God  accessible 
to  man.  The  remembrance  of  sins  was  continually 
renewed  (the  annual  sacrifice  was  a  memorial  of  sins, 
and  God  was  not  manifested,  nor  the  way  to  Him 
opened). 

Christ  comes,  accomplishes  the  sacrifice,  makes  the 
conscience  perfect,  goes  into  heaven  itself;  and  we 
draw  nio^h  to  God  in  the  light.  To  mingle  the  service 
of  the  first  tabernacle  or  holy  place  with  chiistian 
service  is  to  deny  the  latter ;  for  the  meaning  of  the 
first  w^as  that  the  way  to  God  was  not  yet  open ;  the 
meaning  of  the  second,  that  it  is  open. 

God  may  have  patience  with  the  weakness  of  man. 
Till  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  He  bore  with  the 
Jews ;  but  the  two  systems  can  never  really  go  on 
together,  namely,  a  system  w^hich  said  that  one  cannot 


HEBREWS.  293 

draw  nigh  to  God,  and  another  system  which  gives 
access  to  Him. 

Christ  is  come,  the  High  Priest  of  a  new  system,  of 
"good  things,"  which,  under  the  old  system,  were  yet 
"to  come;"  but  He  did  not  enter  into  the  earthly 
most  holy  place,  leaving  the  holy  place  to  subsist 
without  a  true  meaning.  He  is  come  by  the  (not  a) 
more  excellent  and  more  perfect  tabernacle.  I  repeat 
it,  tor  it  is  essential  here:  the  holy  place,  or  the  first 
tent,  is  the  figure  of  the  relationship  of  men  with 
God  under  the  first  tabernacle  (taken  as  a  whole) ;  so 
tluit  we  may  say,  "  the  first  tabernacle,"  applying  it  to 
the  first  "part  of  the  tabernacle,  and  pass  on  to  the 
first  tabernacle  as  a  whole,  and  as  a  recognised  period 
having  the  same  meaning.  This  the  epistle  does 
here.  To  come  out  of  this  position,  we  must  leave 
typical  things  and  pass  into  heaven,  the  true  sanctuary 
where  Christ  ever  lives,  and  where  no  veil  bars  our 
entrance. 

Now  it  is  not  said,  that  we  have  "the  good  things 
to  come."  Christ  has  gone  into  heaven  itself,  the 
High  Priest  of  those  good  things,  securing  their  pos- 
session to  them  that  trust  in  Him.  But  we  have 
access   to*   God    in   the   light   by  virtue   of   Christ's 

=■'  It  is  all-important  thoroughly  to  understand,  that  it  is  into 
the  presence  of  God  that  we  enter ;  and  that,  at  all  times,  and 
bj'-  virtue  of  a  sacrifice  and  of  blood  which  never  lose  their  value. 
The  worshipper,  under  the  former  tabernacle,  did  not  come  into 
the  presence  of  God ;  he  sta.yed  outside  the  unrent  veil.  He 
sinned — a  sacrifice  was  offered:  he  sinned  again — a  sacrifice  was 
offered.  Now  the  veil  is  rent.  Wo  are  always  in  the  presence 
of  God  without  a  veil.  Happen  what  may,  He  always  sees  us 
— sees  us  in  His  presence — according  to  the  efficacy  of  Christ's 
perfect  sacrifice.  We  are  there  now,  by  virtue  of  a  perfect 
sacrifice,  offered  for  the  putting  away  of  sin,  according  to  the 
divine  glory,  and  which  has  perfectly  accomplished  the  purifica- 
tion of  sins.  I  should  not  be  in  the  presence  of  God  in  tliQ 
sanctuary,  if  I  had  not  been  purified  according  to  the  purity  oi 
God,  and  by  God.     It  was  this  which  brought  me  there.     And 

IX. 


294  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

presence  there.  That  presence  is  the  proof  of  right- 
eousness fully  established  ;  the  blood,  an  evidence  that 
our  sins  are  put  away  for  ever ;  and  our  conscience  is 
made  perfect.  Christ  in  heaven  is  the  guarantee  for 
the  fulfilment  of  every  promise.  He  has  opened  an 
access  for  us,  even  now,  to  God  in  the  light,  having 
cleansed  our  consciences  once  for  all — for  He  dwells 
on  high  continuously — that  we  may  enter  in,  and  that 
we  may  serve  God  here  below. 

All  this  is  already  established  and  secured ;  but 
there  is  more.  The  new  covenant,  of  which  He  is 
Mediator,  is  founded  on  His  blood. 

The  way  in  which  the  apostle  always  avoids 
the  direct  application  of  the  new  covenant  is  very 
striking. 

The  transgressions  that  were  imputed  under  the 
first  covenant,  and  which  the  sacrifices  it  offered 
could  not  expiate,  are  by  the  blood  of  the  new  cove- 
nant entirely  blotted  out.  Thus  they  which  are  called 
— observe  the  expression  (ver.  15) — can  receive  the 
promise  of  the  eternal  inheritance ;  that  is  to  say,  the 
foundation  is  laid  for  the  accomplishment  of  the 
blessings  of  the  covenant.  He  says,  "  the  eternal  in- 
heritance," because,  as  we  have  seen,  the  reconciliation 
was  complete,  our  sins  borne  and  cancelled,  and  the 
work  by  which  sin  is  finally  put  away  out  of  God's 
sight  accomplished,  according  to  the  nature  and  cha- 
racter of  God  Himself.  This  is  the  main  point  of  all 
this  part  of  the  epistle. 

It  is  because  of  the  necessity  there  was  for  this 
sacrifice — the  necessity  that  sins,  and  finally  sin,  should 
be  entirely  put  away,*  in  order  to  the  enjoyment  of 

this  sacrifice  and  this  blood  can  never  lose  their  value.  Through 
them  I  am  therefore  perfect  for  ever  in  the  presence  of  God ; 
I  was  brought  into  it  by  them. 

-''  The  work  in  virtue  of  which  all  sin  is  finally  put  away  out 
of  God's  sight — abolished — is  accomplished,  the  question  of  good 


HEBREWS.  295 

tlie  eternal  promises  (for  God  could  not  bless,  as  an 
eternal  principle  and  definitively,  while  sin  was  before 
His  eyes),  that  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  Man  on  earth, 
became  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  in  order 
that  by  death  He  might  make  a  way  for  the  perma- 
nent enjoyment  of  that  which  had  been  promised. 
The  new  covenant,  in  itself,  did  not  speak  of  a 
Mediator.  God  would  write  His  laws  on  the  hearts 
of  His  people,  and  would  remember  sins  no  more. 

The  covenant  is  not  yet  made  with  Israel  and 
Judah.  But  meanwhile  God  has  established  and  re- 
vealed the  Mediator,  who  has  accomplished  the  work 
on  which  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  can  be  founded 
in  a  way  that  is  durable  in  principle,  eternal,  because 
connected  with  the  nature  of  God  Himself.  This  is 
done  by  means  of  death,  the  wages  of  sin,  and  by 
which  sin  is  left  behind ;  and  expiation  for  sins  being 
made  according  to  the  righteousness  of  God,  an  alto- 
gether new  position  is  taken  outside  and  beyond  sin. 
The  Mediator  has  paid  the  ransom.  Sin  has  no  more 
right  over  us. 

Verses  16,  17  are  a  parenthesis,  in  which  the  idea 
of  a  "  testament  "  (it  is  the  same  word  as  "  covenant  " 
in  the  Greek,  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  one  who 
has  the  right  of  disposal)  is  introduced,  to  make  us 


and  evil  is  come  to  a  final  issue  on  the  cross,  and  God  perfectly 
glorified  when  sin  was  before  Him;  the  result  will  not  be  finally 
accomplished  till  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth.  But  our 
sins  having  been  borne  by  Christ  on  the  cross,  He  rises,  atone- 
ment being  made,  an  eternal  testimony  that  they  are  gone  for 
ever,  and  that  by  faith  we  are  now  justified  and  have  peace.  We 
must  not  confound  these  two  things,  our  sins  being  put  away, 
and  the  perfectly  glorifying  God  in  respect  of  sin,  when  Clirist 
was  made  sin,  the  results  of  which  are  not  yet  accomplished. 
As  regards  the  sinful  nature,  it  is  still  in  us ;  but  Christ  having 
died,  its  condemnation  took  place  then,  but,  that  being  in 
death,  we  reckon  ourselves  dead  to  it,  and  no  condemnation 
for  us. 

IX. 


296  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

understand  that  death  must  have  taken  place  before 
the  rights  acquired  under  the  testament  can  be 
enjoyed.* 

This  necessity  of  the  covenant  being  founded  on 
the  blood  of  a  victim  was  not  forgotten  in  the  case  of 
the  first  covenant.  Everything  was  sprinkled  with 
blood.  Only,  in  this  case,  it  was  the  solemn  sanction 
of  death  attached  to  the  obligation  of  the  covenant. 
The  types  always  spoke  of  the  necessity  of  death 
intervening  before  men  could  be  in  relationship  with 
God.  Sin  had  brought  in  death  and  judgment.  We 
must  either  undergo  the  judgment  ourselves,  or  see 
our  sins  blotted  out  through  it  having  been  undergone 
by  another  for  us. 

Three  applications  of  the  blood  are  presented  here. 
The  covenant  is  founded  on  the  blood.  Defilement  is 
washed  away  by  its  means.  Guilt  is  removed  by 
the  remission  obtained  through  the  blood  that  has 
been  shed. 

These  are,  in  fact,  the  three  things  necessary. 
First,  the  ways  of  God  in  bestowing  blessing  accord- 
ing to  His  promises  are  connected  with  His  righteous- 
ness, the  sins  of  those  blessed  being  atoned  for,  the 
requisite  foundation  of  the  covenant,  Christ  having 
withal  glorified  God  in  respect  of  sin,  when  made  sin 
on  the  cross. 

Second,  the  purification  of  the  sin  by  which  we 
were  defiled  (by  which  all  things,  that  could  not  be 
guilty,  were  nevertheless  defiled)  is  accomplished. 
Here  there  were  cases  in  which  water  was  typically 

■'^  Some  think  that  these  two  verses  are  not  a  parenthesis 
speaking  of  a  testament,  but  a  continuation  of  the  argument  on 
the  covenant,  taking  the  word  diaOtfikvov  to  mean,  not  the 
testator,  but  the  sacrifice,  which  put  a  seal,  more  solemn  than 
an  oath,  on  the  obligation  of  observing  the  covenant.  It  is  a 
very  delicate  Greek  question,  on  which  I  do  not  here  enter. 
But  I  cannot  say  they  have  convinced  me. 


HEBREWS.  297 

used:  this  is  moral  and  practical  cleansing.  It 
flows  from  death  ;  the  water  that  purifies  proceeded 
from  the  side  of  the  holy  Victim  already  dead.  It 
is  the  application  of  the  word — which  judges  all 
evil  and  reveals  all  good — to  the  conscience  and  the 
heart. 

Third,  as  regards  remission.  In  no  case  can  this  be 
obtained  without  the  shedding  of  blood.  Observe  that 
it  does  not  here  say  "  application."  It  is  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  work  of  true  propitiation,  which  is 
here  spoken  of.  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is 
no  remission.  All-important  truth  !  For  a  work  of 
remission,  death  and  blood-shedding  must  take  place. 

Two  consequences  flow  from  these  views  of  atonement 
and  reconciliation  to  God. 

~  First,  it  was  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  better 
sacrifice,  a  more  excellent  victim,  than  those  which  were 
offered  under  the  old  .covenant,  because  it  was  the 
heavenly  things  themselves,  and  not  their  figures,  that 
were  to  be  purified.  For  it  is  into  the  presence  of 
God  in  heaven  itself  that  Christ  has  entered. 

Secondly,  Christ  was  not  to  offer  Himself  often, 
as  the  high  priest  went  in  every  year  with  the 
blood  of  others.  For  He  offered  up  Himself.  Hence, 
if  all  that  was  available  in  the  sacrifice  was  not 
brought  to  perfection  by  a  single  offering  once  made, 
He  must  have  suffered  often  since  the  foundation  of 
the  world.*  This  remark  leads  to  the  clear  and 
simple  declaration  of  the  ways  of  God  on  this  point — 
a  declaration  of  priceless  value.  God  allowed  ages 
to  pass  (the  different  distinct  periods  in  which  man 
lias  in  divers  ways  been  put  to  the  test,  and  in  which 
lie  has  had  time  to  shew  what  he  is)  without  ye,i 
accomplishing  His  work  of  grace.     This  trial  of  man 

*  And  He  must  have  repeatedly  suffered^  for  there  must  be 
reality  in  putting  a"way  sin. 

IX. 


298  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

has  served  to  shew  that  he  is  bad  in  nature  and  in 
will.  The  multiplication  of  means  only  made  it  more 
evident  that  he  was  essentially  bad  at  heart,  for  he 
availed  himself  of  none  of  them  to  draw  near  to  God. 
On  the  contrary,  his  enmity  against  God  was  fully 
manifested. 

When  God  had  made  this  plain,  before  the  law, 
under  the  law,  by  promises,  by  the  coming  and  pre- 
sence of  His  Son,  then  the  work  of  God  takes  the 
place,  for  our  salvation  and  God's  glory,  of  man's 
responsibility — on  the  ground  of  which  faith  knows 
man  is  entirely  lost.  This  explains  the  expression 
(ver.  26)  "  in  the  consummation  of  the  ages." 

Now  this  work  is  perfect,  and  perfectly  accom- 
plished. Sin  had  dishonoured  God,  and  separated 
man  from  Him.  All  that  God  had  done  to  oive  him 
the  means  of  return  only  ended  in  affording  him 
opportunity  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  his  sin  by  the 
rejection  of  Jesus.  But  in  this  the  eternal  counsels 
of  God  were  fulfilled,  at  least  the  moral  basis  laid,  and 
that  in  infinite  perfection,  for  their  actual  accomplish- 
ment in  their  results.  All  now  in  fact,  as  in  purpose 
always,  rested  on  the  second  Adam,  and  on  what  God 
had  done,  not  on  man's  responsibility,  while  that  was 
fully  met  for  God's  glory.  (Compare  2  Tim.  i.  9,  10; 
Titus  i.  1,  2.)  The  Christ,  whom  man  rejected,  had 
appeared  in  order  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of 
Himself,  Thus  it  was  morally  the  consummation  of 
the  ages. 

The  result  of  the  work  and  power  of  God  are  not 
yet  manifested.  A  new  creation  will  develop  them. 
But  man,  as  the  child  of  Adam,  has  run  his  whole 
career  in  his  relationship  with  God :  he  is  enmity 
against  God.  Christ,  fulfilling  the  will  of  God,  has 
come  in  the  consummation  of  ages,  to  put  away  sin 
by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  and  His  work  to  this  end 
is    accomplished.      This  is  the  moral  power  of  His 


HEBREWS.  29^ 

act,*  of  His  sacrifice  before  God ;  in  result,  sin  will  be 
entirely  blotted  out  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  To 
faith  this  result,  namely,  the  putting  away  of  sin,  is 
already  realised  in  the  conscience,-|-  because  Christ 
who  was  made  sin  for  us  has  died  and  died  to  sin,  and 
now  is  risen  and  glorified,  sin  (even  as  made  it  for  us) 
left  behind. 

Moreover,  this  result  is  announced  to  the  believer — 
to  those  who  are  looking  for  the  Lord's  return. 
Death  and  judgment  are  the  lot  of  men  as  children  of 
Adam.  Christ  has  been  offered  once  to  bear  the  sins 
of  many  ;  and  "  unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he 
appear  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation," 
not  to  judgment. 

For  them,  as  to  their  standing  before  God,  sin  is 
even  now  put  away :  as  Christ  is,  so  are  they ;  their 
own  sins  are  all  blotted  out.  Christ  appeared  the  first 
time  in  order  to  be  made  sin  for  us,  and  to  bear  our 
sins ;  they  were  laid  upon  Him  on  the  cross.  And, 
with  regard  to  those  who  wait  for  Him,  those  sins 
are  entirely  put  away.  When  He  returns,  Christ  has 
nothing  to  do  with  sin,  as  far  as  they  are  concerned. 
It  was   fully  dealt  with   at    His   first   coming.     He 


*  The  more  we  examine  the  cross  fi'om  God's  side  of  it,  the 
more  we  shall  see  this  :  man's  enmity  against  God,  and  against 
God  come  in  goodness,  was  absolutely  displayed;  Satan's  power 
in  evil  over  man  too ;  man's  perfectness  in  love  to  the  Father 
and  obedience  to  Him ;  God's  majesty  and  righteousness 
against  sin,  and  love  to  sinners,  all  He  is ;  all  good  and  evil 
perfectly  brought  to  an  issue,  and  that  in  the  place  of  sin,  that 
is,  in  Christ  made  sin  for  us.  When  sin  was  as  such  before  His 
face  in  the  sinless  One  where  it  was  needed  and  God  perfectly 
glorified,  and  indeed  the  Son  of  man  too,  morally  the  whole 
thing  was  settled,  and  we  know  it :  the  actual  results  are  not 
yet  produced. 

t  The  judgment,  which  will  fall  upon  the  wicked,  is  not  sin. 
Much  more  also  is  involved  in  the  work  and  position  of  Christ, 
even  heavenly  gloiy  with  God :  but  it  is  not  our  subject  here. 

IX. 


800  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

appears  the  second  time  to  deliver  them  from  all  the 
results  of  sin,  from  all  bondage.  He  will  appear,  not 
for  judgment,  but  unto  salvation.  The  putting  away 
of  sin  on  their  behalf  before  God  has  been  so  complete, 
the  sins  of  believers  so  entirely  blotted  out,  that, 
when  He  appears  the  second  time,  He  has,  as  to  them, 
nothing  to  do  with  sin.  He  appears  apart  from  sin, 
not  only  without  sin  in  His  blessed  Person — this 
was  the  case  at  His  first  coming — but  (as  to  those 
who  look  for  Him)  outside  all  question  of  sin,  for 
their  final  deliverance. 

'■  Witliout  sin"  is  in  contrast  with  "to  bear  the  sins 
of  many."*     But  it  will  be  remarked,  that  the  taking 

'■'  It  is  of  moment  to  see  the  difference  between  verses  26  and 
28.  Sin  had  to  be  put  away  abstractedly  out  of  God's  sight, 
and  hence  He  had  to  be  perfectly  glorified  in  respect  of  it,  in 
that  place  where  sin  was  before  Him.  Christ  was  made  sin, 
appeared  to  abolish  it  out  of  God's  sight,  ilqaQ'iTrjfnv  Tfjc,  a/wapr/af. 
Besides  this,  our  sins  (guilt)  were  in  question,  and  Christ  bore 
them  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  The  sins  are  borne,  and 
Christ  has  them  no  more.  They  are  gone  as  guilt  before  God 
for  ever.  The  work  for  the  abolition  of  sin  in  God's  sight  is 
done,  and  God  owns  it  as  done,  having  glorified  Jesus  who  has 
glorified  Him  as  to  it  when  made  sin.  So  that  for  God  the 
thing  is  settled,  and  faith  recognises  this,  but  the  result  is  not 
produced.  The  work  is  before  God  in  all  its  value,  but  the  sin 
still  exists  in  the  believer  and  in  the  world.  Faith  owns  both, 
knows  that  in  God's  sight  it  is  done,  and  rests  as  God  does  in  it, 
but  the  believer  knows  that  sin  is  still,  de  facto,  there  and  in 
him :  only  he  has  a  title  to  reckon  himself  dead  to  it — that  sin  in 
the  flesh  is  condemned,  but  in  the  sacrifice  for  sin,  so  that  there 
is  none  for  him.  The  dOsTricng  is  not  accomplished,  but  what 
does  it  is ;  so  that  God  recognises  it,  and  so  does  faith,  and 
stands  perfectly  clear  before  God  as  to  sin  and  sins.  He  that 
is  dead  (and  we  are,  as  having  died  with  Christ)  is  justified 
from  sin.  Our  sins  have  all  been  borne.  The  difficulty  partly 
arises  from  '*  sin "  being  used  for  a  particular  act,  and  also 
abstractedly.  In  the  word  "sins"  there  is  no  such  ambiguity. 
A  sacrifice  for  sin  may  apply  to  a  particular  fault.  Sin  entered 
into  the  world  is  another  idea.  This  ambiguity  has  produced 
the  confusion. 


HEBREWS.  301 

up  of  the  assembly  is  not  mentioned  here.  It  is  weli 
to  notice  the  language.  The  character  of  His  second 
coming  is  the  subject.  He  has  been  Tnanijested  once. 
Now  He  is  seen  by  those  who  look  for  Him.  The 
expression  may  apply  to  the  deliverance  of  the  Jews 
who  wait  for  Him  in  the  last  days.  He  will  appear 
for  their  deliverance.  But  we  expect  the  Lord  for 
this  deliverance,  and  we  shall  see  Him  when  He 
accomplishes  it  even  for  us.  The  apostle  does  not 
touch  the  question  of  the  difference  between  this  and 
our  being  caught  up,  and  does  not  use  the  word  which 
serves  to  announce  His  public  manifestation.*  He 
will  appear  to  those  who  expect  Him.  He  is  not 
seen  by  all  the  world,  nor  is  it  consequently  the  judg- 
ment, although  that  may  follow.  The  Holy  Ghost 
speaks  only  of  them  that  look  for  the  Lord.  To  them 
He  will  appear.  By  them  He  will  be  seen,  and  it 
will  be  the  time  of  their  deliverance ;  so  that  it  is  true 
for  us,  and  also  applicable  to  the  Jewish  remnant  in 
the  last  days. 

Thus  the  christian  position,  and  the  hope  of  the 
world  to  come,  founded  on  the  blood  and  on  the 
Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  are  both  given  here. 
The  one  is  the  present  portion  of  the  believer,  the 
other  is  secured  as  tlie  hope  of  Lsrael. 

How  wonderful  is  the  grace  which  we  are  now 
considering ! 

There  are  two  things  that  present  themselves  to  us 
in  Christ — the  attractions  to  our  heart  of  His  grace 
and  goodness,  and  His  work  which  brings  our  souls 
into  the  presence  of  God.  It  is  with  the  latter  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  here  occupies  us.  There  is  not  only 
the  piety  which  grace  produces  ;  there  is  the  efficacy 
of  the  work  itself.  What  is  this  efficacy  ?  What  is 
tlie  result  for  us  of  His  work  ?     Access  to  God  in  the 

*  ofOriatTai,  (pavtfjojOtintTaiy  or  kTTKpaptia. 
IX. 


302  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

light  without  a  veil,  ourselves  entirely  clear  of  all  sin 

before  Him,  as  white  as  snow  in  the  light  which  only 

shews  it.     Marvellous  position  for  us !     We  have  not 

to  wait  for  a  day  of  judgment  (assuredly  coming  as  it 

is),  nor  to  seek  for  means  of  approach  to  God.     We 

are  in  His  presence.     Christ  appears  in  the  presence 

of  God  for  us.     And  not  only  this :  He  remains  there 

ever ;  our  position  therefore  never  changes.     It  is  true 

that  we  are  called  to  walk  according  to  that  position. 

But  this  does  not  touch  the  fact  that  such  is  the  position. 

And  how  came  we  into  it  ?  and  in  what  condition  ? 

Our  sins  entirely  put  away,  perfectly  put  away,  and 

once  for  all,  and  the  whole  question  of  sin  settled  for 

ever    before   God,  we   are   there  because  Christ  has 

finished  the  work  which  abolished  it,  and  without  it 

in  God's  siofht.     So  that  there  are  the  two  thino-s — 

.  ... 

this  work   accomplished,  and   this    position   ours   in 

the  presence  of  God. 

We  see  the  force  of  the  contrast  between  this  and 
Judaism.  According  to  the  latter,  divine  service,  as 
we  have  seen,  was  performed  outside  the  veil.  The 
worshippers  did  not  reach  the  presence  of  God.  Thus 
they  had  always  to  begin  again.  The  propitiatory 
sacrifice  was  renewed  from  year  to  year — a  continually 
repeated  testimony  that  sin  still  was  there.  Indi- 
vidually they  obtained  a  temporary  pardon  for  par- 
ticular acts.  It  had  constantly  to  be  renewed.  The 
conscience  was  never  made  perfect,  the  soul  was  not 
in  the  presence  of  God,  this  great  question  was  never 
settled.  (How  many  souls  are  even  now  in  this  con- 
dition !)  The  entrance  of  the  high  priest  once  a  year 
did  but  furnish  a  proof  that  the  way  was  still  barred, 
that  God  could  not  be  approached,  but  that  sin  was 
still  remembered. 

But  now  the  guilt  of  believers  is  gone,  their  sins 
washed  away  by  a  work  done  once  for  all ;  the  conscience 
Is  made  perfect ;  nor  is  there  any  condemnation  for 


HEBREWS.  303 

theni.  Sin  in  the  flesh  has  been  condemned  in  Christ 
when  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  Christ  appears  ever  in 
the  presence  of  God  for  us.  The  High  Priest  remains 
there.  Thus,  instead  of  having  a  memorial  of  sin 
reiterated  from  year  to  year,  perfect  righteousness 
subsists  ever  for  us  in  the  presence  of  God.  The 
position  is  entirely  changed. 

The  lot  of  man  (for  this  peifect  work  takes  us  out 
of  Judaism)  is  death  and  judgment.  But  now  our  lot 
depends  on  Christ,  not  on  Adam.  Christ  was  offered 
to  bear  the  sins  of  many* — the  work  is  complete,  the 
sins  blotted  out,  and  to  those  who  look  for  Him  Ho 
will  appear  without  having  anything  to  do  with  sin, 
that  question  having  been  entirely  settled  at  His  first 
coming.  In  the  death  of  Jesus,  God  dealt  with  the 
sins  of  those  who  look  for  Him  ;  and  He  will  appear, 
not  to  judge,  but  unto  salvation — to  deliver  them 
finally  from  the  position  into  which  sin  had  brought 
them.  This  will  have  its  application  to  the  Jewish 
remnant  according  to  the  circumstances  of  their  posi- 
tion ;  but  in  an  absolute  way  it  applies  to  the  Christian^ 
who  has  heaven  for  his  portion. 

The  essential  point  established  in  the  doctrine  of 
the  death  of  Christ  is,  that  He  offered  Himself  once 
for  all.  We  must  bear  this  in  mind,  to  understand  the 
full  import  of  all  that  is  here  said.  The  tenth  chapter 
is  the  development  and  application  of  this.  In  it  the 
author  recapitulates  his  doctrine  on  this  point,  and 
applies  it  to  souls,  confirming  it  by  scripture,  and  by 
considerations  which  are  evident  to  every  enlightened 
conscience. 

1.  The  law,  with  its  sacrifices,  did  not  make  the 
worshippers  perfect ;  for,  if  they  had  been  brought  tc 

*  The  word  "manj'-"  has  a  double  beann<=^  here,  neo:ative  and 
positive.  It  could  not  be  said  "all,"  or  all  would  be  saved.  Ojq 
the  other  hand  the  word  maiiy  generalises  the  work,  so  that  il 
is  not  the  Jews  only  who  are  its  object. 

IX. 


B04  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

perfection,  the  sacrifices  would  not  have  been  v.ffered 
afresh.  If  they  were  offered  again,  it  was  because  the 
worshippers  were  not  perfect.  On  the  contrary  the 
repetition  of  the  sacrifice  was  a  memorial  of  sins ;  it 
reminded  the  people  that  sin  was  still  there,  and  that 
it  was  still  before  God.  In  efiect  the  law,  although  it 
was  the  shadow  of  things  to  come,  was  not  their  true 
image.  There  were  sacrifices  ;  but  they  were  repeated, 
instead  of  there  being  one  only  sacrifice  of  eternal 
efficacy.  There  was  a  high  priest,  but  he  was  mortal, 
and  the  priesthood  transmissible.  He  went  inf,o  the 
holiest,  but  only  once  a  year,  the  veil  which  concealed 
God  being  unrent,  and  the  high  priest  unable  to  rc^main 
in  His  presence,  the  work  being  not  perfect.  Thus 
there  were  indeed  elements  which  plainly  indicated 
the  constituent  parts,  so  to  speak,  of  the  priesthood  of 
the  good  things  to  come;  but  the  state  of  the  wor- 
shippers was  in  the  one  case  quite  the  opposite  of  that 
which  it  was  in  the  other.  In  the  first,  every  act 
shewed  that  the  work  of  reconciliation  was  not  done ; 
in  the  second,  the  position  of  the  high  priest  and  of 
the  worshipper  is  a  testimony  that  this  work  has 
been  accomplished,  and  that  the  latter  are  perfected 
for  ever  in  the  presence  of  God. 

In  chapter  x.  this  principle  is  applied  to  the  F,acri- 
fice.  Its  repetition  proved  that  sin  was  there.  That 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  only  offered  once,  was  the 
demonstration  of  its  eternal  efficacy.  Had  the  Jewish 
sacrifices  rendered  the  worshippers  really  perfect  be- 
fore God,  they  would  have  ceased  to  be  offered.  The 
apostle  is  speaking  (although  the  principle  is  general) 
of  the  yearly  sacrifice  on  the  day  of  atonement.  For 
if,  through  the  efficacy  of  the  sacrifice,  they  had 
been  permanently  made  perfect,  they  would  have  had 
no  more  conscience  of  sins,  and  could  not  have  had 
\he  thouo'ht  of  renewino^  the  sacrifice. 

Observe,  here,  that  which  is  very  important,  that 


HEBREWS.  805 

the  conscience  is  cleansed,  our  sins  being  expiated,  the 
worshipper  drawing  nigh  by  virtue  ot*  the  sacrifice. 
The  meaning  of  the  Jewisli  service  was  that  guilt  was 
still  there ;  that  of  the  Christian,  that  it  is  gone.  As 
to  the  former,  precious  as  the  type  is,  the  reason  is 
evident:  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  could  not 
take  away  sin.  Therefore  those  sacrifices  have  been 
abolished,  and  a  work  of  another  character  (although 
still  a  sacrifice)  has  been  accomplished — a  work  which 
excludes  all  other,  and  all  the  repetition  of  the  same, 
because  it  consists  of  nothing  less  than  the  self- 
devotedness  of  the  Son  of  God  to  accomplish  the  will 
of  God,  and  the  completion  of  that  to  which  He  was 
devoted :  an  act  impossible  to  be  repeated,  for  all  His 
will  cannot  be  accomplished  twice,  and,  were  it  pos- 
sible, it  would  be  a  testimony  of  the  inadequacy  of  the 
first,  and  so  of  both. 

This  is  what  the  Son  of  God  says  in  this  most 
solemn  passage  (vers.  5-9),  in  which  we  are  admitted 
to  know,  according  to  the  grace  of  God,  that  which 
passed  between  God  the  Father  and  Himself,  when 
He  undertook  the  fulfilment  of  the  will  of  God — that 
which  He  said,  and  the  eternal  counsels  of  God  which 
He  carried  into  execution.  He  takes  the  place  of 
submission  and  of  obedience,  of  performing  the  will 
of  another.  God  would  no  longer  accept  the  sacrifices 
that  were  offered  under  the  law  (the  four  classes  of 
which  are  here  pointed  out).  He  had  no  pleasure  in 
them.  In  their  stead  He  had  prepared  a  body  for  His 
Son;  vast  and  important  truth  !  for  the  place  of  man  is 
obedience.  Thus,  in  taking  this  place,  the  Son  of  God 
put  Himself  into  the  position  to  obey  perfectly.  In 
fact  He  undertakes  the  duty  of  fulfilling  all  the  will 
of  God,  be  it  what  it  may — a  will  which  is  ever  "good, 
acceptable,  and  perfect." 

The  psalm  says  in  the  Hebrew,  "Thou  hast  digged* 
*  It  is  not  the  same  word  as  to  "bore,"  or  thrust  through,  in 

VOL.  V.  :x.  :^ 


306  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE  BIBLE. 

ears  for  me,"  translated  by  the  Septuagint,  "Thou 
hast  prepared  me  a  body ;"  words  which,  as  they  give 
the  true  meaning,  are  used  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  For 
"  the  ear  "  is  always  employed  as  a  sign  of  the  recep- 
tion of  commandments,  and  the  principle  of  obligation 
to  obey  or  the  disposition  to  do  so.  "  He  hath  opened 
mine  ear  morning  by  morning"  (Is.  1.),  that  is,  has 
made  me  listen  to  His  will,  be  obedient  to  His  com- 
mands. The  ear  was  bored  or  fastened  with  an  awl  to 
the  door,  in  order  to  express  that  the  Israelite  was 
attached  to  the  house  as  a  slave,  to  ol^ey,  for  ever. 
Now  in  taking  a  body,  the  Lord  took  the  form  of  a 
servant.  (Phil,  ii.)  Ears  were  digged  for  Him.  That 
is  to  say,  He  placed  Himself  in  a  position  in  which 
He  had  to  obey  all  His  Master's  will,  whatever  it 
might  be.  But  it  is  the  Lord  Himself*  who  speaks 
in  the  passage  before  us:  "Thou,"  He  says,  "hast 
prepared  me  a  body." 

Entering  more  into  detail,  He  specifies  burnt  offer- 
ings and  offerings  for  sin,  sacrifices  which  had  less  of 
the  character  of  communion,  and  thus  had  a  deeper 
meaning;  but  God  had  no  pleasure  in  them.     In  a 

Exodus  xxi.  nor  as  "open"  in  Isaiah  1.  The  one  (digged)  is 
to  prepare  for  obedience,  the  other  would  be  to  bind  to  it  for 
ever,  and  to  subject  to  the  obedience  when  due.  Exodus  xxi. 
intimates  the  blessed  truth  that,  when  He  had  fulfilled  His 
personal  service  on  -earth,  He  would  not  abandon  either  His 
assembly  or  His  people.  He  is  ever  God,  but  ever  man,  the 
humbled  man,  the  glorified  and  reigning  man,  the  subject  man, 
in  the  joy  of  eternal  perfection. 

*  As  throughout  the  epistle,  the  Messiah  is  the  subject.  In 
the  psalm  it  is  the  Messiah  who  speaks,  that  is,  the  Anointed 
here  below.  He  expresses  His  patience  and  faithfulness  in  the 
position  which  He  had  taken,  addressing  Jehovah  as  His  God ; 
and  He  tells  us  that  He  took  this  place  willingly,  according  to 
the  eternal  counsels  respecting  His  own  Person.  For  the  Per- 
son is  not  changed.  But  He  speaks  in  the  psalm  according  to 
the  position  of  olDedience  which  He  had  taken,  saying  always,  1 
and  me,  in  speaking  of  what  took  place  before  His  incarnatioa. 


HEBREWS.  307 

word  the  Jewish  service  was  ah-eady  declared  by  the 
Spirit  to  be  unacceptable  to  God.  It  was  all  to  cease, 
it  was  fruitless  ;  no  offering  that  formed  part  of  ifc  was 
acceptable.  No  ;  the  counsels  of  God  unfold  them- 
selves, but  first  of  all  in  the  heart  of  the  Word,  the 
Son  of  God,  who  offers  Himself  to  accomplish  the  will 
of  God.  "  Then  said  he,  Lo,  I  come,  in  the  volume  of 
the  book  it  is  written  of  me,  to  do  thy  will,  0  God." 
Nothing  can  be  more  solemn  than  thus  to  lift  the  veil 
from  that  which  takes  place  in  heaven  between  God 
and  the  Word  who  undertook  to  do  His  will.  Observe 
that,  before  He  was  in  the  position  of  obedience.  He 
offers  Himself  in  order  to  accomplish  the  will  of  God, 
that  is  to  say,  of  free  love  for  the  glory  of  God,  of  free 
will ;  as  One  who  had  the  power.  He  offers  Himself. 
He  undertakes  obedience.  He  undertakes  to  do  what- 
soever God  wills.  This  is  indeed  to  sacrifice  all  His 
own  will,  but  freely  and  as  the  effect  of  His  own  pur- 
pose, although  on  the  occasion  of  the  will  of  His 
Father.  He  must  needs  be  God  in  order  to  do  this, 
and  to  undertake  the  fulfilment  of  all  that  God  could 
will. 

We  have  here  the  great  mystery  of  this  divine 
intercourse,  which  remains  ever  surrounded  with  its 
solemn  majesty,  although  it  is  communicated  to  us 
that  we  may  know  it.  And  we  ought  to  know  it ;  for 
it  is  thus  that  we  understand  the  infinite  grace  and 
the  glory  of  this  work.  Before  He  became  man,  in 
the  place  where  only  divinity  is  known,  and  its 
eternal  counsels  and  thoughts  are  communicated  be- 
tween the  divine  Persons,  the  Word — as  He  has 
declared  it  to  us,  in  time,  by  the  prophetic  Spirit — 
such  being  the  will  of  God  contained  in  the  book  of 
the  eternal  counsels,  He  who  was  able  to  do  it,  offered 
Himself  freely  to  accomplish  that  will.  Submissive 
to  this  counsel  already  arranged  for  Him,  He  yet 
offers  Himself  in  perfect  freedom  to  fulfil  it.     But  in 


308  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

offering  He  submits,  yet  at  the  same  time  undertakes 
to  do  all  that  God,  as  God,  willed.  But  also  in 
undertaking  to  do  the  will  of  God,  it  was  in  the  way 
of  obedience,  of  submission,  and  of  devotedness.  For 
I  might  undertake  to  do  the  will  of  another,  as  free 
and  competent,  because  I  wiUed  the  thing ;  but  if  I  sa}^ 
"  to  do  thy  will,"  this  in  itself  is  absolute  and  complete 
submission.  And  this  it  is  which  the  Lord,  the  Word, 
did.  He  did  it  also,  declaring  that  He  came  in  order 
to  do  it.  He  took  a  position  of  obedience  by  accept- 
ing the  body  prepared  for  Him.  He  came  to  do  the 
will  of  God. 

That  of  which  we  have  been  speaking  is  cQutinnally 
manifested  in  the  life  of  Jesus  on  earth.  God  shines 
through  His  position  in  the  human  body ;  for  He  was 
necessarily  God  in  the  act  itself  of  His  humiliation; 
and  none  but  God  could  have  undertaken  and  been 
found  in  it;  yet  He  was  alwa3\s,  and  entirely  and 
perfectly,  obedient  and  dependent  on  God.  Thafc 
which  revealed  itself  in  His  existence  on  earth  was 
the  expression  of  that  which  was  accomplished  in  the 
eternal  abode,  in  His  own  nature.  That  is  to  say  (and 
of  this  Ps.  xl.  speaks),  that  which  He  declares,  and 
that  which  He  was  here  below,  are  the  same  thing; 
the  one  in  reality  in  heaven,  the  other  bodily  on  earth. 
That  which  He  was  here  below  was  but  the  expression, 
the  living,  real,  bodily  manifestation  of  what  is  con- 
tained in  those  divine  communications  which  have 
been  revealed  to  us,  and  which  were  the  reality  of  the 
position  that  He  assumed. 

And  it  is  very  important  to  see  these  things  in  the 
free  offer  made  by  divine  competency,  and  not  only  in 
their  fulfilment  in  death.  It  gives  quite  a  different 
character  to  the  bodily  work  here  below. 

In  reality,  from  chapter  i.  of  this  epistle,  the  Holy 
Ghost  always  presents  Christ  in  this  way.  But  this 
revelation  in  the  psalm  was  requisite  to  explain  how 


HEBREWS.  800 

He  became  a  servant,  what  the  Messiah  really  was  ; 
and  to  us  it  opens  an  innnense  view  of  the  ways  of 
God,  a  view,  the  depths  of  which — clearly  as  it  is 
revealed,  and  through  the  very  clearness  of  the  reve- 
lation— display  to  us  things  so  divine  and  glorious 
that  we  bow  the  head  and  veil  our  faces,  as  having 
had  part  as  it  were  in  such  communications,  on  ac- 
count of  the  majesty  of  the  Persons  whose  acts  and 
whose  intimate  relationships  are  revealed.  It  is  not 
here  the  glory  that  dazzles  us.  But  even  in  this  poor 
world  there  is  nothing  to  which  we  are  greater 
strangers  than  the  intimacy  of  those  who  are,  in  their 
modes  of  life,  much  above  ourselves.  What  then, 
when  it  is  that  of  God !  Blessed  be  His  name !  there 
is  grace  that  brings  us  into  it,  and  that  has  drawn 
nigh  to  us  in  our  weakness.  We  are  then  admitted 
to  know  this  precious  truth,  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
undertook  of  His  own  free  will  the  accomplishment  of 
all  the  will  of  God,  and  that  He  was  pleased  to  take 
the  body  prepared  for  Him  in  order  to  accomplish  it. 
The  love,  the  devotedness  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the 
way  in  which  He  undertook  to  obey,  are  fully  set 
forth.  And  this — the  fruit  of  God's  eternal  counsels 
— displaces  (by  its  very  nature)  every  provisional 
sign :  and  contains,  in  itself  alone,  the  condition  of  all 
relationship  with  God,  and  the  means  by  which  He 
glorifies  Himself.* 

The  Word  then  assumes  a  body,  in  order  to  offer 

*  Kemark,  abo,  here  not  only  the  substitution  of  the  reality 
for  the  ceremonial  figures  of  the  law,  but  the  difference  of 
principle.  The  law  required  for  righteousness  that  man  should 
do  the  will  of  God,  and  rightly.  That  was  human  righteous- 
ness. Here  Christ  undertakes  to  do  it,  and  has  accomplished  it 
in  the  offering  up  of  Himself.  His  so  doing  the  will  of  God  is 
the  basis  of  our  relationship  with  God,  and  it  is  done,  and  we 
are  accepted.  As  born  of  God  our  delight  is  to  do  God's  will, 
but  it  is  in  love  and  newness  of  nature,  not  in  order  to  be 
accepted. 

X. 


310  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

Himself  as  a  sacrifice.  Besides  the  revelation  of  this 
devotedness  of  the  Word  to  accomplish  the  will  of 
God,  the  effect  of  His  sacrifice  according  to  the  will  of 
God  is  also  set  before  us. 

He  came  to  do  the  will  of  Jehovah.  Now  faith 
understands  that  it  is  by  this  will  of  God  (that  is,  by 
His  will  who,  according  to  His  eternal  wisdom,  pre- 
pared a  body  for  His  Son)  that  those  whom  He  has 
called  unto  Himself  for  salvation  are  set  apart  to 
God,  in  other  words,  are  sanctified.  It  is  by  the  will 
of  God  that  we  are  set  apart  for  Him  (not  by  our 
own  will),  and  that  by  means  of  the  sacrifice  offered 
to  God. 

We  shall  observe  that  the  epistle  does  not  here 
speak  of  the  communication  of  life,  or  of  a  practical 
sanctification  wrought  by  the  Holy  Ghost:*  the  sub- 
ject is  the  Person  of  Christ  ascended  on  high,  and  the 
efficacy  of  His  work.  And  this  is  important  with 
regard  to  sanctification,  because  it  shews  that  sanctifi- 
cation is  a  complete  setting  apart  to  God,  as  belonging 
to  Him  at  the  price  of  the  offering  of  Jesus,  a  conse- 
cration to  Him  by  means  of  that  offering.  God  took 
the  unclean  Jews  from  among  men  and  set  them  apart 
— consecrated  them  to  Himself;  so  now  the  called 
ones,  from  that  nation,  and,  thank  God,  ourselves  also, 
by  means  of  the  offering  of  Jesus. 

But  there  is  another  element,  already  pointed  out, 
in  this  offering,  the  force  of  which  the  epistle  here 
applies  to  believers,  namely,  that  the  offering  is  "  once 
for  all."  It  admits  of  no  repetition.  If  we  enjoy  the 
effect  of  this  ofifering,  our  sanctification  is  eternal  in 
its  nature.  It  does  not  fail.  It  is  never  repeated. 
We  belong  to  God  for  ever  according  to  the  efficacy  of 


*  It  speaks  of  this  last  in  the  exhortations,  chapter  xii.  14. 
But  in  the  doctrine  of  the  epistle,  "sanctification"  is  not  used 
in  the  practical  sense  of  what  is  wrought  in  us. 


HEBREWS.  311 

this  offering.  Thus  our  sanctification,  our  being  set 
apart  to  God,  has — with  regard  to  the  work  that 
accomplished  it — all  the  stability  of  the  will  of  God, 
and  all  the  grace  from  which  it  sprang ;  it  has,  too,  in 
its  nature,  the  perfection  of  the  work  itself,  by  which 
it  was  accomplished,  and  the  duration  and  the  con- 
stant force  of  the  efficacy  of  that  work.  But  the 
effect  of  this  offering  is  not  limited  to  this  setting 
apart  for  God.  The  point  already  treated  contains 
our  consecration  by  God  Himself  through  the  per- 
fectly efficacious  offering  of  Christ  fulfilling  His  will. 
And  now  the  position  which  Christ  has  taken,  in 
consequence  of  His  offering  up  of  Himself,  is  employed 
in  order  clearly  to  demonstrate  the  state  it  has  brought 
us  into  before  God. 

The  priests  among  the  Jews — for  this  contrast  is 
still  carried  on — stood  before  the  altar  continually  to 
repeat  the  same  sacrifices  which  could  never  take 
away  sins.  But  this  Man,  when  He  had  offered  one 
sacrifice  for  sins,  sat  down  for  ever*  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  There— having  finished  for  His  own  all  that 
regards  their  presentation  without  spot  to  God — He 
awaits  the  moment  when  His  enemies  shall  be  made 
His  footstool,  according  to  Psalm  ex. :  "  Sit  thou  at  my 
right  hand  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool." 
And  the  Spirit  gives  us  the  important  reason  so  infi- 
nitely precious  to  us :  "  For  he  hath  perfected  for  ever 
them  that  are  sanctified." 

Here  (ver.  14)  as  in  verse  12,  on  which  the  latter 
depends,  the  word  "  for  ever  "  has  the  force  of  perma- 
nence— uninterrupted  continuity.     He  is  ever  seated, 

*  The  word  translated  here  "  for  ever"  is  not  the  same  word 
that  is  used  for  eternally.  It  has  the  sense  of  continuously, 
without  inteiTuption,  tiq  to  dnjviKsi;.  He  does  not  rise  up  or 
stand.  He  is  ever  seated,  His  work  being  finished.  He  will 
indeed  rise  up  at  the  end  to  come  and  fetch  us,  and  to  judge  the 
world,  even  as  this  same  passage  tells  us. 

X. 


312  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

we  are  ever  perfected,  by  virtue  of  His  work  and 
according  to  the  perfect  righteousness  in  which,  and 
conformably  to  which.  He  sits  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  upon  His  throne,  according  to  that  which  He  is 
personally  there,  His  acceptance  on  God's  part  being 
proved  by  His  session  at  His  right  hand.  And  He  is 
there  for  us. 

It  is  a  righteousness  suited  to  the  throne  of  God, 
yea,  the  righteousness  of  the  throne.  It  neither  varies 
nor  fails.  He  is  seaced  there  for  ever.  If  then  we 
are  sanctified — set  apart  to  God — by  this  offering 
according  to  the  will  of  God  Himself,  we  are  also 
made  perfect  for  God  by  the  same  offering,  as  presented 
to  Him  in  the  Person  of  Jesus. 

We  have  seen  that  this  position  has  its  origin  in  the 
will,  the  good- will  of  God  (a  will  which  combines  the 
grace  and  the  purpose  of  God),  and  that  it  has  its 
foundation  and  present  certainty  in  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  work  of  Christ,  the  perfection  of  which  is 
demonstrated  by  the  session  at  the  right  hand  of  God 
of  Him  who  accomplished  it.  But  the  testimony — for 
to  enjoy  this  grace  we  must  know  it  with  divine  cer- 
tainty, and  the  greater  it  is,  the  more  would  our 
hearts  be  led  to  doubt  it — the  testimony  upon  which 
we  believe  it  must  be  divine.  And  this  it  is.  The 
Holy  Ghost  bears  witness  to  us  of  it.  The  will  of 
God  is  the  source  of  the  work  ;  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
accomplished  it ;  the  Holy  Ghost  bears  witness  to  us 
of  it.  And  here  the  application  to  the  people,  called 
by  grace  and  spared,  is  in  consequence  fully  set  forth, 
not  merely  the  fulfilment  of  the  work.  The  Holy 
Ghost  bears  us  witness,  "  Their  sins  and  iniquities 
will  I  remember  no  more." 

Blessed  position!  The  certainty  that  God  will 
never  remember  our  sins  and  iniquities  is  founded 
on  the  stedfast  will  of  God,  on  the  perfect  offering 
of  Christ,  now  consequently  seated  at  the  right  hand 


HEBREWS.  813 

of  God,  and  on  the  sure  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
It  is  a  matter  of  faith  that  God  will  never  remember 
our  sins. 

We  may  remark  here  the  way  in  which  the  cove- 
nant  is  introduced ;  for  although,  as  writing  to  "  the 
holy  brethren,  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling,"  he 
says,  "a  witness  to  us"  the  form  of  his  address  is 
always  that  of  an  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (believers,  of 
course,  but  Hebrews,  still  bearing  the  character  of 
God's  people).  He  does  not  speak  of  the  covenant  in 
a  direct  way,  as  a  privilege  in  which  Christians  had  a 
direct  part.  The  Holy  Ghost,  he  says,  declares,  "I 
will  remember  no  more,"  &c.  It  is  this  which  he 
quotes.  He  only  alludes  to  the  new  covenant,  leaving 
it  aside  consequently  as  to  all  present  application. 
For  after  having  said,  "  This  is  the  covenant,"  &c.,  the 
testimony  is  cited  as  that  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  prove 
the  capital  point  which  he  was  treating,  that  is,  that 
God  remembers  our  sins  no  more.  But  he  alludes  to 
the  covenant  (already  known  to  the  Jews  as  declared 
before  of  God)  which  gave  the  authority  of  the  scrip- 
tures to  this  testimony,  that  God  remembered  no  more 
the  sins  of  His  people  who  are  sanctified  and  admitted 
into  His  favour,  and  which,  at  the  same  time,  pre- 
sented these  two  thoughts:  first,  that  this  complete 
pardon  did  not  exist  under  the  first  covenant:  and, 
second,  that  the  door  is  left  open  for  the  blessing  of 
the  nation  when  the  new  covenant  shall  be  formally 
established. 

Another  practical  consequence  is  drawn  :  sins  being 
remitted,  there  is  no  more  oblation  for  sin.  The  one 
sacrifice  having  obtained  remission,  no  others  can  be 
offered  in  order  to  obtain  it.  Remembrance  of  this 
one  sacrifice  there  may  indeed  be,  whatever  its  cha- 
racter ;  but  a  sacrifice  to  take  away  the  sins  which  are 
already  taken  away,  there  cannot  be.  We  are  there- 
fore in  reality  on  entirely  new  ground — on  that  of  the 

X. 


314  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

fact,  that  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  our  sins  are  alto- 
gether put  away,  and  that  for  us,  who  are  sanctified 
and  partaiiers  of  the  heavenly  calling,  a  perfect  and 
everlasting  permanent  cleansing  has  been  made,  re- 
mission granted,  eternal  redemption  obtained.  So 
that  we  are,  in  the  eyes  of  God,  without  sin,  on  the 
ground  of  the  perfection  of  the  w^ork  of  Christ,  who  is 
seated  at  His  right  hand,  who  has  entered  into  the 
true  holiest,  into  heaven  itself,  to  sit  there  because 
His  work  is  accomplished. 

Thus  all  liberty  is  ours  to  enter  into  the  holy  place 
(all  boldness)  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and 
living  way,  that  is  His  flesh,  to  admit  us  without 
spot  into  the  presence  of  God  Himself,  who  is  there 
revealed.  For  us  the  veil  is  rent,  and  that  which  rent 
the  veil  in  order  to  admit  us  has  likewise  put  away 
the  sin  which  shut  us  out. 

We  have  also  a  great  High  Priest  over  the  house  of 
God,  as  we  have  seen,  who  represents  us  in  the  holy 
place. 

On  these  truths  are  founded  the  exhortations  that 
follow.  One  word  before  we  enter  on  them,  as  to  the 
relation  that  exists  between  perfect  righteousness  and 
the  priesthood.  There  are  many  souls  who  use  the 
priesthood  as  the  means  of  obtaining  pardon  when 
they  have  failed.  They  go  to  Christ  as  a  priest,  that 
He  may  intercede  for  them  and  obtain  the  pardon 
which  they  desire,  but  for  which  they  dare  not  ask 
God  in  a  direct  way.  These  souls — sincere  as  they 
are — have  not  liberty  to  enter  into  the  holy  place. 
They  take  refuge  with  Christ  that  they  may  afresh 
be  brought  into  the  presence  of  God.  Their  condition 
practically  is  that  in  which  a  pious  Jew  stood.  They 
have  lost,  or  rather  they  have  never  had  by  faith,  the 
real  consciousness  of  their  position  before  God  in 
virtue  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  I  do  not  speak  here 
of  all  the  privileges  of  the  assembly:  we  have  seen 


HEBREWS.  315 

that  the  epistle  does  not  speak  of  them.  The  position 
it  makes  for  believers  is  this:  those  whom  it  ad- 
dresses are  not  viewed  as  placed  in  heaven,  although 
partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling;  but  a  perfect  re- 
demption is  accomplished,  all  guilt  entirely  put  away 
for  the  people  of  God,  who  remembers  their  sins  no 
more.  The  conscience  is  made  perfect — they  have  no 
more  conscience  of  sins — by  virtue  of  the  work  accom- 
plished once  for  all.  There  is  no  more  question  of  sin, 
that  is,  of  its  imputation,  of  its  being  upon  them 
before  God,  between  them  and  God.  There  cannot  be, 
because  of  the  work  accomplished  upon  the  cross. 
The  conscience  therefore  is  perfect ;  their  Representa- 
tive and  High  Priest  is  in  heaven,  a  witness  there  to 
the  work  already  accomplished  for  them. 

Thus,  although  the  epistle  does  not  present  them  as 
in  the  holiest,  as  sitting  there — like  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Ephesians — they  have  full  liberty,  entire  boldness, 
to  enter  into  it.  The  question  of  imputation  no 
longer  exists.  Their  sins  have  been  imputed  to 
Christ.  But  He  is  now  in  heaven — a  proof  that  the 
sins  are  blotted  out  for  ever.  Believers  therefore 
enter  with  entire  liberty  into  the  presence  of  God 
Himself,  and  that  always — having  no  more  for  ever 
any  conscience  of  sins. 

For  what  purpose  then  is  priesthood  ?  What  is  to 
be  done  with  respect  to  the  sins  we  commit  ?  They 
interrupt  our  communion;  but  they  make  no  change 
in  our  position  before  God,  nor  in  the  testimony 
rendered  by  the  presence  of  Christ  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  Nor  do  they  raise  any  question  as  to  imputa- 
tion. They  are  sins  against  that  position,  or  against 
God,  measured  by  the  relationship  we  are  in  to  God, 
as  in  it.  For  sin  is  measured  by  the  conscience 
according  to  our  position.  The  perpetual  presence  of 
Christ  at  God's  right  hand  has  this  twofold  effect  for 
us :  1st,  perfected  for  ever  we  have  no  more  conscience 

X, 


816  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

ot*  sins  before  God,  we  are  accepted  ;  2nd,  as  priest  He 
obtains  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need,  that  we  may 
not  sin.  But  the  present  exercise  of  priesthood  by 
Christ  does  not  refer  to  sins:  we  have  through  His 
work  no  more  conscience  of  sins,  are  perfected  for 
ever.  There  is  another  truth  connected  with  this, 
found  1  John  ii. :  we  have  an  Advocate*  with  the 
Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous.  On  this  our  com- 
nnmion  with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ  is  founded  and  secured.  Our  sins  are  not 
imputed,  for  the  propitiation  is  in  all  its  value  before 
God.  But  by  sin  communion  is  interrupted;  our 
righteousness  is  not  altered — for  that  is  Christ  Him- 
self at  God's  right  hand  in  virtue  of  His  work  ;  nor  is 
grace  changed,  and  "he  is  the  propitiation  for  our 
sins;"  but  the  heart  has  got  away  from  God,  com- 
munion is  interrupted.  But  grace  acts  in  virtue  of 
perfect  righteousness,  and  by  the  advocacy  of  Christ, 
on  behalf  of  him  who  has  failed ;  and  his  soul  is 
restored  to  communion.  Nor  is  it  that  we  go  to  Jesus 
for  this ;  He  goes,  even  if  we  sin,  to  God  for  us.  His 
presence  there  is  the  witness  of  an  unchangeable 
righteousness  which  is  ours;  His  intercession  main- 
tains us  in  the  path  we  have  to  walk  in,  or  as  our 
Advocate  He  restores  the  communion  which  is  founded 


*  There  is  a  difference  in  detail  here ;  but  it  does  not  affect 
my  present  subject.  The  High  Priest  has  to  do  with  our  access 
to  God ;  the  Advocate  with  our  communion  with  the  Father  and 
His  government  of  us  as  children.  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
treats  of  the  ground  of  access  and  shews  us  to  be  perfected  for 
ever ;  and  the  priestly  intercession  does  not  apply  to  sins  in  that 
respect.  It  brings  mercy  and  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need 
here,  but  we  are  perfected  for  ever  before  God.  But  communion 
is  necessarily  inteiTupted  by  the  least  sin  or  idle  thought — ^yea, 
really  had  been,  practically  if  not  judicially,  before  the  idle 
thought  was  there.  Here  the  advocacy  of  John  comes  in:  "If 
any  man  sin,"  and  the  soul  is  restored.  But  there  is  never 
imputation  to  the  believer. 


HEBREWS.  317 

on  that  righteousness.  Our  access  to  God  is  always 
open.  Sin  interrupts  our  enjoyment  of  it,  the  heart  is 
not  in  communion;  the  advocacy  of  Jesus  is  the 
means  of  rousing  the  conscience  by  the  action  of  the 
Spirit  and  the  word,  and  we  return  (humbUng  our- 
selves) into  the  presence  of  God  Himself.  The  priest- 
hood and  advocacy  of  Christ  refer  to  the  condition  of 
an  imperfect  and  feeble,  or  failing,  creature  upon 
earth,  reconciling  it  with  the  perfectness  of  the  place 
and  glory  in  ^^•hich  divine  righteousness  sets  us.  The 
soul  is  maintained  st^dfast  or  restored. 

Exhortations  follow.  Having  the  right  thus  to 
approach  God,  let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart,  in 
full  assurance  of  faith.  This  is  the  only  thing  that 
honours  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  work,  and  the  love 
which  has  thus  brought  us  to  enjoy  God.  In  the 
words  that  follow,  allusion  is  made  to  the  consecration 
of  the  priests — a  natural  allusion,  as  drawing  near  to 
God  in  the  holiest  is  the  subject.  They  were  sprinkled 
with  blood  and  washed  with  water,  and  then  they 
drew  nioh  to  serve  God.  Still,  althouorh  I  doubt  not 
of  the  allusion  to  the  priests,  it  is  quite  natural  that 
baptism  should  have  given  rise  to  it.  The  anointing 
is  not  spoken  of  here — it  is  the  power  or  privilege  of 
the  moral  right  to  draw  nigh. 

Again,  we  may  notice  that,  as  to  the  foundation  of 
the  truth,  this  is  the  ground  on  which  Israel  will 
stand  in  the  last  days.  In  Christ  in  heaven  will  not 
be  their  place,  nor  the  possession  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as 
uniting  the  believer  to  Christ  in  heaven;  but  the 
blessing  will  be  founded  on  water  and  on  blood.  God 
will  remember  their  sins  no  more;  and  they  will  be 
washed  in  the  clean  water  of  the  word. 

The  second  exhortation  is  to  persevere  in  the  pro- 
fession of  the  hope  without  wavering.  He  who  made 
the  promises  is  faithful. 

Not  only  should  we  have  this  confidence  in  God  for 
X. 


318  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

ourselves,  but  we  are  also  to  consider  one  another  for 
mutual  encouragement ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  not  to 
fail  in  the  public  and  common  profession  of  faith, 
pretending  to  maintain  it,  while  avoiding  the  open 
identification  of  oneself  with  the  Lord's  people  in  the 
difficulties  connected  with  the  profession  of  this  faith 
before  the  world.  Besides,  this  public  confession  had 
a  fresh  motive  in  that  the  day  drew  nigh.  We  see 
that  it  is  the  judgment  which  is  here  presented  as  the 
thing  looked  for — in  order  that  it  may  act  on  the  con- 
science, and  guard  Christians  from  turning  back  to 
the  world,  and  from  the  influence  of  the  fear  of  man 
— rather  than  the  Lord's  coming  to  take  up  His  own 
people.  Verse  26  is  connected  with  the  preceding 
paragraph  (23-25)  the  last  words  of  which  suggest  the 
warning  of  verse  26 ;  which  is  founded,  moreover,  on 
the  doctrine  of  these  two  chapters  (ix.  and  x.),  with 
regard  to  the  sacrifice.  He  insists  on  perseverance  in 
a  full  confession  of  Christ,  for  His  one  sacrifice  once 
offered  was  the  only  one.  If  any  who  had  professed 
to  know  its  value  abandoned  it,  there  was  no  other 
sacrifice  to  which  he  could  have  recourse,  neither 
could  it  be  ever  repeated.  There  remained  no  more 
sacrifice  for  sin.  All  sins  were  pardoned  by  the 
efiicacy  of  this  sacrifice :  but  if,  after  having  known 
the  truth,  they  were  to  choose  sin  instead,  there  was 
no  other  sacrifice  by  virtue  even  of  the  perfection  of 
that  of  Christ.  Nothing  but  judgment  remained. 
Such  a  professor,  having  had  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth  and  having  abandoned  it,  would  assume  the 
character  of  an  adversary. 

The  case,  then,  here  supposed  is  the  renunciation  of 
the  confession  of  Christ,  deliberately  preferring — after 
having  known  the  truth — to  walk  according  to  one's 
own  will  in  sin.  This  is  evident,  both  from  that  which 
precedes  and  from  verse  29. 

Thus  we  have  (chaps,  vi.,  x.)  the  two  great  privi- 


HEBREWS.  819 

leges  of  Christianity,  what  distinguishes  it  from 
Judaism,  presented  in  order  to  warn  those  who  made 
profession  of  the  former,  that  the  renunciation  of  the 
truth,  after  enjoying  these  advantages,  was  fatal ;  for 
if  these  means  of  salvation  were  renounced,  there  was 
no  other.  These  privileges  were  the  manifested  pre- 
sence and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  offering 
which,  by  its  intrinsic  and  absolute  value,  left  no 
place  for  any  other.  Both  of  these  possessed  a 
mighty  efficacy,  which,  while  it  gave  divine  spring 
and  force,  and  the  manifestation  of  the  presence  of 
God  on  the  one  hand,  made  known  on  the  other  hand 
the  eternal  redemption  and  the  perfection  of  the  wor- 
shipper ;  leaving  no  means  for  repentance,  if  any  one 
abandoned  the  manifested  and  known  power  of  that 
presence ;  no  place  for  another  sacrifice  (which,  more- 
over, would  have  denied  the  efficacy  of  the  first),  after 
the  perfect  work  of  God  in  salvation,  perfect  whether 
with  regard  to  redemption  or  to  the  presence  of  God  by 
the  Spirit  in  the  midst  of  His  own.  Nothing  re- 
mained but  judgment. 

They  who  despised  the  law  of  Moses  died  without 
mercy.  What  then  would  not  those  deserve  at  the 
hand  of  God,  who  trod  under  foot  the  Son  of  God, 
counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  by  which  they  had 
been  sanctified,  as  a  common  thing,  and  did  despite  to 
the  Spirit  of  grace  ?  It  was  not  simple  disobedience, 
however  evil  that  might  be ;  it  was  contempt  of  the 
grace  of  God,  and  of  that  which  He  had  done,  in  the 
Person  of  Jesus,  in  order  to  deliver  us  from  the  conse- 
quences of  disobedience.  On  the  one  hand,  what  was 
there  left,  if  with  the  knowledge  of  what  it  was,  they 
renounced  this  ?  On  the  other  hand,  how  could  they 
escape  judgment  ?  for  they  know  a  God  who  had 
said  that  vengeance  belonged  unto  Him,  and  that  He 
would  recompense ;  and,  again,  the  Lord  would  judge 
His  people. 


.320  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Observe  here  the  way  in  which  sanctification  is 
attributed  to  the  blood ;  and,  also,  that  professors  are 
treated  as  belonging  to  the  people.  The  blood,  re- 
ceived by  faith,  consecrates  the  soul  to  God ;  but  it  is 
here  viewed  also  as  an  outward  means  for  setting 
apart  the  people  as  a  people.  Every  individual  who 
had  owned  Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah,  and  the  blood  to 
be  the  seal  and  foundation  of  an  everlasting  covenant 
available  for  eternal  cleansing  and  redemption  on  the 
part  of  God,  acknowledging  himself  to  be  set  apart 
for  God,  by  this  means,  as  one  of  the  people — every 
such  individual  would,  if  he  renounced  it,  renounce  it 
as  such ;  and  there  was  no  other  way  of  sanctifying 
him.  The  former  system  had  evidently  lost  its  power 
for  him,  and  the  true  one  he  had  abandoned.  This 
is  the  reason  why  it  is  said,  "having  received  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth." 

Nevertheless  he  hopes  better  things,  for  fruit,  the 
sign  of  life,  was  there.  He  reminds  them  how  much 
they  had  suffered  for  the  truth,  and  that  they  had 
even  received  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  their  goods, 
knowing  that  they  had  a  better  and  an  abiding  por- 
tion in  heaven.  They  were  not  to  cast  away  this 
confidence,  the  reward  of  which  would  be  great.  For 
in  truth  they  needed  patience,  in  order  that,  after 
having  done  the  will  of  God,  they  might  receive  the 
effect  of  the  promise.  And  He  who  is  to  come  will 
come  soon. 

It  is  to  this  life  of  patience  and  perseverance  that 
the  chapter  applies.  But  there  is  a  principle  which  is 
the  strength  of  this  life,  and  which  characterises  it. 
In  the  midst  of  the  difficulties  of  the  christian  walk, 
the  just  shall  live  by  faith;  and  if  anyone  draws 
back,  God  will  have  no  pleasure  in  him.  "  But,"  says 
the  author,  placing  himself  as  ever  in  the  midst  of  the 
believers,  "  we  are  not  of  them  who  draw  back,  but  of 
them  that  believe  unto  the  saving  of  the  soul."    There- 


HEBREWS.  321 

upon  he  describes  the  action  of  this  faith,  encouraging 
believers  by  the  example  of  the  elders  who  had 
acquired  their  renown  by  walking  according  to  the 
same  principle  as  that  by  which  the  faithful  were  now 
called  to  walk. 

It  is  not  a  definition  of  this  principle,  that  the 
epistle  gives  us  at  the  commencement  of  chapter  xL, 
but  a  declaration  of  its  powers  and  action.  Faith 
realises  (gives  substance  to)  that  which  we  hope  for, 
and  is  a  demonstration  to  the  soul  of  that  which  we 
do  not  s^e. 

There  is  much  more  order  than  is  generally  thought 
in  the  series  given  here  of  examples  of  the  action  of 
faith,  although  this  order  is  not  the  principal  object. 
I  will  point  out  its  leading  features. 

1st.  With  regard  to  creation.  Lost  in  reasonings, 
and  not  knowing  God,  the  human  mind  sought  out 
endless  solutions  of  existence.  Those  who  have  read 
the  cosmogonies  of  the  ancients  know  how  many 
different  systems,  each  more  absurd  than  the  other, 
have  been  invented  for  that  which  the  introduction  of 
God,  by  faith,  renders  perfectly  simple.  Modern 
science,  with  a  less  active  and  more  practical  mind, 
stops  at  second  causes ;  and  it  is  but  little  occupied 
with  God.  Geology  has  taken  the  place  of  the  cos- 
mogony of  the  Hindoos,  Egyptians,  Orientals,  and 
philosophers.  To  the  believer  the  thought  is  clear  and 
simple;  his  mind  is  assured  and  intelligent  by  faith. 
God,  by  His  word,  called  all  things  into  existence. 
The  universe  is  not  a  producing  cause ;  it  is  itself  a 
creature  acting  by  a  law  imposed  upon  it.  It  is  One 
having  authority  who  has  spoken;  His  word  has 
divine  efficacy.  He  speaks,  and  the  thing  is.  We 
feel  that  this  is  worthy  of  God ;  for,  when  once  God  is 
brought  in,  all  is  simple.  Shut  Him  out,  and  man  is 
lost  in  the  efforts  of  his  own  imagination,  which  can 
neither  create  nor  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  a 
VOL.  V.  XI.  Y 


322  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Creator,  because  it  only  works  with  the  power  of  a 
creature.  Before,  therefore,  the  details  of  the  present 
form  of  creation  are  entered  upon,  the  word  simply 
says,  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and 
the  earth."  Whatever  may  have  taken  place  between 
that  and  chaos  forms  no  part  of  revelation.  It  is 
distinct  from  the  special  action  of  the  deluge,  which  is 
made  known  to  us.  The  beo-inninor  of  Genesis  does 
not  give  a  history  of  the  details  of  creation  itself,  nor 
the  history  of  the  universe.  It  gives  the  fact  that  in 
the  beginning  God  created  ;  and  afterwards,  the  things 
that  regard  man  on  the  earth.  The  angels  even  are 
not  there.  Of  the  stars  it  is  only  said,  "  He  made  the 
stars  also ;"  when,  we  are  not  told. 

By  faith  then  we  believe  that  the  worlds  were 
created  hy  the  word  of  God. 

But  sin  has  come  in,  and  righteousness  has  to  be 
found  for  fallen  man,  in  order  that  he  may  stand 
before  God.  God  has  given  a  Lamb  for  the  sacrifice. 
But  here  we  have  set  before  us,  not  the  gift  on  God's 
part,  but  the  soul  drawing  near  to  Him  by  faith. 

By  faith  then  Abel  offers  to  God  a  more  excellent 
sacrifice  than  Cain — a  sacrifice  which  (founded  on  the 
revelation  already  made  by  God)  was  ofiered  in  the 
intelligence  which  a  conscience  taught  of  God  pos- 
sessed, with  regard  to  the  position  in  which  he  who 
offered  was  standing.  Death  and  judgment  had  come 
in  by  sin,  to  man  insupportable,  although  he  must 
undergo  them.  He  must  go  therefore  to  God,  confess- 
ing this  ;  but  he  must  go  with  a  substitute  which  grace 
has  given.  He  must  go  with  blood,  the  witness  at  the 
same  time  both  of  the  judgment  and  of  the  perfect 
grace  of  God.  Doing  this,  he  was  in  the  truth,  and 
this  truth  was  righteousness  and  grace.  He  approaches 
God  and  puts  the  sacrifice  between  himself  and  God. 
He  receives  the  testimony  that  he  is  righteous — 
righteous  according  to  the  righteous  judgment  of  God. 


HEBREWS.  323 

For  the  sacrifice  was  in  connection  with  the  righteous- 
ness that  had  condemned  man,  and  owned  too  the 
perfect  value  of  that  which  was  done  in  it.  The 
testimonj^  is  to  his  offering;  but  Abel  is  righteous 
before  God.  Nothing  can  be  more  clear,  more  pre- 
cious on  this  point.  It  is  not  only  the  sacrifice  which 
is  accepted,  but  Abel  who  comes  with  the  sacrifice. 
He  receives  from  God  this  testimony,  that  he  is  right- 
eous. Sweet  and  blessed  consolation !  But  the  testi- 
mony is  made  to  his  gifts,  so  that  he  possessed  all  the 
certainty  of  acceptance  according  to  the  value  of  the 
sacrifice  oflfered.  In  going  to  God  by  the  sacrifice  of 
Jesus,  not  only  am  I  righteous  (I  receive  the  testi- 
mony that  I  am  righteous),  but  this  testimony  is  made 
to  my  offering ;  and  therefore  my  righteousness  has 
the  value  and  the  perfection  of  the  offering,  that  is,  of 
Christ  offering  Himself  to  God.  The  fact  that  we 
receive  testimony  on  God's  part  that  we  are  righteous, 
and  at  the  same  time  that  the  testimony  is  made  to 
the  gift  which  we  offer,  (not  to  the  condition  in  which 
we  are),  is  of  infinite  value  to  us.  We  are  now  before 
God  according  to  the  perfection  of  Christ's  work.  We 
walk  with  God  thus. 

By  faith,  death  having  been  the  means  of  my 
acceptance  before  God,  all  that  belongs  to  the  old  man 
is  abolished  for  faith ;  the  power  and  the  rights  of 
death  are  entirely  destroyed — Christ  has  undergone 
them.  Thus,  if  it  please  God,  we  go  to  heaven  with- 
out even  passing  through  death.  (Compare  2  Cor.  v. 
1-4.)  God  did  this  for  Enoch,  for  Elijah,  as  a  testi- 
mony. Not  only  are  sins  put  away,  and  righteousness 
established  by  the  work  of  Christ,  but  the  rights  and 
power  of  him  who  has  the  power  of  death  are  entirely 
destroyed.  Death  may  happen  to  us — we  are  by 
nature  liable  to  it ;  but  we  possess  a  life  which  is  out- 
side its  jurisdiction.  Death,  if  it  come,  is  but  gain  to 
us ;  and  although  nothing  but  the  power  of  God  Him- 

XI. 


324  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

self  can  raise  or  transform  the  body,  this  power  has 
been  manifested  in  Jesus,  and  has  ah-eady  wrought  in 
us  by  quickening  us  (compare  Eph.  i.  19) ;  and  ib 
works  in  us  now  in  the  power  of  deliverance  from 
sin,  from  the  law,  and  from  the  flesh.  Death,  as  a 
power  of  the  enemy,  is  conquered ;  it  is  become  a 
"gain"  to  faith,  instead  of  being  a  judgment  on 
nature.  Life,  the  power  of  God  in  life,  works  in 
holiness  and  in  obedience  here  below,  and  declares 
itself  in  the  resurrection  or  in  the  transformation  of 
the  body.  It  is  a  witness  of  power  with  regard  to 
Christ  in  Romans  i.  4. 

But  there  is  another  very  sweet  consideration  to  be 
noticed  here.  Enoch  received  testimony  that  he 
pleased  God,  before  he  was  translated.  This  is  very 
important  and  very  precious.  If  we  walk  with  God, 
we  have  the  testimony  that  we  please  Him ;  we  have 
the  sweetness  of  communion  with  God,  the  testimony 
of  His  Spirit,  His  intercourse  with  us  in  the  sense  of 
His  presence,  the  consciousness  of  walking  according 
to  His  word,  which  we  know  to  be  approved  by  Him 
— in  a  word,  a  life  which,  spent  with  Him  and  before 
Him  by  faith,  is  spent  in  the  light  of  His  countenance, 
and  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  communications  of  His 
grace  and  of  a  sure  testimony,  coming  from  Himself, 
tliat  we  are  pleasing  to  Him.  A  child  who  walks 
with  a  kind  father  and  converses  with  him,  his  con- 
science reproaching  him  with  nothing — does  he  not 
enjoy  the  sense  of  his  parent's  favour  5 

In  figure  Enoch  here  represents  the  position  of  the 
saints  who  compose  the  assembly.  He  is  taken  up  to 
heaven  by  virtue  of  a  complete  victory  over  death. 
B}^  the  exercise  of  sovereign  grace  he  is  outside  the 
government  and  the  ordinary  deliverance  of  God.  He 
bears  testimony  by  the  Spirit  to  the  judgment  of  the 
world,  but  he  does  not  go  through  it.  (Jude  14,  15.) 
A.  walk  like  that  of  Enoch  has  God  for  its  object ;  His 


HEBREWS.  S25 

existence  is  realised — the  great  business  of  life,  which 
in  the  world  is  spent  as  if  man  did  everything — and 
the  fact  that  He  is  interested  in  the  walk  of  men,  that 
He  takes  account  of  it,  in  order  to  reward  those  who 
diligently  seek  Him. 

Noah  is  found  in  the  scene  of  the  government  of 
this  world.  He  does  not  warn  others  of  the  coming 
judgments  as  one  who  is  outside  them,  although  he  is 
a  preacher  of  righteousness.  He  is  warned  himself 
and  for  himself ;  he  is  in  the  circumstances  to  which 
the  warning  relates.  It  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy. 
He  is  moved  by  fear,  and  he  builds  an  ark  to  the 
saving  of  his  house.  He  thus  condemned  the  world. 
Enoch  had  not  to  build  an  ark  in  order  to  pass  safely 
through  the  flood.  He  was  not  in  it :  God  translated 
him — exceptionally.  Noah  is  preserved  (heir  of  the 
righteousness  which  is  by  faith)  for  a  future  world. 
There  is  a  general  principle  which  accepts  the  testi- 
mony of  God  respecting  the  judgment  that  will  fall 
upon  men,  and  the  means  provided  by  God  for 
escaping  it :  this  belongs  to  every  believer. 

But  there  is  something  more  precise.  Abel  has  the 
testimony  that  he  is  righteous ;  Enoch  walks  with 
God,  pleases  God,  and  is  exempted  from  the  common 
lot  of  humanity,  proclaiming  as  from  above  the  fate 
that  awaits  men,  and  the  coming  of  Him  who  will 
execute  the  judgment.  He  goes  forward  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  counsels  of  God.  But  neither  Abel 
nor  Enoch,  thus  viewed,  condemned  the  world  as  that 
in  the  midst  of  which  they  w^ere  journeying,  receiving 
themselves  the  warning  addressed  to  those  who  were 
dwellers  therein.  This  was  Noah's  case :  the  prophet, 
although  delivered,  is  in  the  midst  of  the  judged 
people.  The  assembly  is  outside  them.  Noah's  ark 
condemned  the  world;  the  testimonj^  of  God  was 
enough  for  faith,  and  he  inherits  a  world  that  had 
been  destroyed,  and   (what   belongs  to  all   believers) 

XI. 


826  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

riojhteousness  by  faith,  on  which  the  new  world  too  is 
founded.  This  is  the  case  of  the  Jewish  remnant  in 
the  last  days.  They  pass  through  the  judgments,  out 
of  which  we,  as  not  belonging  to  the  world,  have  been 
taken.  Warned  themselves  of  God's  ^^ay  of  govern- 
ment in  the  earth,  they  will  be  witnesses  to  the  world 
of  the  coming  judgments,  and  will  be  heirs  of  the 
righteousness  which  is  by  faith,  and  witnesses  to  it  in 
a  new  world,  wherein  righteousness  will  be  accom- 
plished in  judgment  hj  Him  who  is  come,  and  whose 
throne  will  uphold  the  world  in  which  Noah  himself 
failed.  The  words,  "  heir  of  the  righteousness  which 
is  by  faith,"  point  out,  I  think,  that  this  faith  which 
had  governed  a  few  was  summed  up  in  his  person,  and 
that  the  whole  unbelieving  world  was  condemned. 
The  witness  of  this  faith  before  judgment,  Noah 
passes  through  it :  and  when  the  world  is  renewed,  he 
is  a  public  witness  to  the  blessing  of  God  that  rests  on 
faith,  although  outwardly  all  is  changed.  Thus  Enoch 
represents  the  saints  of  the  present  time ;  Noah,  the 
Jewish  remnant.* 

The  Spirit,  after  establishing  the  great  fundamental 
principles  of  faith  in  action,  goes  on  (ver.  8)  to  pro- 
duce examples  of  the  divine  life  in  detail,  always  in 
connection  with  Jewish  knowlerlge,  with  that  which 
the  heart  of  a  Hebrew  could  not  fail  to  own;  and,  at 
the  same  time,  in  connection  with  tlie  object  of  the 
epistle  and  with  the  wants  of  Christians  among  the 
Hebrews. 

In  the  previous  case  we  have  seen  a  faith  which, 
after  owning  a  Creator- God,  recognises  the  great 
principles  of  the  relations  of  man  with  God,  and  that 
onwards  to  the  end  upon  earth. 

In  that  which  follows,  we  have  first  the  patience  of 

*  Indeed  all  that  are  spared  for  the  world  to  come.  Theil 
state  is  expressed  in  the  end  of  Eevelation  vii.,  as  that  of  the 
Jews  in  the  first  verses  of  chapter  xiv. 


HEBEEWS.  82? 

faith  when  it  does  not  possess,  but  trusts  God  and 
waits,  assured  of  fulfilment.  This  is  from  verse  S  to 
22.  We  may  subdivide  it  thus : — first,  the  faith 
which  takes  the  place  of  strangership  on  earth,  and 
maintains  it,  because  something  better  is  desired  ;  and 
which,  in  spite  of  weakness,  finds  the  strength  that  is 
requisite  in  order  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises. 
This  is  from  verse  8  to  16.  Its  effect  is  entrance 
into  the  joy  of  a  heavenly  hope.  Strangers  in  the 
land  of  promise,  and  not  enjoying  the  fulfilment  of 
promises  here  below,  they  wait  for  more  excellent 
things — things  which  God  prepares  on  high  for  those 
who  love  Him.  For  such  He  has  prepared  a  city.  In 
unison  with  God  in  His  own  thoughts,  their  desires 
(through  grace)  answering  to  the  things  in  which  He 
takes  delight,  they  are  the  objects  of  His  peculiar 
regard.  He  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God. 
Abraham  not  only  followed  God  into  a  land  that  He 
shewed  him,  but,  a  stranger  there,  and  not  possessing 
the  land  of  promise,  he  is,  by  the  mighty  grace  of 
God,  exalted  to  the  sphere  of  His  thoughts;  and, 
enjoying  communion  with  God  and  the  communica- 
tions of  His  grace,  he  rests  upon  God  for  the  time 
present,  accepts  his  position  of  strangership  on  earth, 
and,  as  the  portion  of  his  faith,  waits  for  the  heavenly 
city  of  which  God  is  the  builder  and  the  founder. 
There  was  not,  so  to  speak,  an  open  revelation  of 
what  was  the  subject  of  this  hope,  as  was  the  case 
with  that  by  which  Abraham  was  called  of  God ;  but 
walking  closely  enough  with  God  to  know  that  which 
was  enjoyed  in  His  presence,  and  being  conscious  that 
he  had  not  received  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  he 
lays  hold  of  the  better  things,  and  waits  for  them, 
although  only  seeing  them  afar  ofi"^,  and  remains  a 
stranger  upon  earth,  unmindful  of  the  country  whence 
he  came  out. 

The  special  application  of  these  first  principles  of 
XI. 


328  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

faith  to  the  case  of  the  christian  Hebrews  is  evident 
They  are  the  normal  life  of  faith  for  all. 

The  second  character  of  faith  presented  in  this  part 
is  entire  confidence  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises — 
a  confidence  maintained  in  spite  of  all  that  might  tend 
to  destroy  it.     This  is  from  verse  17  to  22. 

We  next  find,  the  second  great  division,  that  faith 
makes  its  way  through  all  the  difiaculties  that  oppose 
its  progress.  (Ver.  23-27.)  And  from  verse  28  to  31 
faith  displays  itself  in  a  trust  that  reposes  on  God 
with  regard  to  the  use  of  the  means  which  He  sets 
before  us,  and  of  which  nature  cannot  avail  itself. 
Finally,  there  is  the  energy  in  general,  of  which  faith 
is  the  source,  and  the  sufferings  that  characterise  the 
walk  of  faith.* 

This  general  character  belongs  to  all  the  examples 
mentioned,  namely,  that  they  who  have  exercised 
faith  have  not  received  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise ; 
the  application  of  which  to  the  state  of  the  Hebrew 
Christians  is  evident.  Further,  these  illustrious  heroes 
of  faith,  however  honoured  they  might  be  among  the 
Jews,  did  not  enjoy  the  privileges  that  Christians  pos- 
sessed. God  in  His  counsels  had  reserved  something 
better  for  us. 

Let  us  notice  some  details.  Abraham's  faith  shews 
itself  by  a  thorough  trust  in  God.  Called  to  leave  his 
own  people,  breaking  the  ties  of  nature,  he  obeys. 
He  knows  not  whither  he  is  going :  enough  for  him 
that  God  would  shew  him  the  place.  God,  having 
brought  him  thither,  gives  him  nothing.  He  dwells 
there  content,  in  perfect  reliance  on  God.  He  was  a 
gainer  by  it.  He  waited  for  a  city  that  had  founda- 
tions.    He  openly  confesses  that  he  is  a  stranger  and 


*  In  general  we  may  say  that  verses  8-22  are  faith  resting 
isnred  on  the  promise,  the 
id,  faith  resting  on  God  fb 
leads  to,  the  energy  of  faith. 


assured  on  the  promise,  the  patience  of  faith :  verse  23  to  the 
end.  faith  resting  on  God  for  the  activities  and  difficulties  faith 


HEBREWS.  829 

a  pilgrim  on  earth.  (Gen.  xxiii.  4.)  Thus,  in  spirit,  he 
draws  nearer  to  God.  Although  he  possesses  nothing, 
his  affections  are  eno-ao^ed.  He  desires  a  better  coun- 
try,  and  attaches  himself  to  God  more  immediately 
and  entirely.  He  has  no  desire  to  return  into  his 
own  country ;  he  seeks  a  country.  Such  is  the  Chris- 
tian. In  offering  up  Isaac  there  was  that  absolute 
confidence  in  God  which,  at  His  command,  can  re- 
nounce even  God's  own  promises  as  possessed  after 
the  flesh,  sure  that  God  would  restore  them  through 
the  exercise  of  His  power,  overcoming  death  and 
every  obstacle. 

It  is  thus  that  Christ  renounced  His  rights  as 
Messiah,  and  went  even  into  death,  committing  Him- 
self to  the  will  of  God  and  trusting  in  Him ;  and 
received  everything  in  resurrection.  And  this  the 
Hebrew  Christians  had  to  do,  with  respect  to  the 
Messiah  and  the  promises  made  to  Israel.  But,  if 
there  is  simplicity  of  faith,  for  us  the  Jordan  is  dry, 
nor  could  we  indeed  have  passed  it  if  the  Lord  had 
not  passed  on  before. 

Observe  here  that,  when  trusting  in  God  and  giving 
up  all  for  Him,  we  always  gain,  and  we  learn  some- 
thing more  of  the  ways  of  His  power :  for  in  renounc- 
ing according  to  His  will  anything  already  received, 
we  ought  to  expect  from  the  power  of  God  that  He 
will  bestow  something  else.  Abraham  renounces 
the  promise  after  the  'flesh.  He  sees  the  city  which 
has  foundations;  he  can  desire  a  heavenly  country. 
He  gives  up  Isaac,  in  whom  were  the  promises :  he 
learns  resurrection,  for  God  is  infallibly  faithful.  The 
promises  were  in  Isaac:  therefore  God  must  restore 
him  to  Abraham,  and  by  resurrection,  if  he  offered 
him  in  sacrifice. 

In  Isaac  faith  distinguishes  between  the  portion  of 
God's  people  according  to  his  election,  and  that  of 
man  having  birthrights  according  to  nature.     This  is 

XT. 


830  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  knowledge  of  the  ways  of  God  in  blessing,  and  in 
judgment. 

By  faith  Jacob,  a  stranger  and  feeble,  having 
nothing  but  the  staff  with  which  he  had  crossed  the 
Jordan,  worships  God,  and  announces  the  double  por- 
tion of  the  heir  of  Israel,  of  the  one  whom  his 
brethren  rejected — a  type  of  the  Lord,  the  heir  of  all 
things.     This  lays  the  ground  of  worship. 

By  faith  Joseph,  a  stranger,  the  representative  here 
of  Israel  far  from  his  own  country,  reckons  on  the 
fulfilment  of  the  earthly  promises.* 

These  are  the  expressions  of  faith  in  the  faithful- 
ness of  God,  in  the  future  fulfilment  of  His  promise. 
In  that  which  follows  we  have  the  faith  which 
surmounts  every  difficulty  that  arises  in  the  path  of 
the  man  of  God,  in  the  way  that  God  marks  out  for 
him  as  he  journeys  on  towards  the  enjoyment  of  the 
promises. 

The  faith  of  the  parents  of  Moses  makes  them 
disregard  the  king's  cruel  command,  and  they  conceal 
their  infant;  whom  God,  in  answer  to  their  faith, 
preserved  by  extraordinary  means  when  there  was 
no  other  way  to  save  it.  Faith  does  not  reason;  it 
acts  from  its  own  point  of  view,  and  leaves  the  result 
to  God. 

But  the  means  which  God  used  for  the  preservation 
of  Moses  placed  him  within  a  little  of  the  highest 
position  in  the  kingdom.  He'  there  came  to  be  pos- 
sessed of  all  the  acquirements  which  that  period  could 
bestow  on  a  man  distinguished  alike  by  his  energy  and 
his  character.  But  faith  does  its  work,  and  inspires 
divine  afi'ections  which  do  not  look  to  surrounding 
circumstances  for  a  guide  of  action,  even  when  those 

*  Observe  that  in  these  cases  we  find  the  rights  of  Christ  in 
resurrection;  the  judgment  of  nature,  and  the  blessing  of  faith, 
through  grace;  the  inheritance  of  aJl  things  heavenly  and 
earthly  by  Christ ;  and  Israel's  future  return  to  their  own  land. 


HEBREWS,  831 

circumstances  may  have  owned  their  origin  to  the 
most  remarkable  providences. 

Faith  has  its  own  objects,  supplied  by  God  Himself, 
and  governs  the  heart  with  a  view  to  those  objects. 
It  gives  us  a  place  and  relationships  which  rule  the 
whole  life,  and  leave  no  room  for  other  motives  and 
other  spheres  of  affection  which  would  divide  the 
heart;  for  the  motives  and  affections  wliich  govern 
faith  are  given  by  God,  and  given  by  Him  in  order  to 
form  and  govern  the  heart. 

Verse  24-26  develop  this  point.  It  is  a  very  im- 
portant principle ,  for  we  often  hear  Providence  alleged 
as  a  reason  for  not  walking  by  faith.  Never  was 
there  a  more  remarkable  Providence  than  that  which 
placed  Moses  in  the  court  of  Pharaoh ;  and  it  gained 
its  object.  It  would  not  have  done  so  if  Moses  had 
not  abandoned  the  position  into  which  that  Providence 
had  brought  him.  But  it  was  faith  (that  is  to  say, 
the  divine  affections  which  God  had  created  in  his 
heart),  and  not  Providence  as  a  rule  and  motive,  whicli 
produced  the  effect  for  which  Providence  had  preserved 
and  prepared  him.  Providence  (thanks  be  to  God  !) 
governs  circumstances;  faith  governs  the  heart  and 
the  conduct. 

The  reward  which  God  has  promised  comes  in  here 
as  an  avowed  object  in  the  sphere  of  faith.  It  is  not 
the  motive  powei' ;  but  it  sustains  and  encourages  the 
heart  that  is  acting  by  faith,  in  view  of  the  object 
which  God  presents  to  our  affections.  It  thus  takes 
the  heart  away  from  the  present,  from  the  influence 
of  the  things  that  surround  us  (whether  they  are 
things  that  attract  or  that  tend  to  intimidate  us),  and 
elevates  the  heart  and  character  of  him  who  walks  by 
faith,  and  confirms  him  in  a  path  of  devotedness  which 
will  lead  him  to  the  end  at  which  he  aims. 

A  motive  outside  that  which  is  present  to  us  is  the 
secret  of  stability  and  of  true  greatness.     We  may 

XI. 


332  TflE  BOOKS  0**  tllE  BIBLE. 

have  an  object  with  regard  to  which  we  act :  but  we 
need  a  motive  outside  that  object — a  divine  motive — 
to  enable  us  to  act  in  a  godly  way  respecting  it. 

Faith  realises  also  (ver.  27)  the  intervention  of  God 
without  seeing  Him  ;  and  thus  delivers  from  all  fear 
of  the  power  of  man — the  enemy  of  His  people.  But 
the  thought  of  God's  intervention  brings  the  heart 
into  a  greater  difficulty  than  even  the  fear  of  man. 
If  His  people  are  to  be  delivered,  God  must  intervene, 
and  that  in  judgment.  But  they,  as  well  as  their 
enemies,  are  sinners ;  and  the  consciousness  of  sin  and 
of  deserving  judgment  necessarily  destroys  confidence 
in  Him  who  is  the  Judge.  Dare  they  see  Him  come 
to  manifest  His  power  in  judgment  (for  this  it  is,  in 
fact,  which  must  take  place  for  the  deliverance  of  His 
people)  ?  Is  God  for  us — the  heart  asks — this  God 
who  is  coming  in  judgment  ?  But  God  has  provided 
the  means  of  securing  safety  in  the  presence  of  judg- 
ment (ver.  28) ;  a  means  apparently  contemptible  and 
useless,  yet  which  in  reality  is  the  only  one  that,  by 
glorifying  Him  with  regard  to  the  evil  of  which  we  are 
guilty,  has  power  to  afford  shelter  from  the  judgment 
which  He  executes. 

Faith  recognised  the  testimony  of  God  by  trusting 
to  the  efficacy  of  the  blood  sprinkled  on  the  door,  and 
could,  in  all  security,  let  God  come  in  judgment — God 
who,  seeing  the  blood,  would  pass  over  His  believing 
people.  By  faith  Moses  kept  the  passover.  Observe 
here  that,  by  the  act  of  putting  the  blood  on  the 
door,  the  people  acknowledged  that  they  were  as  much 
the  objects  of  the  just  judgment  of  God  as  the  Egyp- 
tians. God  had  given  them  that  which  pres.erved 
them  from  it ;  but  it  was  because  they  were  guilty 
and  deserved  it.     No  one  can  stand  before  God. 

Verse  29.  But  the  power  of  God  is  manifested,  and 
manifested  in  judgment.  Nature,  the  enemies  of 
God's  people,  think  to  pass  through  this  judgment 


HEBREWS.  ,       383 

dry-shod,  like  those  who  are  sheltered  by  redeeming 
power  from  the  righteous  vengeance  of  God.  But  the 
judgment  swallows  them  up  in  the  very  same  place  in 
which  the  people  find  deliverance — a  principle  of 
marvellous  import.  There,  where  the  judgment  of 
God  is,  even  there  is  the  deliverance.  Believers  have 
truly  experienced  this  in  Christ.  The  cross  is  death 
and  judgment,  the  two  terrible  consequences  of  sin,  the 
lot  of  sinful  man.  To  us  they  are  the  deliverance 
provided  of  God.  By  and  in  them  we  are  delivered, 
and  (in  Christ)  we  pass  through  and  are  out  of  their 
reach.  Christ  died  and  is  risen ;  and  faith  brings  us, 
by  means  of  that  which  should  have  been  our  eternal 
ruin,  into  a  place  where  death  and  judgment  are  left 
behind,  and  where  our  enemies  can  no  longer  reach  us. 
We  go  through  without  their  touching  us.  Death  and 
judgment  shield  us  from  the  enemy.  They  are  our 
security.  But  we  enter  into  a  new  sphere,  we  live 
by  the  effect  not  only  of  Christ's  death,  but  of  His 
resurrection. 

Those  who,  in  the  mere  power  of  nature,  think  to 
pass  through  (they  who  speak  of  death  and  judgment 
and  Christ,  taking  the  christian  position,  and  thinking 
to  pass  through,  although  the  power  of  God  in 
redemption  is  not  with  them)  are  swallowed  up. 

With  respect  to  the  Jews,  this  event  will  have  an 
earthly  antitype;  for  in  fact  the  day  of  God's  judg- 
ment on  earth  will  be  the  deliverance  of  Israel,  who 
will  have  been  brought  to  repentance. 

This  deliverance  at  the  Bed  Sea  goes  beyond  the 
protection  of  the  blood  in  Egypt.  There  God  coming 
in  the  expression  of  His  holiness,  executing  judgment 
upon  evil,  what  they  needed  was  to  be  sheltered  from 
that  judgment — to  be  protected  from  the  righteous 
judgment  of  God  Himself.  And,  b}^  the  blood,  God, 
thus  coming  to  execute  judgment,  was  shut  out,  and 
the  people  were  placed  in  safety  before  the  Judge.    This 

XI. 


334         .  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

judgment  had  the  character  of  the  eternal  judgment. 
And  God  had  the  character  of  a  Judge. 

At  the  Red  Sea  it  was  not  merely  deliverance  from 
judgment  hanging  over  them ;  God  wsisfor  the  people, 
active  in  love  and  in  power  for  them.*  The  deliver- 
ance was  an  actual  deliverance :  they  came  out  of  that 
condition  in  which  they  had  been  enslaved,  God's  own 
power  bringing  them  unhurt  through  that  which 
otherwise  must  have  been  their  destruction.  Thus,  in 
our  case,  it  is  Christ's  death  and  resurrection,  in  which 
we  participate,  the  redemption  which  He  therein 
accomplished,-!*  which  introduces  us  into  an  entirely 
new  condition  altogether  outside  that  of  nature.  We 
are  no  lonoer  in  the  flesh. 

o 

In  principle  the  earthly  deliverance  of  the  Jewish 
nation  (the  Jewish  remnant)  will  be  the  same.  Founded 
on  the  power  of  the  risen  Christ,  and  on  the  propitia- 
tion w^rought  out  by  His  death,  that  deliverance  will 
be  accomplished  by  God,  who  will  intervene  on  behalf 
of  those  that  turn  to  Him  by  faith :  at  the  same  time 
that  His  adversaries  (who  are  those  also  of  His 
people)  shall  be  destroyed  by  the  very  judgment 
which  is  the  safeguard  of  the  people  whom  they  have 
oppressed. 

Verse  30.  Yet  all  difficulties  were  not  overcome 
because  redemption  was  accomplished,  deliverance 
effected.  But  the  God  of  deliverance  was  with  them ; 
difficulties  disappear  before  Him.  That  which  is  a 
difficulty  to  man  is  none  to  Him.  Faith  trusts  in  Him, 
and  uses  means  which  only  serve  to  express  that 
trust.  The  walls  of  Jericho  fall  down  at  the  sound  of 
trumpets  made  of  rams'  horns,  after  Israel  had  com- 

''■  Stand  still,  says  Moses,  and  see  the  salvation  of  Jehovah. 

t  Crossing  tlie  Jordan  represents  the  believer  being  set  at 
liberty,  and  intelligently  entering  by  faith  into  the  heavenlies ; 
it  is  conscious  death  and  resurrection  with  Christ.  The  Red  Sea 
is  the  power  of  redemption  by  Christ. 


HEBREWS.  835 

passed  the  city  seven  days,  sounding  these  trumpets 
seven  times. 

Rahab,  in  presence  of  all  the  as  yet  unimpaired 
strength  of  the  enemies  of  God  and  His  people, 
identities  herself  with  the  latter  before  they  had 
gained  one  victory,  because  she  felt  that  God  was 
with  them.  A  stranger  to  them  (as  to  the  flesh),  she 
by  faith  escaped  the  judgment  which  God  executed 
upon  her  people. 

Verse  32.  Details  are  now  no  longer  entered  into. 
Israel  (although  individuals  had  still  to  act  by  faith), 
being  established  in  the  land  of  promise,  furnished  less 
occasion  to  develop  examples  of  the  principles  on 
which  faith  acted.  The  Spirit  speaks  in  a  general 
way  of  these  examples  in  which  faith  re-appeared 
under  various  characters  and  energy  of  patience,  and 
sustained  souls  under  all  kinds  of  suffering.  Their 
glory  was  with  God,  the  world  was  not  worthy  of 
them.  Nevertheless  they  had  received  nothing  of  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promises:  they  had  to  live  by  faith, 
as  well  as  the  Hebrews,  to  whom  the  epistle  was 
addressed.  The  latter,  however,  had  privileges  which 
were  in  no  wise  possessed  by  believers  of  former  days. 
Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  was  brought  to  perfec- 
tion, that  is,  to  the  heavenly  glory,  unto  which  God 
has  called  us,  and  in  which  they  are  to  participate. 
Abraham  and  others  waited  for  this  glory ;  they  never 
possessed  it :  God  would  not  give  it  them  without  us. 
But  He  has  not  called  us  by  the  same  revelations 
only  as  those  which  He  made  to  them.  For  the  days 
of  the  rejected  Messiah  He  had  reserved  some  better 
thing.  Heavenly  things  have  become  things  of  the 
present  time,  things  fully  revealed  and  actualh^  pos- 
sessed in  spirit,  by  the  union  of  the  saints  with  Christ, 
and  present  access  into  the  holiest  through  the  blood 
of  Christ. 

We  have  not  to  do  with  a  promise  and  a  distinct 


336  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

view  of  a  place  approached  from  without,  entrance  to 
which  was  not  yet  granted,  so  that  relationship  with 
God  would  not  be  founded  on  entrance  within  the 
veil — entrance  into  His  own  presence.  We  now  go  in 
with  boldness.  We  belong  to  heaven ;  our  citizenship 
is  there;  we  are  at  home  there.  Heavenly  glory  is 
our  present  portion,  Christ  having  gone  in  as  our 
Forerunner.  We  have  in  heaven  a  Christ  who  is  man 
glorified.  This  Abraham  had  not.  He  walked  on 
earth  with  a  heavenly  mind,  waiting  for  a  city,  feeling 
that  nothing  else  would  satisfy  the  desires  which  God 
had  awakened  in  his  heart ;  but  he  could  not  be  con- 
nected with  heaven  by  means  of  a  Christ  actually 
sitting  there  in  glory.  This  is  our  present  portion. 
We  can  even  say  that  we  are  united  to  Him  there. 
The  Christian's  position  is  quite  different  from  that 
of  Abraham.  God  had  reserved  some  better  thmg 
for  us. 

The  Spirit  does  not  here  develop  the  whole  extent 
of  this  "  better  thing,"  because  the  assembly  is  not  His 
subject.  He  presents  the  general  thought  to  the 
Hebrews  to  encourage  them,  that  believers  of  the  pre- 
sent day  have  special  privileges,  which  they  enjoy  by 
faith,  but  which  did  not  belong  even  to  the  faith  of 
believers  in  former  days. 

We  shall  be  perfected,  that  is  to  say,  glorified 
together  in  resurrection ;  but  there  is  a  special  portion 
which  belongs  to  the  saints  now,  and  which  did  not 
belong  to  the  patriarchs.  The  fact  that  Christ,  as 
man,  is  in  heaven  after  having  accomplished  redemp- 
tion, and  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  whom  we  are  united 
to  Christ,  is  on  earth,  made  this  superiority  granted  to 
Christians  easily  understood.  Accordingly  even  the 
least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  the 
greatest  of  those  who  preceded  it. 

Chapter  xii.  The  epistle  now  enters  on  the  practical 
exhortations  that  flow  from  its  doctrinal  instruction, 


HEBREWS.  337 

with  reference  to  the  dangers  peculiar  to  the  Hebrew 
Christians — instruction  sui*-.ed  throughout  to  inspire 
them  with  courage.  Surrounded  with  a  cloud  of 
witnesses  like  these  of  chapter  xi.,  who  all  declared 
the  advantages  of  a  life  of  faith  in  promises  still 
unfulfilled,  they  ought  to  feel  themselves  impelled  to 
follow  their  steps,  running  with  patience  the  race  set 
before  them,  and  above  all  looking  away  from  every 
difficulty*  to  Jesus,  who  had  run  the  whole  career  of 
faith,  sustained  by  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him, 
and,  having  reached  the  goal,  had  taken  His  seat  in 
glory  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

This  passage  presents  the  Lord,  not  as  He  who 
bestows  faith,  but  as  He  who  has  Himself  run  the 
whole  career  of  faith.  Others  had  travelled  a  part 
of  the  road,  had  surmounted  some  difficulties;  the 
obedience  and  the  perseverance  of  the  Lord  had  been 
subjected  to  every  trial  of  which  human  nature  is 
susceptible.  Men,  the  adversary,  the  being  forsaken 
of  God,  everything  was  against  Him.  His  disciples 
flee  when  He  is  in  danger,  His  intimate  friend  betrays 
Him;  He  looks  for  some  one  to  have  compassion  on 
Him  and  finds  no  one.  The  fathers  (of  whom  we  read 
in  the  previous  chapter)  trusted  in  God  and  were 
delivered,  but  as  for  Jesus,  He  was  a  worm,  and  no 
man ;  His  throat  was  dry  with  crying.  His  love  for 
us.  His  obedience  to  His  Father,  surmounted  all.  He 
carries  off  the  victory  by  submission,  and  takes  His 
seat  in  a  glory  exalted  in  proportion  to  the  greatness 
of  His  abasement  and  obedience,  the  only  just  reward 
for  having  perfectly  glorified  God  where  He  had  been 
dishonoured  by  sin.     The  joy  and  the  rewards  that 

*  It  is  not  insensibility  to  them,  but,  when  they  are  felt  to  be 
there,  looking  from  them  to  Christ.  This  If  the  secret  of  faith. 
"Be  careful  for  nothing"  need  not  have  been  said,  if  nothing 
had  been  there  calculated  to  awaken  care.  Abraham  considered 
not  his  body  now  dead. 

VOL.  V,  Z 


338  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

are  set  before  us  are  never  the  motives  of  the  walk  of 
faith — we  know  this  well  with  regard  to  Christ,  but 
it  is  not  the  less  true  in  our  own  case — they  are  the 
encouragement  of  those  who  walk  in  it. 

Jesus,  then,  who  has  attained  the  glory  due  to  Him, 
becomes  an  example  to  us  in  the  sutferings  through 
which  He  passed  in  attaining  it;  therefore  we  are 
neither  to  lose  courage  nor  to  grow  weary.  We  have 
not  yet,  like  Him,  lost  our  lives  in  order  to  glorify 
God  and  to  serve  Him.  The  way  in  which  the  apostle 
engages  them  to  disentangle  themselves  from  every 
hindrance,  whether  sin  or  difficulty,  is  remarkable; 
as  though  they  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  cast  them  off 
as  useless  weights.  And  in  fact,  when  we  look  at 
Jesus,  nothing  is  easier ;  when  we  are  not  looking  at 
Him,  nothing  more  impossible. 

There  are  two  things  to  be  cast  off:  every  weighty 
and  the  sin  that  would  entangle  our  feet  (for  he 
speaks  of  one  who  is  running  in  the  race).  The  flesh, 
the  human  heart,  is  occupied  with  cares  and  diffi- 
culties ;  and  the  more  we  think  of  them,  the  more  we 
are  burdened  by  them.  It  is  enticed  by  the  object  of 
its  desires,  it  does  not  free  itself  from  them.  The  con- 
flict is  with  a  heart  that  loves  the  thing  against  which 
we  strive;  we  do  not  separate  ourselves  from  it  in 
thought.  When  looking  at  Jesus,  the  new  man  is 
active ;  there  is  a  new  object,  which  unburdens  and 
detaches  us  from  every  other  by  means  of  a  new 
affection  which  has  its  place  in  a  new  nature :  aiid  in 
Jesus  Himself,  to  whom  we  look,  there  is  a  positive 
power  which  sets  us  free. 

It  is  by  casting  it  ail  off*  in  an  absolute  way  that 
the  thing  is  easy — by  looking  at  that  which  fills  the 
heart  with  other  things,  and  occupies  it  in  a  different 
sphere,  where  a  new  object  and  a  new  nature  act  upon 
each  other;  and  in  that  object  there  is  a  positive 
power   which   absorbs   the   heart   and   shuts   put  all 


HEBREWS.  889 

objects  that  act  merely  on  the  old  nature.  What  is 
felt  to  be  a  weight  is  easily  east  off.  Everything  is 
judged  of  by  its  bearing  on  the  object  we  aim  at.  If 
I  run  in  a  race  and  all  my  thought  is  the  prize,  a  bag 
of  gold  is  readily  ca.st  away.  It  is  a  weight.  But  we 
must  look  to  Jesus.  Only  in  Him  can  we  cast  off 
every  hindrance  easily  and  without  reservation.-  We 
cannot  combat  sin  by  the  flesh. 

But  there  is  another  class  of  trials  that  come  from 
without :  they  are  not  to  be  cast  off,  they  must  be 
borne.  Christ,  as  we  have  seen,  went  through  them. 
We  have  not  like  Him  resisted  even  to  the  shedding 
of  our  blood  rather  than  fail  in  faithfulness  and 
obedience.  Now  God  acts  in  these  trials  as  a  father. 
He  chastises  us.  They  come  perhaps,  as  in  the  case  of 
Job,  from  the  enemy,  but  the  hand  and  the  wisdom  of 
God  are  in  them.  He  chastises  those  whom  He  loves. 
We  must  therefore  neither  despise  the  chastisement 
nor  be  discouraged  by  it.  We  must  not  despise  it,  for 
He  does  not  chastise  without  a  motive  or  a  cause 
(moreover,  it  is  God  who  does  it);  nor  must  we  be 
discouraged,  for  He  does  it  in  love. 

If  we  lose  our  life  for  the  testimony  of  the  Lord 
and  in  resisting  sin,  the  warfare  is  ended ;  and  this  is 
not  chastisement,  but  the  glory  of  suffering  with 
Christ.  Death  in  this  case  is  the  negation  of  sin.  He 
who  has  died  is  free  from  sin ;  he  who  has  suffered  in 
the  flesh  has  done  with  sin.  But  up  to  that  point,  the 
flesh  in  practice  (for  we  have  a  right  to  reckon  our- 
selves dead)  is  not  yet  destroyed;  and  God  knows 
bow  to  unite  the  manifestation  of  the  faithfulness 
of  the  new  man,  who  suffers  for  the  Lord,  with  the 
discipline  by  which  the  flesh  is  mortified.  For 
example,  Paul's  thorn  in  the  flesh  united  these  two 
things.  It  was  painful  to  him  in  the  exercise  of  his 
ministry,  for  it  was  somethino-  that  tended  to  make 
him  contemptible  when  preaching  (and  this  he  endured 

XII. 


340  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

for  the  Lord's  sake),  but  at  the  same  time  it  kept  his 
flesli  in  check. 

Verse  9.  Now  we  are  subject  to  our  natural  parents, 
who  discipline  us  after  their  own  will:  how  much 
more  then  to  the  Father  of  spirits,*  who  makes  us 
partakers  of  His  own  holiness!  Observe  here  the 
grace  that  is  appealed  to.  We  have  seen  how  much  the 
Hebrews  needed  warning — their  tendency  was  to  fail 
in  the  career  of  faith.  The  means  of  preventing  this 
is  doubtless  not  to  spare  warning,  but  yet  to  bring 
the  soul  fully  into  connection  with  grace.  This  alone 
can  give  strength  and  courage  through  confidence 
in  God. 

We  are  not  come  to  Mount  Sinai,  to  the  law  which 
makes  demands  on  us,  but  to  Sion,  where  God  mani- 
fested His  power  in  re-establishing  Israel  by  His 
grace  in  the  person  of  the  elect  king,  when,  as  to  the 
responsibility  of  the  people,  all  was  entirely  lost,  all 
relationship  with  God  impossible  on  that  footing,  for 
the  ark  was  lost ;  there  was  no  longer  a  mercy-seat,  no 
longer  a  throne  of  God  among  the  people.  Ichabod 
was  written  on  Israel. 

Therefore  in  speaking  of  holiness  he  says,  God  is 
active  in  love  tovvards  you,  even  in  your  very  suffer- 
ings. It  is  He  who  has  not  only  given  free  access  to 
Himself,  by  the  blood  and  by  the  presence  of  Christ  in 
heaven  for  us,  but  who  is  continually  occupied  with 
all  the  details  of  your  life ;  v/hose  hand  is  in  all  your 
trials,  who  thinks  unceasingly  about  you,  in  order  to 
make  you  partakers  of  His  holiness.  This  is  not  to 
require  holiness  on  our  part — necessary  as  it  must 
ever  be — it  is  in  order  to  make  us  partakers  of  His 
o^vn  holiness.  What  immense  and  perfect  grace ! 
What  a  means !  It  is  the  means  by  which  to  enjoy 
God  Himself  perfectly. 

*  "Father  of  spirits"  is  simply  in  contrast  with  "fathers  of 
Qiiv  flesh," 


HEBREWS.  341 

Verse  11.  God  does  not  expect  us  to  find  these 
exercises  of  soul  pleasant  at  the  moment  (they  would 
not  produce  their  effect  if  they  were  so):  but  after- 
wards, the  will  being  broken,  they  produce  the  peace- 
able fruits  of  righteousness.  The  pride  of  man  is 
brought  down  when  he  is  obliged  to  submit  to  that 
which  is  contrary  to  his  will.  God  also  takes  a 
larger  (ever  precious)  place  in  his  thoughts  and  in 
his  life. 

Verse  12.  On  the  principle  then  of  grace,  the 
Hebrews  are  exhorted  to  encourage  themselves  in  the 
path  of  faith,  and  to  watch  against  the  buddings  of 
sin  among  them,  whether  in  jdelding  to  the  desires  of 
the  flesh,  or  in  giving  up  christian  privileges  for 
something  of  the  world.  They  were  to  walk  so 
courageously  that  their  evident  joy  and  blessing 
(which  is  always  a  distinct  testimony  and  one  that 
triumphs  over  the  enemy)  should  make  the  weak  feel 
that  it  was  their  own  assured  portion  also ;  and  thus 
stren2;th  and  healing:  would  be  administered  to  them 
instead  of  discouragement.  The  path  of  godliness  as 
to  circumstances  was  to  be  made  easy,  a  beaten  path 
to  weak  and  lame  souls  ;  and  they  would  feel  more 
than  stronger  souls  the  comfort  and  value  of  such  a 
path. 

Grace,  we  have  already  said,  is  the  motive  given 
for  this  walk ;  but  grace  is  here  presented  in  a  form 
that  requires  to  be  considered  a  little  in  detail. 

We  are  not  come,  it  says,  to  Mount  Sinai.  There 
the  terrors  of  the  majesty  of  God  kept  man  at  a 
distance.  No  one  was  to  approach  Him.  Even  Moses 
feared  and  trembled  at  the  presence  of  Jehovah. 
This  is  not  where  the  Christian  is  brought.  But,  in 
contrast  with  such  relationships  as  these  with  God, 
the  whole  millennial  state  in  all  its  parts  is  developed  ; 
according  however  to  the  way  in  which  these  dif- 
ferent parts  are  now  known  as  things  hoped  for.     We 

XII. 


842  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

belong  to  it  all;  but  evidently  these  things  are  not 
yet  established.  Let  us  name  them :  Sion ;  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem  ;  the  angels  and  general  assembly; 
the  church  of  the  firstborn,  whose  names  are  inscribed 
in  heaven;  God  the  Judge  of  all;  the  spirits  of  the 
just  made  perfect ;  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  new 
covenant ;  and  finally,  the  blood  of  sprinkling  which 
speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel. 

Sion  we  have  spoken  of  as  a  principle.  It  is  the 
intervention  of  sovereign  grace  (in  the  king)  after  the 
ruin,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  ruin,  of  Israel,  re-estab- 
lishing the  people  according  to  the  counsels  of  God  in 
glory,  and  their  relationships  with  God  Himself.  It 
is  the  rest  of  God  on  the  earth,  the  seat  of  the 
Messiah's  royal  power.  But,  as  we  know,  the  extent 
of  the  earth  is  far  from  being  the  limits  of  the  Lord's 
inheritance.  Sion  on  earth  is  Jehovah's  rest ;  it  is  not 
the  city  of  the  living  God — the  heavenly  Jerusalem  is 
that,  the  heavenly  capital,  so  to  speak  of  His  kingdom, 
the  city  that  has  foundations,  whose  founder  and 
builder  is  God  Himself. 

Having  named  Sion  below,  the  author  turns  natu- 
rally to  Jerusalem  above  :  but  this  carries  him  into 
heaven,  and  he  finds  himself  with  all  the  people  of 
God,  in  the  midst  of  a  multitude  of  angels,  the  great 
universal  assembly*  of  tlie  invisible  world.  There  is 
however  one  peculiar  object  on  which  his  eye  rests  in 
this  marvellous  and  heavenly  scene.  It  is  the  as- 
sembly of  the  firstborn  whose  names  are  inscribed  in 
heaven.  They  were  not  born  there,  not  indigenous 
like  the  angels,  whom  God  preserved  from  falling. 
They  are  the  objects  of  the  counsels  of  God.  It  is  not 
merely  that  they  reach  heaven :  they  are  the  glorious 


"^^  The  word  here  translated  "assembly"  was  that  of  all  the 
states  of  Greece;  that  of  the  "firstborn"  is  the  word  for  the 
assembly  of  citizens  of  any  particular  state. 


HEBREWS.  843 

heirs  and  firstborn  of  God,  according  to  His  eternal 
counsels,  in  accordance  with  which  they  are  registered 
in  heaven.  The  assembly  composed  of  the  objects  of 
grace,  now  called  in  Christ,  belongs  to  heaven  by 
grace.  They  are  not  the  objects  of  the  promises,  who, 
not  having  received  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  on 
earth,  do  not  fail  to  enjoy  them  in  heaven.  They  have 
the  anticipation  of  no  other  country  or  citizenship  than 
heaven.  The  promises  were  not  addressed  to  them. 
They  have  no  place  on  earth.  Heaven  is  prepared  for 
them  by  God  Himself.  Their  names  are  inscribed 
there  by  Him.  It  is  the  highest  place  in  heaven 
above  the  dealings  of  God  in  government,  promise, 
and  law  on  the  earth.  This  leads  the  picture  of  glory 
on  to  God  Himself.  But  (-having  reached  the  highest 
point,  that  which  is  most  excellent  in  grace)  He  is 
seen  under  another  character,  namely,  as  the  Judge  of 
all,  as  looking  down  from  on  high  to  judge  all  that  is 
below.  This  introduces  another  class  of  these  blessed 
inhabitants  of  the  heavenly  glory:  those  whom  the 
righteous  Judge  owned  as  His  before  the  heavenly 
assembly  was  revealed,  the  spirits  of  the  just  arrived 
at  perfection.  They  had  finished  their  course,  they 
had  overcome  in  conflict,  they  were  waiting  only  for 
glory.  They  had  been  connected  with  the  dealings  of 
God  on  the  earth,  but — faithful  before  the  time  for  its 
blessing  was  come — they  had  their  rest  and  their 
portion  in  heaven. 

It  was  the  purpose  of  God  nevertheless  to  bless  the 
earth.  He  could  not  do  so  according  to  man's  respon- 
sibility :  His  people  even  were  but  as  grass.  He 
would  therefore  establish  a  new  covenant  with  Israel, 
a  covenant  of  pardon,  and  according  to  which  He 
would  write  the  law  in  the  hearts  of  His  people. 
The  Mediator  of  this  covenant  had  already  appeared 
and  had  done  all  that  was  required  for  its  establish- 
ment. The  saints  among  the  Hebrews  were  come  to 
"xii. 


344  THE  BOOKS   OP  THE   BIBLE. 

the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant :  blessing  was  thus 
prepared  for  the  earth  and  secured  to  it. 

Finally,  the  blood  of  Christ  had  been  shed  on  earth, 
as  that  of  Abel  by  Cain  ;  but,  instead  of  crying  from 
the  earth  for  vengeance,  so  that  Cain  became  a  fugi- 
tive and  a  vagabond  in  the  earth  (a  striking  type  of 
the  Jew,  guilty  of  the  death  of  Christ),  it  is  grace 
that  speaks ;  and  the  shed  blood  cries  to  obtain  pardon 
and  peace  for  those  who  shed  it. 

It  will  be  observed  that,  although  speaking  of  the 
different  parts  of  millennial  blessing,  with  its  founda- 
tions, all  is  given  according  to  the  present  condition 
of  things,  before  the  coming  of  that  time  of  blessing 
from  God.  We  are  in  it  as  to  our  relationships ;  but 
the  spirits  of  the  just  men  of  the  Old  Testament  only 
are  here  spoken  of,  and  only  the  Mediator  of  this  new 
covenant :  the  covenant  itself  is  not  established.  The 
blood  cries,  but  the  answer  in  earthly  blessing  has  not 
yet  come.  This  is  easily  understood.  It  is  exactly 
according  to  the  existing  state  of  things,  and  even 
throws  considerable  light  on  the  position  of  the 
Hebrew  Christians  and  on  the  doctrine  of  the  epistle. 
The  important  thing  for  them  was,  that  they  should 
not  turn  away  from  Him  who  spoke  from  heaven.  It 
was  with  Him  they  had  to  do.  We  have  seen  them 
connected  with  all  that  went  before,  with  the  Lord's 
testimony  on  earth  ;  but  in  fact  they  had  to  do  at  that 
time  with  the  Lord  Himself  as  speaking  from  heaven. 
His  voice  then  shook  the  earth  ;  but  now,  speaking 
with  the  authority  of  grace  and  from  heaven,  He 
announced  the  dissolution  of  everything  which  the 
flesh  could  lean  upon,  or  on  which  the  creature  could 
rest  its  hopes. 

All  that  could  be  shaken  should  be  dissolved.  How 
much  more  fatal  to  turn  away  from  Him  that  speaketh 
now,  than  from  the  commandments  even  of  Sinai ! 
This  shaking  of  all  things  (whether  here  or  in  the 


HEBREWS.  345 

analogous  passage  in  2  Peter)  evidently  goes  beyond 
Judaism,  but  has  a  peculiar  application  to  it.  Judaism 
was  the  system  and  the  frame  of  the  relationships  of 
God  with  men  on  earth  according  to  the  principle  of 
responsibility  on  their  part.  All  this  was  of  the  first 
creation,  but  its  springs  were  poisoned ;  heaven,  the 
seat  of  the  enemy's  power,  perverted  and  corrupted; 
the  heart  of  man  on  earth  was  corrupt  and  rebellious. 
God  will  shake  and  change  all  things.  The  result 
will  be  a  new  creation  in  which  righteousness  shall 
dwell. 

Meanwhile  the  first  fruits  of  this  new  creation  were 
being  formed  ;  and  in  Christianity  God  was  forming 
the  heavenly  part  of  the  kingdom  that  cannot  be 
moved;  and  Judaism — the  centre  of  the  earthly 
system  and  of  human  responsibility — was  passing 
away.  The  apostle  therefore  announces  the  shaking 
of  all  things — that  everything  which  exists  as  the 
present  creation  shall  be  set  aside.  With  regard  to 
the  present  fact  he  says  only,  "we  receive  a  kingdom 
that  cannot  be  moved ;"  and  calls  us  to  serve  God  with 
true  piety,  because  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire ;  not — 
as  people  say — God  out  of  Christ,  but  our  God.  This 
is  His  character  in  holy  majesty  and  in  righteous 
judgment  of  evil. 

Chapter  xiii.  In  this  next  chapter  there  is  more  than 
one  truth  important  to  notice.  The  exhortations  are 
as  simple  as  they  are  weighty,  and  require  but  few 
remarks.  They  rest  in  the  sphere  in  which  the  whole 
of  the  epistle  does :  what  relates  to  the  Christian's 
path  as  walking  here,  not  what  flows  from  union  with 
Christ  in  heavenly  places.  Brotherly  love,  hospitality, 
care  for  those  in  bonds,  the  strict  maintenance  of  the 
marriage  tie  and  personal  purity,  the  avoiding  of 
covetousness :  such  are  the  subjects  of  exhortation,  all 
important  and  connected  with  the  gracious  walk  of  a 
Christian,  but  not  drawn  from  the  higher  and  more 
XIII. 


84)6  THE   BOOKS   OP  THE  BIBLE. 

heavenly  sources  and  principles  of  the  christian  life 
as  we  see  in  Ephesians  and  Colossians.  Nor,  even 
though  there  be  more  analogy — for  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  rests  in  general  in  life  in  Christ  in  this  world, 
presenting  Christ's  resurrection,  without  going  on  to 
His  ascension* — are  the  exhortations  such  as  in  this 
latter  epistle.  Those  which  follow  connect  themselves 
with  the  circumstances  in  which  the  Hebrews  found 
themselves,  and  rest  on  the  approaching  abolition  and 
judgment  of  Judaism,  from  which  they  had  now 
definitely  to  separate  themselves. 

In  exhorting  them  (ver.  7)  to  remember  those  who 
have  guided  the  flock,  he  speaks  of  those  already 
departed  in  contrast  with  those  still  living.  (Ver.  17.) 
The  issue  of  their  faith  might  well  encourage  others  to 
follow  their  steps,  to  walk  by  those  principles  of  faith 
which  had  led  them  to  so  noble  a  result. 

Moreover  Christ  never  changed ;  He  was  the  same 
j^esterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  Let  them  abide  in 
the  simplicity  and  integrity  of  faith.  Nothing  is  a 
plainer  proof  that  the  heart  is  not  practically  in 
possession  of  that  which  gives  rest  in  Christ,  that  it 
does  not  realise  what  Christ  is,  than  the  restless  search 
after  something  new — "  divers  and  strange  doctrines." 
To  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  is  our  life  and 
our  privilege.  The  search  after  novelties  which  are 
foreign  to  Him,  is  a  proof  of  not  being  satisfied  with 
Him.  But  he  who  is  not  satisfied  with  Jesus  does  not 
know  Him,  or,  at  least,  has  forgotten  Him.  It  is 
impossible  to  enjoy  Him,  and  not  to  feel  that  He  is 
everything,  that  is  to  say,  that  He  satisfies  us,  and 
that  by  the  nature  of  what  He  is,  He  shuts  out 
everything  else. 

Now  with  regard  to  Judaism,  in  which  the  Hebrews 
were  naturally  inclined  to  seek  satisfaction  for  the 

*  It  is  only  spoken  of  in  chapter  viii.  34,  and  an  allusion  in 
chapter  x.  6. 


HEBREWS.  847 

flesh,  the  apostle  goes  farther.  They  ♦were  no  longer 
Jews  in  the  possession  of  the  true  worship  of  God,  a 
privileged  worship  in  which  others  had  no  right  to 
participate.  The  altar  of  God  belonged  now  to  the 
Christians.  Christians  only  had  a  right  to  it.  An 
earthly  worship,  in  which  there  was  no  entering 
within  the  veil,  into  God's  own  presence  in  the  sanc- 
tuary, could  no  longer  subsist — a  worship  that  had  its 
worldly  glory,  that  belonged  to  the  elements  of  this 
world  and  had  its  place  there.  Now,  it  is  either 
heaven  or  the  cross  and  shame.  The  great  sacrifice 
for  sin  has  been  offered ;  but  by  its  efficacy,  it  brings 
us  into  the  sanctuary,  into  heaven  itself,  where  the 
blood  has  been  carried  in ;  and  on  the  other  hand  it 
takes  us  outside  the  camp,  a  religious  people  connected 
with  the  world  down  here,  into  shauie  and  rejection 
on  earth.  This  is  the  portion  of  Christ.  In  heaven 
He  is  accepted.  He  has  gone  in  with  His  own  blood — 
on  earth  cast  out  and  despised. 

A  worldly  religion,  which  forms  a  system  in  which 
the  world  can  walk,  and  in  which  the  religious  ele- 
ment is  adapted  to  man  on  the  earth,  is  the  denial  of 
Christianity. 

Here  we  have  no  continuing  city,  we  seek  the  one 
which  is  to  come.  By  Christ  we  ofi'er  our  sacrifices 
of  praise  and  thanksgiving.  By  sharing  also  our 
goods  with  others,  by  doing  good  in  every  way, 
we  offer  sacrifices  with  which  God  is  well  pleased. 
(Ver.  16.) 

He  then  exhorts  them  to  obey  those  who,  as  respon- 
sible to  God,  watch  over  souls,  and  who  go  before  the 
saints  in  order  to  lead  them  on.  It  is  a  proof  of  that 
humble  spirit  of  grace  which  seeks  only  to  please  the 
Lord. 

The  sense  of  this  responsibility  makes  Paul  ask  the 
saints  to  pray  for  him,  but  with  the  declaration  that 
he  had  assuredly  a  good  conscience.     We  serve  God, 

XIII. 


848  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

we  act  for  Him,  when  He  is  not  obliged  to  be  acting 
on  us.  That  is  to  say,  the  Spirit  of  God  acts  by  our 
means  when  He  has  not  to  occupy  us  with  ourselves. 
When  the  latter  is  the  case,  one  could  not  Jisk  for  the 
prayers  of  saints  as  a  labourer.  While  the  Spirit  is 
exercising  us  in  our  conscience,  we  cannot  call  our- 
selves labourers  of  God.  When  the  conscience  is  good, 
we  can  ask  unreservedly  for  the  prayers  of  the  saints. 
The  apostle  so  much  the  more  asked  for  them  because 
he  hoped  thus  the  sooner  to  see  them  again. 

Finally,  he  invokes  blessing  upon  them,  giving  God 
the  title  he  so  often  ascribes  to  Him — "  the  God  of 
peace."  In  the  midst  of  exercise  of  heart  with  regard 
to  the  Hebrews,  of  arguments  to  preserve  their  Jove 
from  growing  cold,  in  the  midst  of  the  moral  unsteadi- 
ness that  enfeebled  the  walk  of  these  Christians,  and 
their  trials  in  the  breaking  down  of  what  they  con- 
sidered stable  and  holy,  this  title  has  a  peculiarly 
precious  character. 

The  Spirit  sets  them  also  in  the  presence  of  a  risen 
Christ,  of  a  God  who  had  founded  and  secured  peace 
by  the  death  of  Clirist,  and  had  given  a  proof  of  it  in 
His  resurrection.  He  had  brought  Christ  again  from 
the  dead  according  to  the  power  of  the  blood  of  the 
everlasting*  covenant.  On  this  blood  the  believing 
people  might  build  a  hope  that  nothing  could  shake. 
For  it  was  not,  as  at  Sinai,  promises  founded  on  the 
condition  of  the  people's  obedience,  but  on  the  ransom 
which  had  been  paid,  and  the  perfect  expiation  of  their 
disobedience.  The  blessing  was  therefore  unchange- 
able,  the  covenant  (as  the  inheritance  and  the  redemp- 
tion) was  everlasting.  He  prays  that  the  God  w^ho 
had  wrought  it,  would  work  in  them  to  grant  them 

*  The  word  "everlasting"  is  specific,  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  in  contrast  with  a  system  which  was  passing  away. 
It  speaks  of  eternal  redemption,  eternal  inheritance,  the  eternal 
Spirit  even. 


HEBREWS.  849 

full  power  and  energy  for  the  accomplishment  of  His 
will,  working  Himself  in  them  that  which  was  well- 
pleasing  in  iiis  sight. 

He  urges  them  to  give  heed  to  exhortation ;  he  had 
only  sent  them  a  few  words. 

He  who  wrote  the  letter  desires  they  should  know 
that  Timothy  had  been  set  at  liberty ;  he  himself  was 
so  already ;  he  was  in  Italy ;  circumstances  which  tend 
to  confirm  the  idea  that  it  was  Paul  who  wrote  this 
letter — a  very  interesting  point,  although  in  nowise 
affecting  its  authority. 

It  is  the  Spirit  of  God  who  everywhere  gives  His 
own  authority  to  the  word. 


XIl, 


JAMES. 

The  Epistle  of  James  is  not  addressed  to  the  assembly, 
and  does  not  take  the  ground  of  apostolic  authority 
over  the  persons  to  whom  it  is  sent.  It  is  a  practical 
exhortation  which  still  recognises  the  twelve  tribes 
and  the  connection  of  the  christian  Jews  with  them, 
as  Jonah  addressed  the  Gentiles,  although  the  Jewish 
people  had  their  place  before  God.  Thus  the  Spirit  of 
God  still  acknowledges  here  the  relationship  with 
Israel,  as  in  the  other  case  the  relationship  with 
Gentiles,  and  the  rights  of  God  which  are  unchange- 
able, whatever  may  be  the  special  privileges  granted 
to  the  assembly  or  to  Israel  respectively.  We  know 
that  historically  the  christian  Jews  remained  Jews  to 
the  end  of  the  New  Testament  history,  and  were  even 
zealous  for  the  law — to  us  a  strange  thing,  but  which 
God  endured  for  a  time. 

The  doctrine  of  Christianity  is  not  the  subject  of 
this  epistle.  It  gives  God  His  place  in  the  conscience, 
and  with  regard  to  all  that  surrounds  us.  It  thus 
girds  up  the  loins  of  the  Christian,  presenting  also  the 
near  coming  of  the  Lord  and  His  present  discipline — 
a  discipline  with  respect  to  which  the  assembly  of 
God  ought  to  possess  intelligence,  and  activity  founded 
thereon.  The  world  also,  and  all  that  makes  an 
appearance  in  it,  is  judged  from  God's  point  of  view. 

A  few  remarks  on  the  position  of  Christians  (that 
is,  on  the  way  in  which  this  position  is  viewed  with 
respect  to  Israel)  will  help  us  to  understand  this 
portion  of  the  word. 

Israel  is  still  regarded  as  the  people  of  God.     To 


JAMES.  851 

the  faith  of  James  the  nation  has  still  the  relationship 
which  God  had  given  it  towards  Himself.  The  Chris- 
tians in  it  are  addressed  as  still  forming  part  of  a 
people  whose  links  with  God  were  not  yet  judicially 
broken :  but  it  was  only  the  Christians  among  them 
who  possessed  the  faith  which  the  Spirit  gave  in  the 
true  Messiah.  These  only  among  the  people,  with  the 
writer,  acknowledged  Jesus  as  the  Lord  of  glory. 
With  the  exception  of  verses  14,  15,  in  chapter  v.,  this 
epistle  contains  no  exhortation  which,  in  its  spiritual 
height,  goes  beyond  that  which  might  be  addressed  to 
a  godly  Jew.  It  supposes  indeed  that  the  persons  to 
whom  it  speaks  have  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus ;  but  it 
does  not  call  them  to  that  which  is  exclusively  proper 
to  Christianity  and  depends  on  its  privileges.  The 
exhortations  flow  from  that  higher  source  and  breathe 
the  more  heavenly  atmosphere,  but  the  effect  they  aim 
at  producing  consists  in  real  proofs  of  religion  here 
below ;  they  are  such  as  might  be  heard  in  the  profess- 
ing church — a  vast  body  like  Israel,  in  the. midst  of 
which  some  Christians  existed. 

The  epistle  is  not  founded  on  christian  relationships 
here  below.  It  acknowledges  them  ;  but  only  as  one 
fact  in  the  midst  of  others,  which  have  rights  over  the 
conscience  of  the  writer.  It  supposes  those  whom  it 
addresses  to  be  in  a  relationship  with  God,  which  is 
known,  unquestioned,  and  of  ancient  date;  in  the 
midst  of  which  Christianity  has  been  introduced. 

It  is  important  to  notice  the  moral  measure  of  the 
life  which  this  epistle  presents.  As  soon  as  we  appre- 
hend the  position  in  which  it  views  believers,  the 
discernment  of  the  truth  on  this  point  is  not  difficult. 
It  is  the  same  as  that  which  Christ  presented  when 
walkino^  in  the  midst  of  Israel  and  settino^  before  His 
disciples  the  light,  and  the  relationships  with  God, 
which  resulted  to  them  from  His  presence.  Now 
indeed  He  was  absent ;  but  that  light  and  those  rela- 

I. 


352  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

tionships  are  retained  as  the  measure  of  responsibility. 
And  this  the  Lord's  return  would  vindicate  by  judg- 
ment on  those  who  refused  to  accept  and  walk  in  it. 
Until  that  day  the  faithful  were  to  be  patient  in  the 
midst  of  the  oppression  they  were  suffering  from  on 
the  part  of  the  Jews,  who  still  blasphemed  the  holy 
name  by  which  they  were  called. 

It  is  the  converse  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
with  regard  to  their  relationship  with  the  Jewish 
nation ;  not  morally,  but  because  of  the  nearness  of 
the  judgment  when  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was 
written. 

The  fundamental  principles  of  the  position  that  we 
have  been  speaking  of  are  as  follows :  the  law  in  its 
spirituality  and  perfection,  as  stated  and  summed  up 
by  Christ ;  a  life  imparted,  which  has  the  moral  prin- 
ciples of  the  law,  itself  a  divine  life;  the  revelation 
of  the  Fathers  name.  All  this  was  true  when  the 
Lord  was  on  the  earth,  and  was  the  ground  on 
which  (however  poorly  they  understood  it)  He  then 
placed  His  disciples.  He  told  them  that  they  were  to 
be  witnesses  of  it,  as  of  all  He  had  said,  after  His 
death,  distinguishing-  this  testimony  from  that  of  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

It  is  this  which  James  teaches  here,  with  the  addition 
of  that  which  the  Lord  had  also  said — that  He  would 
come  again.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  Christ  with  regard 
to  walk  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  according  to  the  light 
and  the  truths  which  He  had  introduced  ;  and — seeing 
that  He  was  still  absent — an  exhortation  to  persever- 
ance and  patience  in  that  walk,  waiting  for  the 
moment  when,  by  judgment  on  those  who  oppressed 
them.  He  would  vindicate  the  principles  on  which 
they  walked. 

Although  the  judgment  executed  on  Jerusalem 
changed  the  position  of  the  renmant  of  Israel  in  this 
respect,  yet  the  life  of  Christ  remains  ever  our  model ; 


JAAiES.  353 

and  we  have  to  wait  with  patience  until  the  Lord 
come. 

We  have  not  in  this  epistle  the  association  of  the 
Christian  with  Christ  exalted  on  high,  nor  conse- 
quently the  thought  of  going  to  meet  Him  in  the  air, 
as  Paul  taught.  But  that  which  it  contains  ever  re- 
mains true ;  and  he  who  says  that  he  abides  in  Him 
(Christ)  ought  also  to  walk  even  as  He  walked. 

The  judgment  that  was  coming  makes  us  under- 
stand the  way  in  which  James  speaks  of  the  world,  of 
the  rich  who  rejoice  in  their  portion  in  the  world,  and 
the  position  of  the  believing  remnant  oppressed  and 
suti'ering  in  the  midst  of  the  unbelieving  nation ;  why 
he  begins  with  the  subject  of  the  tribulations  and  so 
often  recurs  to  it:  why  also  he  insists  on  practical 
evidences  of  faith.  He  still  sees  all  Israel  together; 
but  some  had  received  faith  in  the  Lord  of  glory,  and 
these  were  tempted  to  value  the  rich  and  the  great  in 
Israel.  x\ll  being  still  Jews,  we  can  easily  understand 
that,  while  some  truly  believed  and  confessed  their 
belief  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  yet,  as  these  Chris- 
tians followed  the  Jewish  ordinances,  mere  professors 
might  do  as  much  without  the  least  vital  change  being 
proved  by  their  works.  It  is  evident  that  a  faith  like 
this  has  no  value  whatever.  It  is  precisely  the  faith 
of  those  who  clamour  for  works  in  the  present  day — 
a  mere  dead  profession  of  the  truth  of  Christianity. 
To  be  begotten  by  the  word  of  truth  is  as  foreign 
and  strange  to  them  as  to  the  Jews  of  whom  James  is 
speaking. 

Believers  being  thus  placed  in  the  midst  of  Israel 
with  some  who  merely  professed  faith,  we  can  readily 
understand  the  apostle's  address  to  the  mass  as  those 
who  might  share  in  the  privileges  that  existed  in  their 
midst;  his  address  to  Christians  as  having  a  special 
place  in  their  own  ;  and  his  warning  to  those  who 
called  themselves  believers  in  Christ.     Most  easy  and 

VOL.    v.  I.  A  A 


354  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

perfectly  clear  is  the  practical  application  to  all  times, 
and  in  particular  when  a  mass  of  persons  assume  a 
right  by  inheritance  to  the  privileges  of  the  people  of 
God.  Besides  this,  the  epistle  has  peculiar  force  for 
the  individual  conscience ;  it  judges  the  position  one  is 
in,  and  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart. 

The  epistle  then  begins  with  an  exhortation  to 
rejoice  in  trial,  as  a  means  of  producing  patience. 
This  subject  in  the  main  continues  to  the  end  of  verse 
20,  where  the  idea  turns  towards  the  necessity  of 
curbing  everything  that  opposes  itself  to  patience, 
and  towards  the  true  character  of  one  who  stands  in 
the  presence  of  God.  This  address,  as  a  whole,  ends 
with  the  chapter.  The  connection  of  the  reasoning  is 
not  always  easy  to  find;  the  key  to  it  is  the  moral 
condition  with  which  the  apostle's  mind  is  occu- 
pied. I  will  endeavour  to  make  the  connection  more 
apparent. 

The  subject  in  the  main  is,  that  we  ought  to  walk 
before  God  to  shew  the  reality  of  our  profession  in 
contrast  with  union  with  the  world — practical  re- 
ligion. Patience  then  must  have  its  perfect  work  ; 
thus  self-will  is  subdued,  and  the  whole  of  God's  will 
is  accepted ;  consequently  nothing  is  wanting  to  the 
practical  life  of  the  soul.  The  believer  may  suffer; 
but  he  patiently  waits  on  the  Lord.  This  Christ  did ; 
it  was  His  perfection.  He  waited  for  the  will  of  God, 
and  never  did  His  own  will :  thus  obedience  was  per- 
fect, man  thoroughly  tested.  But  in  fact  we  often 
lack  wisdom  to  know  what  we  ought  to  do.  Here  it 
says  the  resource  is  evident :  we  are  to  ask  wisdom 
from  God.  He  gives  to  all  liberally ;  only  we  must 
count  upon  His  faithfulness  and  upon  an  answer  to 
uur  prayers.  Otherwise  the  heart  is  double ;  there  is 
dependence  elsewhere  than  on  God ;  our  desires  have 
another  object.  If  we  only  seek  that  which  God 
wills  and  that  which  God  does,  we  depend  securely 


JAMES.  355 

on  Him  to  accomplish  it ;  and  as  to  the  circumstances 
of  this  world,  which  might  make  one  believe  that  it 
was  useless  to  depend  on  God,  they  vanish  away  as 
the  flower  of  the  fleld.  We  ought  to  have  the  con- 
sciousness that  our  place  according  to  God  is  not  that 
which  is  of  this  world.  He  who  is  in  a  low  station 
should  rejoice  that  Christianity  exalts  him ;  the  rich, 
that  it  humbles  him.  It  is  not  in  riches  that  we 
are  to  rejoice  (they  pass  away),  but  in  the  exercises  of 
heart  of  which  the  apostle  had  been  speaking ;  for  after 
having  been  tried  we  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life. 

The  life  of  one  who  is  thus  tried,  and  in  whom  this 
life  develops  itself  in  obedience  to  the  entire  will  of 
God,  is  well  worth  that  of  a  man  who  indulges  all  the 
desires  of  his  hearfc  in  luxury. 

Now  with  regard  to  temptations  of  this  last  cha- 
racter, into  which  the  lusts  of  the  heart  cause  men  to 
fall,  it  must  not  be  said  that  these  lusts  come  from 
God :  the  heart  of  man  is  their  source — its  lusts  which 
lead  through  sin  to  death.  Let  no  one  deceive  himself 
on  this  point.  That  which  inwardly  tempts  the  heart 
comes  from  oneself.  All  good  and  perfect  gifts  come 
from  God,  and  He  never  changes,  He  does  nothing  but 
good.  Accordingly  He  has  given  us  a  new  nature,  the 
fruit  of  His  own  will  working  in  us  by  the  word  of 
truth,  in  order  that  we  should  be  as  it  were  firstfruits 
of  His  creatures.  The  Father  of  lights,  that  which  is 
darkness  does  not  come  from  Him. 

By  the  word  of  truth  He  has  begotten  us  to  be  the 
first  and  most  excellent  witnesses  of  that  power  of 
good  which  will  shine  forth  hereafter  in  the  new 
creation,  of  which  we  are  the  firstfruits.  This  is  the 
opposite  of  being  the  source  of  corrupt  desires.  The 
word  of  truth  is  the  good  seed  of  life ;  self-will  is  the 
cradle  of  our  lusts — its  energy  can  never  produce  the 
fruits  of  divine  nature;  nor  the  wrath  of  man  the 
righteousness  of  God.     Therefore  we  are  called  to  be 

I. 


356  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

docile,  to  be  ready  to  hear,  slow  to  speak,  slow  to 
wrath,  to  lay  aside  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh,  all  energy 
of  iniquity,  and  to  receive  the  word  with  meekness — a 
word  which,  while  it  is  the  word  of  God,  identifies 
itself  w4th  the  new  nature  that  is  in  us  (it  is  planted 
in  us)  while  forming  and  developing  it  according  to 
its  own  perfection ;  because  this  nature  itself  has  its 
origin  from  God  through  the  word. 

It  is  not  as  a  law  which  is  outside  us,  and  which, 
being  opposed  to  our  sinful  nature,  condemns  us. 
This  word  saves  the  soul ;  it  is  living  and  quickening, 
and  it  works  livingly  in  a  nature  that  flows  from  it, 
and  which  it  forms  and  enlightens. 

But  it  is  necessary  to  be  doers  of  the  word,  not 
merely  to  hear  it  with  the  ear,  but  that  it  should  pro- 
duce the  practical  fruits  which  are  the  proof  that  it 
works  really  and  vitally  in  the  heart.  Otherwise  the 
word  is  only  as  a  mirror  in  which  we  may  perhaps 
see  ourselves  for  a  moment,  and  then  forget  what  we 
have  seen.  He  who  looks  into  the  perfect  law,  which 
is  that  of  liberty,  and  continues  in  it,  doing  the  work 
which  it  presents,  shall  be  blessed  in  the  real  and 
obedient  activity  developed  in  him. 

This  law  is  perfect ;  for  the  word  of  God,  all  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  has  expressed,  is  the  expression  of 
the  nature  and  the  character  of  God,  of  that  which  He 
is  and  of  that  which  He  wills :  for,  when  fully  revealed 
(and  till  then  man  cannot  fully  know  Him),  He  wills 
that  which  He  is,  and  this  necessarily. 

This  law  is  the  law  of  liberty,  because  the  same 
word  which  reveals  what  God  is  and  what  He  wills 
has  made  us  partakers  by  grace  of  the  divine  nature ; 
so  that  not  to  walk  according  to  that  word  would  be 
not  to  walk  according  to  our  own  new  nature.  Now 
to  walk  according  to  our  own  new  nature,  and  that 
the  nature  of  God,  and  guided  by  His  word,  is  true 
liberty. 


JAME!^,  357 

The  law  given  on  Sinai  was  the  expression  in  man, 
written  not  on  the  heart  but  outside  man,  of  what 
man's  conduct  and  heart  ought  to  be  according  to  the 
will  of  God.  It  represses  and  condemns  all  the  motions 
of  the  natural  uian,  and  cannot  allow  him  to  have  a 
will,  for  he  ought  to  do  the  will  of  God.  But  he  has 
another  will,  and  therefore  the  law  is  bondage  to  him, 
a  law  of  condemnation  and  death.  Now,  God  having 
begotten  us  by  the  word  of  truth,  the  nature  that  we 
have,  as  thus  born  of  God,  possesses  tastes  and  desires 
according  to  that  word  ;  it  is  of  that  very  word.  The 
word  in  its  own  perfection  develops  this  nature,  forms 
it,  enlightens  it,  as  we  have  said  ;  but  the  nature  itself 
has  its  liberty  in  following  it.  Thus  it  was  with 
Christ ;  if  His  liberty  could  have  been  taken  away 
(which  spiritually  was  impossible),  it  would  have  been 
by  preventing  Him  from  doing  the  will  of  God  the 
Father. 

It  is  the  same  with  the  new  man  in  us  (which  is 
Christ  as  life  in  us)  which  is  created  in  us  according 
to  God  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,  produced  in 
us  by  the  word,  which  is  the  perfect  revelation  of  God 
— of  the  whole  divine  nature  in  man ;  of  which  Christ, 
the  living  Word,  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  is 
the  manifestation  and  the  pattern.  The  liberty  of 
the  new  man  is  liberty  to  do  the  will  of  God,  to 
imitate  God  in  character,  as  being  His  dear  child, 
according  as  that  character  was  presented  in  Christ. 
The  law  of  liberty  is  this  character,  as  it  is  revealed 
in  the  word,  in  which  the  new  nature  finds  its  joy  and 
satisfaction ;  even  as  it  drew  its  existence  from  the 
word  which  reveals  Him,  and  from  the  God  who  is 
therein  revealed. 

Such  is  the  "  law  of  liberty  " — the  character  of  God 
Himself  in  us  formed  by  the  operation  of  a  nature, 
beo'otten  throuorh  the  word  which  reveals  Him, 
mouldinjff  itself  upon  the  word. 

L 


358  TfiE  BOOitS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

The  first  and  most  sifting  index  of  the  inner  man 
is  the  tongue.  A  man  who  appears  to  be  in  relationship 
with  God  and  to  honour  Him,  yet  who  cannot  bridle 
his  tongue,  deceives  himself,  and  his  religion  is  vain. 

Pure  religion  before  God  and  the  Father  is  to  care 
for  those  who,  reached  in  the  tenderest  relationships 
by  the  wages  of  sin,  are  deprived  of  their  natural 
supports ;  and  to  keep  oneself  untainted  by  the  world. 
Instead  of  striving  to  exalt  oneself  and  gain  reputation 
in  a  world  of  vanity,  afar  from  God,  our  activities 
turn,  as  God  does,  to  the  sorrowful,  who  in  their 
affliction,  need  succour ;  and  we  keep  ourselves  from  a 
world  in  which  everything  is  defiling,  and  contrary  to 
the  new  nature  which  is  our  life,  and  to  the  character 
of  God  as  we  know  it  by  the  word. 

Chapter  ii.  The  apostle  now  enters  on  the  subject  of 
those  who  professed  to  believe  that  Jesus  was  Christ 
the  Lord.  Before,  in  chapter  i.,  he  had  spoken  of  the 
new  nature  in  connection  with  God :  here  the  profes- 
sion of  faith  in  Christ  is  brought  to  the  same 
touchstone — the  reality  of  the  fruits  produced  by  it  in 
contrast  with  this  world.  All  these  principles — the 
\  alue  of  the  name  of  Jesus,  the  essence  of  the  law  as 
Christ  presented  it,  and  the  law  of  liberty — are 
brought  forward  to  test  the  reality  of  their  professed 
faith,  or  to  convince  the  professor  that  he  did  not 
possess  it.  Two  things  are  reprobated  :  having  re- 
spect to  the  outward  appearance  of  persons ;  and  the 
absence  of  good  works  as  a  proof  of  the  sincerity  of 
the  profession. 

First,  then,  he  blames  respect  for  outward  appear- 
ance of  persons.  They  profess  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  yet  hold  with  the  spirit  of  the  world  !  He 
replies  that  God  has  chosen  the  poor,  making  them 
rich  in  faith  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom.  These  pro- 
fessors had  despised  them ;  these  rich  men  blasphemed 
the  name  of  Christ  and  persecuted  Christians. 


JAMES.  359 

In  the  second  place  lie  appeals  to  the  practical  sum- 
mary of  the  law,  of  which  Jesus  had  spoken — the 
royal  law.  They  broke  the  law  itself  in  favouring 
the  rich.  Now  the  law  did  not  allow  of  any  infraction 
whatsoever  of  its  commands,  because  the  authority  of 
the  legislator  was  concerned.  In  despising  the  poor, 
they  were  assuredly  not  loving  their  neighbour  as 
themselves. 

In  the  third  place  they  ought  to  walk  as  those 
whose  responsibility  was  measured  by  the  law  of 
liberty,  in  which — possessing  a  nature  which  tasted 
and  loved  that  which  was  of  God — they  were  set  free 
from  all  that  was  contrary  to  Him ;  so  that  they  could 
not  excuse  themselves  if  they  admitted  principles 
which  were  not  those  of  God  Himself.  This  intro- 
duction of  the  divine  nature  leads  the  apostle  on  to 
speak  of  the  mercy  by  which  God  glorifies  Himself. 
The  man  who  shews  no  mercy  will  find  himself  the 
object  of  the  judgment  which  he  has  loved. 

The  second  part  of  the  chapter  is  connected  with 
this ;  for  he  begins  his  discourse  on  works,  as  proofs  of 
faith,  by  speaking  of  this  mercy  which  answers  to  the 
nature  and  character  of  God,  of  which,  as  born  of  Him, 
the  true  Christian  is  made  a  partaker.  The  profession 
of  having  faith  without  this  life — the  existence  of 
which  is  proved  by  works — can  profit  no  one.  This 
is  plain  enough.  I  say  the  profession  of  having  faith, 
because  the  epistle  says  it:  "If  a  man  say  he  hath 
faith."  This  is  the  key  to  this  part  of  the  epistle. 
He  says  it :  where  is  the  proof  of  it  ?  Works  are  the 
proof ;  and  it  is  in  this  way  that  the  apostle  uses  them. 
A  man  says  he  hath  faith.  It  is  not  a  thing  that  we 
can  see.  I  say  therefore  with  reason,  "  Shew  it  me." 
This  is  the  evidence  of  faith  which  is  required  for 
man — it  is  only  by  its  fruits  that  we  make  it  evident 
to  men ;  for  the  faith  itself  cannot  be  seen.  But  if  I 
produce  these  fruits,  then  assuredly  I  have  the  root, 

11. 


360  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

without  winch  there  could  not  be  the  fruits.  Thus 
faith  does  not  shew  itself  to  others,  nor  can  I  recog- 
nise it,  without  works ;  but  works,  the  fruit  of  faith, 
prove  the  existence  of  faith. 

That  which  follows  shews  that  he  is  speaking  of  the 
profession  of  a  doctrine,  true  perhaps  in  itself — of 
certain  truths  being  confessed ;  for  it  is  a  real  faith 
looked  at — certainty  of  knowledge  and  conviction — 
which  devils  have  in  the  unity  of  the  Godhead.  They 
do  not  doubt  it;  but  there  is  no  link  at  all  between 
their  heart  and  God  by  means  of  a  new  nature — far 
indeed  from  it. 

But  the  apostle  confirms  this,  by  the  case  of  men  in 
whom  the  opposition  to  the  divine  nature  is  not  so 
apparent.  Faith,  the  recognition  of  the  truth  with 
respect  to  Christ,  is  dead  without  works ;  that  is,  such 
a  faith  as  produces  none  is  dead. 

We  see  (ver.  16)  that  the  faith  of  which  the  apostle 
speaks  is  a  profession  devoid  of  reality;  verse  19 
shews  that  it  may  be  an  unfeigned  certainty  that  the 
thing  is  true:  but  the  life  begotten  by  the  word,  so 
that  a  relationship  is  formed  between  the  soul  and 
God,  is  entirely  wanting.  Because  this  takes  place 
through  the  word,  it  is  faith ;  being  begotten  of  God 
we  have  a  new  life.  This  life  acts,  that  is  to  say, 
faith  acts,  according  to  the  relationship  with  God,  by 
works  which  flow  naturally  from  it,  and  which  bear 
testimony  to  the  faith  that  produced  them. 

From  verse  20  to  the  end  he  presents  a  fresh  proof 
of  his  thesis,  founded  on  the  last  principle  that  I  have 
mentioned.  Now  these  proofs  have  nothing  at  all  to 
do  with  the  fruits  of  a  kindly  nature  (for  there  are 
such),  appertaining  to  us  as  creatures — but  not  to  that 
life  which  has  for  its  source  the  word  of  God,  by 
which  He  begets  us.  The  fruits  of  which  the  apostle 
speaks,  bear  testimony  by  their  very  character  to  the 
faith  that  produced  them.     Abraham  offered  up  his 


JAMES.  861 

son ;  Haliab  received  the  messengers  of  Israel,  associat- 
ing herself  with  the  people  of  God  when  everything 
was  against  tliem,  and  separating  herself  from  her 
own  people  by  faith.  All  sacriticL>d  for  God,  all  given 
up  for  His  people  before  they  had  gained  one  victory, 
and  while  the  world  was  in  full  power,  such  were  the 
fruits  of  faith.  One  referred  to  God  ;  and  believed 
Him  in  the  most  absolute  way,  against  all  that  is  in 
nature  or  on  which  nature  can  count ;  the  other  owned 
God's  people,  when  all  was  against  them  ;  but  neither 
was  the  fruit  of  an  amiable  nature  or  natural  good, 
such  as  men  call  good  works.  One  was  a  father  going 
to  put  his  son  to  death,  the  other  a  bad  woman 
betraying  her  country.  Certainly  the  scripture  was 
fulfilled  which  said  that  Abraham  believed  God. 
How  could  he  have  acted  as  he  did,  if  he  had  not 
believed  Him  ?  Works  put  a  se^ii  on  his  faith  :  and 
faith  without  works  is  but  like  the  body  without  the 
soul,  an  outward  form  devoid  of  the  life  that  animates 
it.  Faith  acts  in  the  works  (without  it  the  works  are 
a  nullity,  they  are  not  those  of  tlie  new  life),  and  the 
works  complete  the  faith  which  acts  in  them ;  for  in 
spite  of  trial,  and  in  the  trial,  faith  is  in  activity. 
Works  of  law  have  no  part  in  it.  The  outward  law 
which  exacts,  is  not  a  life  which  produces  (apart  from 
this  divine  nature)  these  holy  and  loving  dispositions 
which,  having  God  and  His  people  for  their  object, 
value  nothing  else. 

James,  remark,  never  says  that  works  justify  us 
before  God;  for  God  can  see  the  faith  without  its 
works.  He  knows  that  life  is  there.  It  is  in  exercise 
with  regard  to  Him,  towards  Him,  by  trust  in  His 
word,  in  Himself,  by  receiving  His  testimony  in  spite 
of  ever^^thing  within  and  without.  This  God  sees  and 
knows.  But  when  our  fellow-creatures  are  in  ques- 
tion, when  it  must  be  said  "  shew  me,"  then  faith,  life, 
shews  itself  in  works. 

n. 


3C2  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

In  chapter  iii.  the  apostle  recurs  to  the  tongue,  the 
most  ready  index  to  the  heart,  the  proof  whether  the 
new  man  is  in  action,  whether  nature  and  self-will  are 
under  restraint.  But  there  is  hardly  anything  here 
which  needs  remark,  although  much  that  demands  the 
hearing  ear.  Where  there  is  the  divine  life,  know- 
ledge does  not  display  itself  in  mere  words,  but  in  the 
^>^^alk  and  by  works  in  which  the  meekness  of  true 
wisdom  will  be  seen.  Bitterness  and  contention  are 
not  the  fruits  of  a  wisdom  that  comes  from  above,  but 
are  earthly,  of  the  nature  of  a  man,  and  of  the  enemy. 

The  wisdom  that  comes  from  above,  having  its 
place  in  the  life,  in  the  heart,  has  three  characteristics. 
First  of  all,  the  character  of  purity,  for  the  heart  is  in 
communion  with  God — has  intercourse  with  Him 
(therefore  there  must  needs  be  this  purity).  Next,  it 
is  peaceable,  gent>e,  ready  to  yield  to  the  will  of 
another.  Then,  full  of  good  works,  acting  by  a  prin- 
ciple which,  as  its  origin  and  motives  are  from  above, 
does  good  without  partiality ;  that  is  to  say,  its  action 
is  not  guided  by  the  circumstances  which  influence 
the  flesh  and  the  passions  of  men.  For  the  same  reason 
it  is  sincere  and  unfeigned.  Purity,  absence  of  will 
and  self,  activity  in  good,  such  are  the  characteristics 
of  heavenly  wisdom. 

These  directions  to  bridle  the  tongue,  as  the  first 
movement  and  expression  of  the  will  of  the  natural 
man,  extend  to  believers.  There  are  not  to  be  (as  to 
the  inward  disposition  of  the  man)  many  teachers. 
We  all  fail ;  and  to  teach  others  and  fail  ourselves  only 
increases  our  condemnation.  For  vanity  can  easily  be 
fed  in  teaching  others ;  and  that  is  a  very  different 
thing  from  having  the  life  quickened  by  the  power  of 
trutlj.  The  Holy  Ghost  bestows  His  gifts  as  He 
pleases.  The  apostle  speaks  here  of  the  propensity  in 
any  one  to  teach,  not  of  the  gift  he  may  have  received 
for  teaching. 


JAMES.  363 

In  all  that  follows  (chap,  iv.)  we  have  still  the 
judgment  of  lyibridled  nature,  of  will  in  its  different 
forms:  contentions  that  arise  from  the  lusts  of  the 
natural  heart ;  requests  made  to  God  proceeding  from 
the  same  source ;  the  desires  of  the  tlesh  and  of  the 
mind  developing  themselves  and  finding  their  sphere 
in  the  friendship  of  the  world,  which  is  thus  enmity 
against  God.  The  nature  of  man  covets  enviously,  is 
full  of  envy  with  regard  to  others.  But  God  gives 
more  grace:  there  is  counteracting  power,  if  one  is 
content  to  be  little  and  humble,  to  be  as  nothing  in 
the  world.  The  grace  and  favour  of  God  are  with 
such  a  one ;  for  He  resists  the  proud  and  gives  grace 
to  the  humble.  Upon  this,  the  apostle  unfolds  the 
action  of  a  soul  directed  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  the 
midst  of  the  unbelieving  and  selhsh  multitude  with 
whom  it  was  associated.  (Vers.  6-10.)  For  he  still 
supposes  the  believers  whom  he  ad<lressed  to  be  in 
connection  with  the  law.  If  they  spoke  evil  of  their 
brother,  to  whom  the  law  gave  a  place  before  God, 
they  spoke  evil  of  the  law,*  according  to  which  his 
value  was  so  great.  Judgment  belonged  to  God,  who 
had  given  the  law,  and  who  would  vindicate  His  own 
authority  as  well  as  grant  deliverance  and  salvation. 

Verses  13-16.  The  same  self-will  and  forgetfulness 
of  God  are  blamed,  the  false  confidence  that  flows 
from  reckoning  upon  being  able  to  do  as  one  pleases 
— the  absence  of  dependence  on  God.  Verse  17  is  a 
general  conclusion,  founded  on  the  principle  already 
suggested  (chap.  iii.  1),  and  on  that  which  is  said  with 
regard  to  faith.  The  knowledge  of  good,  without  its 
practice,  causes  even  the  absence  of  the  work  which 
one  could  have  performed  to  be  a  positive  sin.  The 
action  of  the  new  man  is  absent,  that  of  the  old  man 
is  present ;  for  the  good  is  before  our  e^es — we  know 

*  Compare  1  Thessalonians  iv.  8,  where  the  Spirit  takes  the 
place  of  the  law  here. 

IV, 


864  THE   BOOKS  Ot'  THE  BIBLE. 

what  we  ought  to  do,  and  do  not  choose  to  do  it; 
there  is  no  inclination  to  do  it — we  will  not  do  it. 

Chapter  v.  The  two  classes  in  Israel  are  distinctly 
marked  here  in  contrast  with  one  another,  with  the 
addition  of  the  walk  which  the  Christian  ought  to 
pursue  when  chastised  by  the  Lord. 

The  apostle  gives  the  coming  of  the  Lord  as  the 
term  of  their  condition,  both  to  the  unbelieving  rich 
oppressors  in  Israel,  and  to  the  poor  believing  remnant. 
The  rich  have  heaped  up  treasures  for  the  last  days  ; 
the  oppressed  poor  are  to  be  patient  until  the  Lord 
Himself  shall  come  to  deliver  them.  Moreover,  he 
says,  deliverance  would  not  be  delayed.  The  hus- 
bandman waits  for  the  rain  and  the  time  of  harvest ; 
the  Christian  for  his  Master's  coming.  This  patience 
characterises,  as  we  have  seen,  the  walk  of  faith.  It 
had  been  witnessed  in  the  prophets ;  and  in  the  case 
of  others  we  count  them  happy  which  endure  alHic- 
tions  for  the  Lord's  sake.  Job  shews  us  the  ways  of 
the  Lord :  he  needed  to  have  patience,  but  the  end  of 
the  Lord  was  blessing  and  tender  mercy  towards  him. 

This  expectation  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord  was  a 
solemn  vvaruinof,  and  at  the  same  time  the  strono-est 
encouragement,  but  one  which  maintained  the  true 
character  of  the  Christian's  practical  life.  It  shewed 
also  what  the  selfishness  of  man's  will  would  end  in, 
and  it  restrained  all  action  of  that  will  in  believers. 
The  feelings  of  brethren  towards  each  other  were 
placed  under  the  safeguard  of  this  same  truth.  They 
were  not  to  have  a  spirit  of  discontent,  or  to  murmur 
against  others  who  were  perhaps  more  favoured  in 
their  outward  circumstances:  "the  judge  stood  before 
the  dour." 

Oaths  displayed  still  more  the  forgetfulness  of  God, 
and  the  actings  consequently  of  the  self-will  of  nature. 
"  Yea,"  ought  to  be  yea,  ^nd  "  Nay,"  nay.  The  act- 
ings of  the  divine  nature  in  the  consciousness  of  the 


JAMKS.  365 

presence  of  God,  and  the  repression  of  all  human  will 
and  of  sinful  nature,  is  what  the  writer  of  this  epistle 
desires. 

Now  there  were  resources  in  Christianity  both  for 
joy  and  sorrow.  If  any  were  afflicted,  let  them  pray 
(God  was  ready  to  hear) ;  if  happy,  let  them  sing ;  if 
sick,  send  for  the  elders  of  the  assembly,  who  would 
pray  for  the  sufferer  and  anoint  him,  and  the  chastise- 
ment would  be  removed,  and  the  sins  for  which,  accord- 
ing to  God's  government,  he  was  thus  chastised,  would 
be  forgiven  as  regards  that  government ;  for  it  is  that 
only  which  is  here  spoken  of. 

The  imputation  of  sin  for  condemnation  has  no 
place  here.  The  efficacy  of  the  prayer  of  faith  is  set 
before  us  ;  but  it  is  in  connection  with  the  maintenance 
of  sincerity  of  heart.  The  govermnent  of  God  is 
exercised  with  regard  to  His  people.  He  chastises 
them  by  sickness  ;  and  it  is  important  that  truth  in 
the  inner  man  should  be  maintained.  Men  hide  their 
faults ;  they  desire  to  walk  as  if  all  were  goin^:  on 
well ;  but  God  judges  His  people.  He  tries  the  heart 
and  the  reins.  They  are  held  in  bonds  of  affliction. 
God  shews  them  their  faults,  or  their  unbroken  self- 
will.  Man  is  chastened  also  with  pain  upon  his  bed, 
and  the  multitude  of  his  bones  with  strong  pain.'" 
(Job  xxxiii.  19.)  And  now  the  church  of  God  intervenes 
in  charity,  and  according  to  its  own  order,  by  means 
of  the  elders;  the  sick  man  commits  himself  to  God, 
confessing  his  state  of  need ;  the  charity  of  the  church 
acts  and  brink's  him  who  is  chastised,  accordino-  to 
this  relationship,  before  God — for  that  is  where  the 
church  is.  Faith  pleads  this  relationship  of  grace ; 
the  sick  man  is  healed.  If  sins — and  not  merely  the 
need  of  discipline — were  the  cause  of  his  chastisement, 
those  sins  will  not  hinder  his  being  healed,  they  shall 
be  forgiven  him. 

The  apostle  then  presents  the  principle  in  general 
V. 


366  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

as  the  course  for  all,  namely,  to  open  their  hearts  to 
each  other,  in  order  to  maintain  truth  in  the  inner 
man  as  to  oneself ;  and  to  pray  for  each  other  in  order 
that  charity  should  be  in  full  exercise  with  regard  to 
the  faults  of  others;  grace  and  truth  being  thus 
spiritually  formed  in  the  church,  and  a  perfect  union 
of  heart  among  Christians,  so  that  even  their  faults 
are  an  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  charity  (as  in  God 
towards  us),  and  entire  confidence  in  each  other, 
according  to  that  charity,  such  as  is  felt  towards  a 
restoring  and  pardoning  God.  What  a  beautiful 
picture  is  presented  of  divine  principles  animating 
men  and  causing  them  to  act  according  to  the  nature 
of  God  Himself,  and  the  influence  of  His  love  upon 
the  heart. 

We  may  remark,  that  it  is  not  confession  to  the 
elders  that  is  spoken  of.  That  would  have  been  con- 
fidence in  men — official  confidence.  God  desires  the 
operation  of  divine  charity  in  all.  Confession  to  one 
another  shews  the  condition  of  the  church,  and  God 
would  have  the  church  to  be  in  such  a  state,  that  love 
should  so  reign  in  it,  that  they  should  be  so  near  to 
God,  as  to  be  able  to  treat  the  transgressor  according 
to  the  grace  they  know  in  Him  :  and  that  this  love 
should  be  so  realised,  tKat  perfect  inward  sincerity 
should  be  produced  by  the  confidence  and  operation  of 
grace.  Official  confession  destroys  all  this — is  con- 
trary to  it.  How  divine  the  wisdom  which  omitted 
confession  when  speaking  of  the  elders,  but  which 
commands  it  as  the  living  and  voluntary  impression 
of  the  heart ! 

This  leads  us  also  to  the  value  of  the  energetic 
prayers  of  the  righteous  man.  It  is  his  nearness  to 
God,  the  sense  that  he  has  consequently  of  that  which 
God  is,  which  (through  grace  and  the  operation  of  the 
Spirit)  gives  him  this  power.  God  takes  account  of 
men,  and  that  according  to  the  infinitude  of  His  love. 


JAMES.  367 

He  takes  account  of  the  trust  in  Himself,  the  faith  in 
His  word,  shewn  by  one  who  thinks  and  acts  accord- 
ing to  a  just  appreciation  of  what  He  is.  That  is 
always  faith,  which  makes  sensible  to  us  that  which 
we  do  not  see — God  Himself,  who  acts  in  accordance 
with  the  revelation  that  He  has  givon  of  Himself. 
Now  the  man  who  in  the  practical  sense  is  righteous 
through  grace,  is  near  to  God ;  as  being  righteous,  he 
has  not  to  do  with  God  for  himself  with  regard  to  sin, 
which  would  keep  his  heart  at  a  distance ;  his  heart  is 
thus  free  to  draw  nigh  to  God,  according  to  His  holy 
nature  on  behalf  of  others ;  and,  moved  by  the  divine 
nature,  which  animates  him  and  which  enables  him  to 
appreciate  God,  he  seeks,  according  to  the  activity  of 
that  nature,  that  his  prayers  may  prevail  with  God, 
whether  for  the  good  of  others  or  for  the  glory  of  God 
Himself  in  his  service.  And  God  answers,  according 
to  that  same  nature,  by  blessing  this  trust  and  respond- 
ing to  it,  in  order  to  manifest  what  He  is  for  faith,  to 
encourage  it  by  sanctioning  its 'activity,  putting  His 
seal  on  the  man  who  walks  by  faith.* 

The  Spirit  of  God  acts  we  know  in  all  this ;  but  the 
apostle  does  not  here  speak  of  Him,  being  occupied 
with  the  practical  effect,  and  presenting  the  man  as  he 
is  seen,  acting  under  the  influence  of  this  nature  in  its 
positive  energy  with  regard  to  God,  and  near  to  Him, 
so  that  it  acts  in  all  its  intensity,  moved  by  the 
power  of  that  nearness.  But  if  we  consider  the 
action  of  the  Spirit,  these  thoughts  are  confirmed. 
The  righteous  man  does  not  grieve  the  Holy  Ghost, 

*  It  is  well  to  remember  that  this  is  carried  out  in  respect  of 
the  governinj]^  ways  of  God,  and  thus  under  the  title  of  Lord — a 
place  which  Christ  specially  holds,  though  here  the  term  is  used 
generally.  Compare  verse  11,  and  the  general  Jewish  reference 
of  the  passage.  To  us  we  have  one  God  the  Father,  and  one 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  become  Lord  and  Christ,  and  every 
tongue  shall  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord. 


368  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

and  the  Spirit  works  in  him  according  to  His  own 
power,  not  having  to  set  his  conscience  right  with 
God,  but  acting  in  the  man  according  to  the  power  of 
his  communion. 

Finally,  we  have  the  assurance  that  the  ardent  and 
energetic  prayer  of  the  righteous  man  has  great 
efficacy:  it  is  the  prayer  of  faith,  which  knows  God 
and  counts  upon  Him  and  draws  near  Him. 

The  case  of  Elijah  is  interesting,  as  shewing  us  (and 
there  are  other  examples  of  the  same  kind)  how  the 
Holy  Ghost  acts  inwardly  in  a  man  \A'here  we  see  the 
outward  manifestation  of  power.  In  the  history  we 
have  Elijah's  declaration :  "  Jehovah  liveth,  there  shall 
not  be  dew  nor  rain  these  years,  but  according  to  my 
word."  This  is  the  authority,  the  power,  exercised  in 
the  name  of  Jehovah.  In  our  epistle  the  secret 
operation,  that  which  passes  between  the  soul  and 
God,  is  set  forth.  He  prayed,  and  God  heard  him. 
We  have  the  same  testimony  on  the  part  of  Jesus  at 
the  tomb  of  Lazarus.  Only  that  in  the  latter  case  we 
have  the  two  together,  except  that  the  prayer  itself  is 
not  given — unless  in  the  unutterable  groan  of  Christ's 
spirit. 

Comparing  Galatians  ii.  with  the  history  in  Acts 
XV.,  we  find  a  revelation  from  God  which  determined 
Paul's  conduct,  whatever  outward  motives  there  may 
have  been  which  were  known  to  all.  By  such  cases 
as  those  which  the  apostle  proposes  to  the  church,  and 
those  of  Elijah  and  the  Lord  Jesus,  a  God,  living, 
acting,  and  interesting  Himself  in  all  that  happens 
among  His  people,  is  revealed  to  us. 

There  is  also  the  activity  of  love  towards  those  who 
err.  If  any  one  departs  from  the  truth,  and  they 
bring  him  back  by  grace,  let  it  be  known  that  to  bring 
back  a  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  ways  is  the  exer- 
cise— simple  as  our  action  in  it  may  be — of  the  power 
that  delivers  a  soul  from  death  ;  accordingly  all  those 


JAMES,  869 

sins  which  spread  themselves  in  their  odious  nature 
before  the  eyes  of  God,  and  offended  His  glory  and  His 
heart  by  their  presence  in  His  universe,  are  covered. 
The  soul  being  brought  to  God  by  grace,  all  its  sins 
are  pardoned,  appear  no  more,  are  blotted  out  from 
Viefore  the  face  of  God.  The  apostle  (as  throughout) 
does  not  speak  of  the  power  that  acts  in  this  work  of 
love,  but  of  the  fact.  He  applies  it  to  cases  that  had 
happened  among  them  ;  but  he  establishes  a  universal 
principle  with  regard  to  the  activity  of  grace  in  the 
heart  that  is  animated  by  it.  The  erring  soul  is  saved ; 
the  sin  is  put  away  from  before  God. 

Charity  in  the  assembly  suppresses,  so  to  speak,  the 
sins  which  otherwise  would  destroy  union  and  over- 
come that  charity  in  the  assembly,  and  appear  in  all 
their  deformity  and  all  their  malignancy  before  God. 
Whereas,  being  met  by  love  in  the  assembly,  they  go 
no  farther,  are,  as  it  were  (as  regards  the  state  of 
things  before  God  in  this  world),  dissolved  and  put 
away  by  the  charity  which  they  could  not  vanquish. 
The  sin  is  vanquished  by  the  love  which  dealt  with  it, 
disappears,  is  swallowed  up  by  it.  Thus  love  covers 
a  multitude  of  sins.  Here  it  is  its  action  in  the 
conversion  of  a  sinner. 


yoL.  y.  B  B 


I  PETER. 

The  First  Epistle  of  Peter  is  addressed  to  believers 
among  the  dispersed  of  Israel  found  in  those  provinces 
of  Asia  Minor  which  are  named  in  the  first  verse  ;  the 
Second  Epistle  declares  itself  to  be  a  second  addressed 
to  the  same  persons:  so  that  the  one  and  the  other 
were  destined  for  the  Jews  of  Asia  Minor  (that  is,  to 
those  among  them  who  had  the  same  precious  faith  as 
the  apostle). 

The  First  Epistle  is  founded  on  the  doctrine  of  the 
heavenly  calling  (I  do  not  say  of  the  assembly  on 
earth,*  which  is  not  brought  before  us  here)  in  con- 
trast with  the  portion  of  the  Jews  on  the  earth.  It 
presents  Christians,  and  in  particular  Christians  among 
the  Jews,  as  pilgrims  and  strangers  on  earth.  The 
conduct  suited  to  such  is  more  largely  developed  than 
the  doctrine.  The  Lord  Jesus,  who  was  Himself  a 
pilgrim  and  a  stranger  here,  is  presented  as  a  pattern 
in  more  than  one  aspect.  Both  epistles  pursue  the 
righteous  government  of  God  from  the  beginning  to 
the  consummation  of  all  things,  in  which  the  ele- 
ments melt  with  fervent  heat,  and  there  are  new 
heavens  and  a  new  earth,  in  which  righteousness 
dwells.  The  first  gives  the  government  of  God  in 
favour  of  believers,  the  second  in  the  judgment  of  the 
wicked. 

Nevertheless,  in  presenting  the  heavenly  calling,  the 
apostle  necessarily  presents  salvation — the  deliverance 

*  I  add  "on  earth"  here,  because  the  assembly,  as  built  by 
Jesus  Himself  and  not  yet  finished,  is  spoken  of  in  chapter  ii., 
"V^here  the  living  stones  come  to  Christ. 


I  PETER.  371 

of  the  soul  in  contrast  with  the  temporal  deliverance 
of  the  Jews. 

The  following  is  the  description  which  the  Spirit 
gives  of  these  believers.  They  are  elect,  and  that 
according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father. 
Israel  was  a  nation  elected  on  the  earth  by  Jehovah. 
Here,  it  is  those  who  were  foreknown  of  the  Father. 
The  means  by  which  their  election  is  carried  out  is 
sanctification  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  are  really  set 
apart  b}"  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  Israel  was  set  apart 
by  ordinances ;  but  these  are  sanctified  unto  the  obedi- 
ence of  Jesus  Christ  and  for  the  sprinkling  of  His 
blood,  that  is  to  say,  on  the  one  hand  to  obey  as  He 
obeyed,  and  on  the  other  to  be  sprinkled  with  His 
blood  and  thus  to  be  perfectly  clear  before  God. 
Israel  had  been  set  apart  for  the  obedience  of  the  law, 
and  for  that  blood  which,  while  it  announced  death  as 
the  sanction  of  its  authority,  could  never  cleanse  the 
soul  from  sin. 

Such  was  the  Christian's  position.  The  apostle 
wishes  them  grace  and  peace — the  known  portion  of 
believers.  He  reminds  them  of  the  blessings  with 
which  God  had  blessed  them,  blessing  God  who  had 
bestowed  them.  Believing  Israelites  knew  Him  now, 
not  in  the  character  of  Jehovah,  but  as  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

That  which  the  apostle  presents  as  the  fruit  of  His 
grace,  is  a  hope  be3'ond  this  world  ;  not  the  inheritance 
of  Canaan,  appropriate  to  man  living  on  the  earth, 
which  was  the  hope  of  Israel,  and  is  still  that  of  the 
unbelieving  nation.  The  mercy  of  God  had  begotten 
them  again  for  a  living  hope  by  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ  from  out  of  the  dead.  This  resurrection 
shewed  them  a  p€w:tion  in  another  world,  and  the 
power  which  brought  man  into  it,  although  he  had 
been  subjected  to  death :  he  would  enter  it  by  resur- 
rection, through  the  glorious  triumph  of  the  Saviour, 

I, 


372  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

to  share  an  inheritance  that  is  incorruptible,  undefiled, 
and  that  fadeth  not  away.  The  apostle  is  not  speak- 
inj^  of  our  resurrection  with  Christ;  he  views  the 
Christian  as  a  pilgrim  here,  encouraged  by  the  triumph 
of  Christ  Himself  in  resurrection,  which  animated 
\\\m  by  the  consciousness  that  there  was  a  world  of 
light  and  happiness  before  him,  and  a  power  which 
would  bring  him  into  this  world.  Consequently  the 
inheritance  is  spoken  of  as  "  reserved  in  heaven."  In 
the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  we  are  seated  in  the 
heavens  in  Christ,  and  the  inheritance  is  that  of  all 
things  of  which  Christ  Himself  is  heir.  But  the 
Christian  is  also  in  fact  a  pilgrim  and  a  stranger  on 
the  earth ;  and  it  is  a  strong  consolation  to  us,  in  our 
pilgrimage,  to  see  this  heavenly  inheritance  before  us, 
as  a  certain  pledge  of  our  own  entrance  into  it. 

Another  inestimable  consolation  is  added.  If  the 
inheritance  is  preserved  in  heaven  for  us,  we  are  kept 
by  the  power  of  God  all  through  our  pilgrimage  that 
we  may  enjoy  it  at  the  end.  Sweet  thought! — we 
are  kept  here  below  through  all  our  dangers  and  diffi- 
culties ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  inheritance  there, 
where  there  is  no  defilement  or  possibility  of  decay. 

But  it  is  by  moral  means  that  this  power  preserves 
us  (and  it  is  in  this  way  that  Peter  always  speaks), 
by  the  operation  in  us  of  grace,  which  fixes  the  heart 
on  objects  that  keep  it  in  connection  with  God  and 
with  His  promise.  (Compare  2  Peter  i.  4.)  We  are 
kept  by  the  power  of  God  through,  faith.  It  is,  God 
be  praised,  the  power  of  God  Himself ;  but  it  acts  by 
sustaining  faith  in  the  heart,  maintaining  it  in  spite 
of  all  temptations  above  all  the  defilement  of  the 
world,  and  filling  the  affection  with  heavenly  things. 
Peter,  however,  always  occupied  with  the  ways  of  God 
respecting  this  world,  only  looks  at  the  share  that 
believers  will  have  in  this  salvation,  this  heavenly 
glory,  when  it  shall  be  manifested  ;  when  God  will,  by 


I   PETER.  873 

this  glory,  establish  His  authority  in  blessing  on  the 
earth.  It  is  indeed  the  heavenly  glory,  but  the 
heavenly  glory  manifested  as  the  means  of  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  supreme  government  of  God  on  eartb, 
for  His  own  glory  and  for  the  blessing  of  the  whole 
world. 

It  is  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  times. 
This  word  "ready"  is  important.  Our  apostle  says 
also  that  the  judgment  is  ready  to  be  revealed. 
Christ  is  glorified  personally,  has  conquered  all  His 
enemies,  has  accomplished  redemption.  He  only  waits 
for  one  thing,  namely,  that  God  should  make  His 
enemies  His  footstool.  He  has  taken  His  seat  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,  because  He  has 
accomplished  everything  as  to  glorifying  God  where 
sin  was.  It  is  the  actual  salvation  of  souls — the 
gathering  together  of  His  own,  which  is  not  yet 
finished  (2  Pet.  iii.  9,  15) ;  but  when  once  all  they  who 
are  to  share  it  are  brought  in,  there  is  nothing  to  wait 
for  as  regards  the  salvation,  that  is  to  say,  the  glory 
in  which  the  redeemed  will  appear  ;*  nor  consequently 
as  regards  the  judgment  of  the  wicked  on  earth, 
which  will  be  consummated  by  the  manifestation  of 
Ohrist.-f-  All  is  ready.  This  thought  is  sweet  for  us 
ill  our  days  of  patience,  but  full  of  solemnity  when  we 
reflect  upon  the  judgment. 

Yes,  as  the  apostle  says,  we  rejoice  greatly  in  this 
salvation,  which  is  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last 
times.     We  are  waiting  for  it.     It  is  a  time  of  rest,  of 


*  The  doctrine  of  the  gathering  together  of  the  saints  to 
Jesua  in  the  air,  when  they  go  to  meet  Him,  forms  no  part  of 
Peter's  teaching,  any  more  than  does  that  of  the  assembly  on 
earth  with  which  it  is  connected.  He  speaks  of  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  saints  in  glory,  because  he  is  occupied  with  the  ways 
of  God  towards  the  earth,  although  he  is  so  in  connection  with 
Christianity. 

f  See  2  Thessalonians  i.  9,  10. 
I. 


374  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  earth's  blessing,  of  the  full  manifestation  of  Hi.s 
glory  who  is  worthy  of  it,  who  was  humbled  and  who 
suffered  for  us ;  the  time  when  the  light  and  the  glory 
of  God  in  Christ  will  illumine  the  world,  and  first 
bind  and  then  chase  away  all  its  evil. 

This  is  our  portion :  abundant  joy  in  the  salvation 
about  to  be  revealed,  and  in  which  we  may  always 
rejoice  ;  although,  if  it  be  needed  for  our  good,  we  may 
be  in  sorrow  through  divers  temptations.  But  it  is 
only  for  a  very  little  while — only  a  light  attiiction, 
which  passes  away,  and  which  only  comes  upon  us  if 
it  be  needful,  in  order  that  the  precious  trial  of  faith 
may  have  its  result  in  praise  and  honour  and  glory 
at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  whom  we  are 
waiting.  That  is  the  end  of  all  our  sorrows  and  trials  ; 
transitory  and  light  as  they  are,  in  comparison  with 
the  vast  result  of  the  excellent  and  eternal  glory 
towards  which  they  are  leading  us,  according  to  the 
wisdom  of  God  and  the  need  of  our  souls.  The  heart 
attaches  itself  to  Jesus :  He  will  appear. 

We  love  Him,  although  we  have  never  seen  Him. 
In  Him,  though  now  we  see  Him  not,  we  rejoice  with 
joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  It  is  this  which 
decides  and  forms  the  heart,  which  fixes  it  and  fills  it 
with  joy,  however  it  may  be  with  us  in  this  life.  To 
our  hearts  it  is  He  who  fills  all  the  glory.  By  grace 
I  shall  be  glorified,  I  shall  have  the  glory ;  but  I  love 
Jesus,  my  heart  pants  for  His  presence — desires  to  see 
Him.  Moreover  we  shall  be  like  Him,  and  He  per- 
fectly glorified.  The  apostle  may  well  say,  "  unspeak- 
able and  full  of  glory."  The  heart  can  desire  nothing 
else :  and  if  some  light  afflictions  are  needful  for  us, 
we  endure  them  gladly,  since  they  are  a  means  of 
forming  us  for  the  glory.  And  we  can  rejoice  at  the 
thought  of  Christ's  appearing;  for  in  receiving  Him, 
unseen,  into  our  heart  we  receive  the  salvation  of  our 
soul.     This  is  the  object  and  the  end  of  faith;  far 


I  PETER  S?5 

more  precious  than  the  temporal  deliverances  that 
Israel  enjoyed,  although  the  latter  were  tokens  of  the 
favour  of  God. 

The  apostle  goes  on  to  develop  the  three  successive 
.*-teps  of  the  revelation  of  this  grace  of  salvation — the 
full  and  entire  deliverance  from  the  consequences,  the 
fruits,  and  the  misery  of  sin :  the  prophecies ;  the 
testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven ; 
the  manifestation  of  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  when  the 
deliverance  that  had  been  already  announced  should 
be  fully  accomplished. 

It  is  interesting  to  see  here  how  the  rejection  of  the 
Messiah,  according  to  Jewish  hopes,  already  antici- 
pated and  announced  in  the  prophets,  necessarily 
made  way  for  a  salvation  which  brought  with  it  that 
of  the  soul  likewise.  Jesus  was  no  more  seen;  the 
earthly  portion  was  not  realised  by  His  first  coming; 
salvation  was  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  times.  But 
thus  a  salvation  of  the  soul  was  unfolded,  the  whole 
extent  of  which  would  be  realised  in  the  glory  about 
to  be  revealed  ;  for  it  was  the  spiritual  joy  of  the  soul 
in  a  heavenly  Jesus  who  was  not  seen,  and  who  in 
His  death  had  accomplished  expiation  for  sin,  and  in 
His  resurrection,  according  to  the  power  of  the  life  of 
the  Son  of  God,  had  begotten  again  to  a  living  hope. 
By  faith  then  this  salvation  was  received — this  true 
deliverance.  It  was  not  yet  the  glory  and  the  out- 
ward rest;  that  salvation  would  indeed  take  place 
when  Jesus  appeared,  but  meantime  the  soul  already 
enjoyed  b}^  faith  this  perfect  rest,  and  in  hope  even 
the  glory  itself. 

Now  the  prophets  had  announced  the  grace  of  God 
which  was  to  be  accomplished  for  believers,  and  which 
even  now  imparts  to  the  soul  the  enjoyment  of  that 
salvation ;  and  they  had  searched  into  their  own 
prophecies,  which  they  had  received  by  inspiration 
from  God,  seeking  to  understand  what  time,  and  what 

L 


376  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

manner  of  time,  the  Spirit  indicated,  when  He  testi- 
fied beforehand  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the 
glories  that  should  follow.  For  the  Spirit  spoke  of 
them  both  by  the  prophets,  and  signified  consequently 
more  than  a  temporal  deliverance  in  Israel ;  for  the 
Messiah  was  to  suffer.  And  they  discovered  that  it 
was  not  for  themselves  nor  for  their  own  times,  that 
the  Spirit  of  Christ  announced  these  truths  with 
regard  to  the  Messiah,  but  for  Christians.  But  Chris- 
tians, while  receiving  the  salvation  of  the  soul  by  the 
revelation  of  a  Christ  seated  in  heaven  after  His 
sufferings  and  coming  again  in  glory,  have  not  re- 
ceived those  glories  which  were  revealed  to  the  pro- 
phets. These  things  have  been  reported  with  great 
and  divine  plainness  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down 
from  heaven  after  the  death  of  Jesus :  but  the  Spirit 
does  not  bestow  the  glory  itself  in  which  the  Lord 
will  appear;  He  has  only  declared  it.  Christians  have 
therefore  to  gird  up  the  loins  of  their  mind,  to  be 
sober,  and  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  (in 
effect)  will  be  brought  to  them  at  the  revelation  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Such  are  the  three  successive  steps  in 
God's  dealings:  the  prediction  of  the  events  relating 
to  Christ,  which  went  altogether  beyond  Jewish 
blessings;  the  things  reported  by  the  Spirit;  the 
accomplishment  of  the  things  promised  when  Christ 
is  revealed. 

That,  then,  which  the  apostle  presents,  is  a  participa- 
tion in  the  glory  of  Christ  when  He  shall  be  revealed ; 
that  salvation,  of  which  the  prophets  had  spoken, 
which  was  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  days.  But  mean- 
time God  had  begotten  again  the  believing  Jews  to  a 
living  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from 
among  the  dead ;  and  by  means  of  His  sufferings  had 
made  them  comprehend  that  even  now,  while  waiting 
for  the  revelation  of  the  2:Iory,  realising  it  in  the 
Person  of  Jesus,  they  enjoyed  a  salvation  of  the  soul 


1  PETER.  877 

before  which  the  deliverances  of  Israel  faded  away 
and  might  be  forgotten.  It  was  indeed  the  salvation 
"ready  to  be  revealed"  in  all  its  fulness;  but  as  yet 
they  only  possessed  it  in  respect  of  the  soul.  But, 
being  detached  from  the  manifestation  of  the  earthly 
glory,  this  salvation  had  a  yet  more  spiritual  cha- 
racter. Therefore  they  were  to  gird  up  their  loins, 
kvhile  waiting  for  the  revelation  of  Jesus,  and  to 
acknowledge  with  thanksgiving  that  they  were  in 
possession  of  the  end  of  their  faith.  They  were  in 
relationship  with  God. 

When  announcing  these  things  by  the  ministry  of 
the  prophets,  God  had  Christians  in  view,  and  not  the 
prophets  themselves.  This  grace  was  in  due  time  to 
be  communicated  to  believers  ;  but  meantime,  for  faith 
and  for  the  soul,  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from 
heaven  bore  testimony  to  it.  It  was  to  be  brought  at 
the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ,  which  was  the  guarantee  of  the  accom- 
plishment of  all  the  promises  and  the  power  of  life  for 
their  enjoyment,  had  begotten  them  again  unto  a 
living  hope;  but  the  right  to  enjoy  the  effect  of  the 
promise  was  founded  on  another  truth.  To  this  the 
exhortations  conduct  us.  They  were  to  walk  as 
obedient  children,  no  longer  following  the  lusts  that 
had  led  them  in  the  days  of  their  ignorance.  Called 
by  Him  who  is  holy,  they  were  to  be  holy  in  all  their 
conversation,  as  it  is  written.  Moreover,  if  they 
called  on  the  Father,  who,  regardless  of  man's  pre- 
tension to  respect,  judged  according  to  every  one's 
work,  they  were  to  pass  the  time  of  their  sojourn  here 
in  fear. 

Observe,  here,  that  he  is  not  speaking  of  the  final 
judgment  of  the  soul.  In  that  sense  "the  Father 
judgeth  no  man,  but  has  committed  all  judgment  to 
tlie  Son."  The  thing  spoken  of  here  is  the  daily 
judgment  of  God's  government  in  this  world,  exercised 

L 


378  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

with  regard  to  His  children.  Accordingly  it  says, 
"the  time  of  your  sojourn  here."  It  is  a  judgment 
applied  to  christian  life.  The  fear  spoken  of  is  not 
an  uncertainty  as  to  salvation  and  redemption.  It  is 
a  fear  founded  on  the  certainty  that  one  is  redeemed ; 
and  the  immense  price,  the  infinite  value  of  the  means 
employed  for  our  redemption — namely,  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb,  without  blemish  and  without  spot — is  the 
motive  for  fearing  God  during  our  pilgrimage.  We 
have  been  redeemed  at  the  cost  of  the  blood  of  Jesus 
from  our  vain  conversation:  can  we  then  still  walk 
according  to  the  principles  from  which  we  have  been 
thus  delivered  ?  Such  a  price  for  our  deliverance 
demands  that  we  should  walk  with  circumspection 
and  gravity  before  the  Father,  with  whom  we  desire 
to  have  intercourse  both  as  privilege  and  spiritual 
relationship. 

The  apostle  then  applies  this  truth  to  the  Chris- 
tians whom  he  was  i|,ddressing.  The  Lamb  had  been 
ordained  in  the  counsels  of  God  before  the  world  was 
made;  but  He  was  manifested  in  the  last  days  for 
believers:  and  these  are  presented  in  their  true  cha- 
racter, they  believe  in  God  by  Jesus — by  this  Lamb. 
It  is  not  by  means  of  the  creation  that  they  believe : 
although  creation  is  a  testimony  to  His  glory,  it  gives 
no  rest  to  the  conscience  and  does  not  tell  of  a  place  in 
heav^en.  It  is  not  by  means  of  providence,  which,  even 
while  directing  all  things,  yet  leaves  the  government  of 
God  in  such  profound  darkness.  Nor  is  it  by  means  of 
the  revelation  of  God  on  Mount  Sinai  under  the  name 
of  Jehovah  and  the  terror  connected  with  a  broken  law. 
It  is  by  means  of  Jesus,  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  we 
believe ;  observe  that  it  is  not  said,  "  in  Him,"  but  by 
Him  in  God.  We  know  God  as  the  One  who,  when 
we  were  sinners  and  dead  in  our  trespasses  and  sins, 
loved  us,  and  gave  this  precious  Saviour  to  come  down 
even  into  the  death  in  which  we  were,  to  take  part  in 


I  PETER.  S79 

our  position  as  lying  under  this  judgment,  and  die  as 
the  Lamb  of  God.  We  believe  in  God  who  by  His 
power,  when  Jesus  was  there  for  us — in  our  stead — 
raised  Him  up  from  the  dead  and  gave  Him  glory. 
It  is  in  a  Saviour- God  therefore,  a  God  who  exercises 
His  power  in  our  behalf,  that  we  believe  by  Jesus,  so 
that  our  faith  and  our  hope  are  in  God.  It  does  not 
say  in  something  before  God,  but  in  God  Himself. 
Where  then  shall  any  cause  for  fear  or  distrust  arise 
as  regards  God,  if  our  faith  and  hope  are  in  Himself  ? 
This  changes  everything.  The  aspect  in  which  we 
view  God  Himself  is  entirely  changed  ;  and  this  change 
is  founded  on  that  which  establishes  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  accepting  us  as  cleansed  from  all  sin,  the 
love  of  God  in  blessing  us  perfectly  in  Jesus,  whom 
His  power  has  raised  from  the  dead  and  glorified — the 
power  according  to  which  He  blesses  us.  Our  faith 
and  our  hope  are  in  God  Himself. 

This  places  us  in  the  most  intimate  of  relationships 
with  the  rest  of  the  redeemed  :  objects  of  the  same 
love,  washed  by  the  same  precious  blood,  redeemed  by 
the  same  Lamb,  they  become — to  those  whose  hearts 
are  purified  by  the  reception  of  the  truth  through  the 
Spirit — the  objects  of  a  tender  brotherly  love,  a  love 
unfeigned.  They  are  our  brethren.  Let  us  then  love 
one  another  fervently  with  a  pure  heart.  But  this  is 
based  on  another  essentially  vital  principle.  It  is  a 
new  nature  which  acts  in  this  afifection.  If  we  are  re- 
deemed by  the  precious  blood  of  the  Lamb  without 
spot,  we  are  born  of  the  incorruptible  seed  of  the 
word  of  God,  which  lives  and  abides  for  ever.  For 
the  flesh  is  but  grass,  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower 
of  grass.  The  grass  withers,  its  flower  falls,  but  the 
word  of  the  Lord  abides  for  ever.  This  is  the  word 
of  the  gospel  which  has  been  preached  unto  us.  It  is 
an  eternal  principle  of  blessing.  The  believer  is  not 
born  after  the  flesh  to  enjoy  temporary  rights  and 

I. 


380  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

blessings,  as  was  the  case  with  a  Jew,  but  of  an 
incorruptible  seed,  a  principle  of  life  as  unchangeable 
as  the  word  of  God  Himself.  The  prophet  had  told 
them  so,  when  comforting  the  people  of  God ;  all 
flesh,  the  nation  itself,  was  but  withered  grass.  God 
was  unchangeable,  and  the  word  which  by  its  immut- 
able certainty  secured  divine  blessings  to  the  objects 
of  God's  favour,  wrought  in  the  heart  to  beget  a  life 
as  immortal  and  incorruptible  as  the  word  which  is 
its  source. 

Thus  cleansed  therefore  and  bom  of  the  word,  they 
were  to  put  off  all  fraud,  hypocrisy,  envy,  slander; 
and,  as  new-born  babes,  to  seek  for  this  milk  of  the 
understanding,  in  order  to  grow  thereby  (for  the  word 
is  the  milk  of  the  child,  as  it  was  the  seed  of  its  life) ; 
and  we  are  to  receive  it  as  babes  in  all  simplicity,  if 
in  truth  we  have  felt  that  the  Lord  is  good  and  full  of 
grace.  It  is  not  Sinai  (where  the  Lord  God  declared 
His  law  from  the  midst  of  the  fire,  so  that  they 
entreated  not  to  hear  His  voice  any  more),  to  which  I 
am  come,  or  from  which  the  Lord  is  speaking.  If  I 
have  tasted  and  understood  that  the  Lord  acts  in 
grace,  that  He  is  love  towards  me,  and  that  His  word 
is  the  expression  of  that  grace,  even  as  it  communi- 
cates life,  I  shall  desire  to  feed  on  this  milk  of  the 
miderstanding,  which  the  believer  enjoys  in  proportion 
to  his  simplicity ;  that  good  word  which  announces  to 
me  nothing  but  grace,  and  the  God  whom  I  need  as 
all  grace,  full  of  grace,  acting  in  grace,  as  revealing 
Himself  to  me  in  this  character — a  character  which 
He  can  never  cease  to  maintain  towards  me,  making 
me  a  partaker  of  His  holiness. 

I  now  know  the  Lord  Himself:  I  have  tasted  that 
which  He  is.  Moreover  this  is  still  in  contrast  with 
the  leoral  condition  of  the  Jew,  althouo-h  it  is  the 
fulfilment  of  that  which  the  Psalms  and  the  prophets 
had  declared  (the  resurrection  having  plainly  revealed 


I   PETER.  381 

in  addition  a  heavenly  hope).  It  was  they  themselves 
who  were  now  the  spiritual  house,  the  holy  priesthood. 
They  came  to  the  Living  Stone,  rejected  indeed  of 
men,  but  chosen  of  God  and  precious,  and  they  were 
built  up  on  Him  as  living  stones.  The  apostle  delights 
in  this  word  "  living."  It  was  to  hiin  the  Father  had 
revealed  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  the  living  God. 
No  one  else  had  then  confessed  Him  as  such,  and  the 
Lord  told  him  that  on  this  rock  (that  is,  on  tlie  Person 
of  the  Son  of  God  in  power  of  life,  manifested  in  the 
resurrection,  which  declared  Him  to  be  such)  He  would 
build  His  assembly.  Peter,  by  his  faith,  participated 
in  the  nature  of  this  living  rock.  Here  then  (chap, 
ii.  5)  he  extends  this  character  to  all  believers,  and 
exhibits  the  holy  house  built  on  the  Living  Stone, 
which  God  Himself  had  laid  as  the  chief  corner-stone 
elect  and  precious.  Whosoever  believed  in  Him  shouM 
not  be  confounded.* 

Now,  it  was  not  only  in  the  eyes  of  God  that  this 
stone  was  precious,  but  in  the  eyes  of  faith  which — 
feeble  as  the  possessors  of  it  may  be — sees  as  God  sees. 

*  In  this  passage,  so  to  speak  (as  in  this  alone),  Peter  meets 
the  doctrine  of  the  assembly,  and  that  mider  the  character  of  a 
building,  not  of  a  body  or  a  bride ;  that  which  Christ  built,  not 
what  was  united  to  Him.  So  Paul  also  presents  it  to  us  in 
Ephesians  ii.  20,  21.  In  this  view,  though  going  on  on  earth, 
it  is  Christ's  work  and  a  continuing  process ;  no  human  instru- 
mentality is  referred  to :  I  will  build,  says  Christ;  it  grows,  says 
Paul;  living  stones  come,  says  Peter.  This  must  not  be  con- 
founded with  the  building  into  which  men  may  build  wood  and 
hay  and  stubble,  as  the  same  thing  ;  though  the  outward  thing 
which  God  set  up  good,  left  to  man's  responsibility,  as 
ever,  was  soon  corrupted.  Individuals  are  built  up  by  grace, 
and  it  grows  into  a  holy  temple.  Ail  this  refers  to  Matthew  xvi. 
The  responsibility  of  human  service  in  this  respect  is  found  in 
1  Corinthians  iii.,  and  the  assembly  is  there  given  in  another 
point  of  view.  The  body  is  another  thing  altogether ;  the  doc- 
trine is  taught  in  Ephesians  i.-iv. ;  1  Corinthians  xii.,  and 
other  passages. 

a 


382  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

To  unbelievers  this  stone  was  a  stone  of  stumbling 
and  of  offence.  They  stumbled  at  the  word,  being 
disobedient,  to  which  also  they  were  appointed.  It 
does  not  say  that  they  were  appointed  to  sin  nor  to 
condemnation,  but  these  unbelieving  and  disobedient 
sinners,  the  Jewish  race — long  rebellious,  and  con- 
tinually exalting  themselves  against  God — were  des- 
tined to  find  in  the  Lord  of  grace  Himself  a  rock  of 
offence ;  and  to  stumble  and  fall  upon  that  which  was 
to  faith  the  precious  stone  of  salvation.  It  was  to 
this  particular  fall  that  their  unbelief  was  destined. 

Believers,  on  the  contrary,  entered  into  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  promises  made  to  Israel,  and  that  in  the 
most  excellent  way.  Grace — and  the  very  faithful- 
ness of  God — had  brought  the  fulfilment  of  the  pro- 
mise in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  the  minister  of  the 
circumcision  for  the  truth  of  God  to  fulfil  the  promises 
made  to  the  fathers.  And,  although  the  nation  had 
rejected  Him,  God  would  not  deprive  of  the  blessings 
those  who — in  spite  of  all  this  difficulty  to  faith  and 
to  the  heart — had  submitted  to  the  obedience  of  faith, 
and  attached  themselves  to  Him  who  was  the  despised 
of  the  nation.  They  could  not  have  the  blessing  of 
Israel  with  the  nation  on  earth,  because  the  nation 
had  rejected  Him ;  but  they  were  brought  fully  into 
the  relationship  with  God  of  a  people  accepted  of 
Him.  The  heavenly  character  which  the  blessing  now 
assumed  did  not  destroy  their  acceptance  according  to 
the  promise ;  only  they  entered  into  it  according  to 
grace.  For  the  nation,  as  a  nation,  had  lost  it;  not 
only  long  ago  by  disobedience,  but  now  by  rejecting 
Him  who  came  in  grace  to  impart  to  them  the  effect 
of  the  promise. 

The  apostle,  therefore,  applies  the  character  of  "  holy 
nation  "  to  the  elect  remnant,  investing  them  in  the 
main  with  the  titles  bestowed  in  Exodus  xix.  on 
condition  of  obedience,  but  here  in  connection  with 


I   PETER.  383 

the  Messiah,  their  enjoyment  of  these  titles  being 
founded  on  His  obedience  and  rights  acquired  by  their 
faith  in  Him. 

But,  the  privileges  of  the  believing  remnant  being 
founded  on  the  Messiah,  the  apostle  goes  farther,  and 
applies  to  them  the  declarations  of  Hosea,  which 
relate  to  Israel  and  Judah  when  re-established  in  the 
fulness  of  blessing  in  the  last  days,  enjoying  those 
relationships  with  God  into  which  grace  will  bring 
them  at  that  time. 

"Ye  are,"  he  says,  "a  chosen  generation,  a  royal 
priesthood,  a  purchased  people."  These  are  almost 
the  words  of  Exodus  xix.  He  goes  on :  "  Which  in 
time  past  were  not  a  people,  but  are  now  the  people  of 
God ;  who  formerly  had  not  obtained  mercy,  but  have 
now  obtained  it."  These  are  the  words  of  Hosea  ii. 
This  sets  before  us,  in  the  most  interesting  way,  the 
principle  on  which  the  blessing  is  founded.  In 
Exodus  the  people  were  to  have  this  blessing  if  they 
exactly  obeyed  the  voice  of  God.  But  Israel  had  not 
obeyed,  had  been  rebellious  and  stiff-necked,  had  gone 
after  strange  gods,  and  rejected  the  testimony  of  the 
Spirit ;  yet,  after  their  unfaithfulness,  God  Himself 
has  laid  in  Zion  a  Stone,  a  chief  corner-stone,  and 
whosoever  believed  in  Him  should  not  be  confounded. 
It  is  grace  that,  when  Israel  had  failed  in  every 
respect,  and  on  the  ground  of  obedience  had  lost 
everything,  God  should  bestow  on  them  by  Jesus, 
through  grace,  that  which  was  promised  them  at  first 
on  condition  of  obedience.  In  this  way  all  was  secured 
to  them. 

The  question  of  obedience  was  settled — on  Israel's 
disobedience — by  grace,  and  by  the  obedience  of 
Christ,  the  foundation  laid  by  God  in  Zion.  But  this 
principle  of  grace  abounding  over  sin — by  which  is 
shewn  the  inability  of  disobedience  to  frustrate  the 
purposes  of  God,  for  this  grace  came  after  the  com- 

II. 


384  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

pletion  of  disobedience — this  principle,  so  glorious  and 
so  comforting  to  the  convinced  sinner,  is  confirmed  in 
a  striking  way  by  the  quotation  from  Hosea.  In  this 
passage  from  the  prophet,  Israel  is  presented,  not 
merely  as  guilty,  but  as  having  already  undergone 
judgment.  God  had  declared  that  He  would  no  more 
have  mercy  (with  regard  to  His  patience  toward  the 
ten  tribes) ;  and  that  Israel  was  no  longer  His  people 
(in  His  judgment  on  unfaitliful  Judah).  But  after- 
wards, when  the  judgment  had  been  executed,  He 
returns  to  His  irrevocable  purposes  of  grace,  and 
allures  Israel  as  a  forsaken  wife,  and  gives  her  the 
valle}^  of  Achor-^the  valley  of  trouble,  in  which  Achan 
was  stoned,  the  tirst  judgment  on  unfaithful  Israel 
after  their  entrance  into  the  promised  land — for  a 
door  of  hope.  For  judgment  is  changed  into  grace, 
and  God  begins  all  afresh  upon  a  new  principle.  It 
was  as  though  Israel  had  again  come  up  out  of 
Egypt,  but  upon  an  entirely  new  principle.  He 
be  troths  her  to  Him  for  ever,  in  righteousness,  in 
judgment,  in  grace,  in  mercy,  and  all  is  blessing.  Then 
He  calls  her  "Ruhama,"  or,  "the  object  of  mercy;" 
and  "  Ammi,"  '  my  people." 

These,  then,  are  the  expressions  which  the  apostle 
uses,  applying  them  to  the  remnant  who  believed  in 
Jesus,  the  stumbling-stone  to  the  nation,  but  the  chief 
corner-stone  from  God  to  the  believer.  Thus  the 
condition  is  taken  away,  and  instead  of  a  condition  we 
have  blessing  after  disobedience,  and  after  judgment 
the  full  and  assured  grace  of  God,  founded  (in  its 
application  to  believers)  on  the  Person,  the  obedience, 
and  the  work  of  Christ. 

It  is  affecting  to  see  the  expression  of  this  grace  in 
the  term  "Achor."  It  was  the  first  judgment  on 
Israel  in  the  land  of  promise  for  having  profaned 
themselves  with  the  forbidden  thing.  And  there  it  is 
that  hope  is  given :  so  entirely  true  is  it  that  grace 


I  PETER.  385 

triumphs  over  justice.  And  it  is  this  which  has 
taken  place  in  the  most  excellent  way  in  Christ.  The 
very  judgment  of  God  becomes  in  Him  the  door  of 
hope,  the  guilt  and  the  judgment  having  alike  passed 
away  for  ever. 

Two  parts  of  the  christian  life — so  far  as  it  is  the 
manifestation  of  spiritual  power — result  from  this,  in 
the  double  priesthood ;  of  which  the  one  answers  to 
the  present  position  of  Christ  on  high,  and  the  other 
anticipatively  to  the  manifestation  of  His  glory  on 
earth — the  priesthoods  of  Aaron,  and  of  Melchisedec. 
For  He  is  now  within  the  veil  according  to  the  type  of 
Aaron  ;  hereafter  He  will  be  a  priest  on  His  throne — • 
it  will  be  the  public  manifestation  of  His  glory  on 
earth.  Thus  the  saints  exercise  "  a  holy  priesthood  " 
(ver.  5)  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving.  Sweet  privilege  of  the  Christian,  thus 
brought  as  near  as  possible  to  God !  He  offers — sure 
of  being  accepte<:l,  for  it  is  by  Jesus  that  he  offers  them 
— his  sacrifices  to  God. 

This  part  of  the  christian  life  is  the  first,  the  most 
excellent,  the  most  vital,  the  source  of  the  other 
(which  is  its  expression  here  below) ;  the  most  excel- 
lent, because,  in  its  exercise,  we  are  in  immediate 
connection  with  the  divine  object  of  our  affections. 
These  spiritual  sacrifices  are  the  reflex,  by  the  action 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  the  grace  which  we  enjoy ;  that 
which  the  heart  returns  to  God,  moved  by  the  excel- 
lent gifts  of  which  we  are  the  object,  and  by  the  love 
which  has  given  them.  The  heart  (by  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost)  reflects  all  that  has  been  revealed  to 
it  in  grace,  worshipping  the  Author  and  Giver  of  all 
according  to  the  knowledge  we  have  of  Himself 
through  this  means  ;  the  fruits  of  the  heavenly  Canaan 
in  which  we  participate  presented  as  an  offering  to 
God ;  the  entrance  of  the  soul  into  the  presence  of 
God  to  praise  and  adore  Him. 

VOL.  V  IL  C  C 


386  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

This  is  the  holy  priesthood,  according  to  the  analogy 
of  the  priesthood  of  Aaron,  and  of  the  temple  at 
Jerusalem  which  God  inhabited  as  His  house. 

The  second  priesthood  of  which  the  apostle  speaks 
is  to  shew  forth  the  virtues  of  Him  who  has  called  us 
out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light.  Its  de- 
scription is  taken,  as  we  have  seen,  from  Exodus  xix. 
It  is  a  chosen  generation,  a  holy  nation,  a  royal  priest- 
hood. I  only  allude  to  the  Melchisedec  priesthood  to 
shew  the  character  of  a  royal  priesthood.  Priests, 
amonof  the  Jews,  drew  near  to  God.  God  had  formed 
the  people  for  Himself:  they  were  to  shew  forth  all 
His  virtues,  His  praises.  Christ  will  do  this  perfectly 
in  the  day  of  His  glory.  The  Christian  is  called  to  do 
it  now  in  this  world.  He  is  to  reproduce  Christ  in 
this  world.     It  is  the  second  part  of  his  life. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  first  chapter  of  this 
epistle  presents  the  Christian  as  animated  by  hope, 
but  under  trial — the  precious  trial  of  faith.  The 
second  chapter  presents  him  in  his  privileges,  as  of  a 
holy  and  royal  priesthood,  by  means  of  faith. 

After  this  (chap.  ii.  11),  the  apostle  begins  his  ex- 
hortations. Whatever  may  be  the  privileges  of  the 
Christian,  in  his  position  as  such,  he  is  always  viewed 
as  a  pilgrim  on  the  earth ;  and,  as  we  have  seen,  the 
constant  government  of  God  is  the  object  which 
presents  itself  to  the  mind  of  the  apostle.  But  he 
warns  them  first,  with  regard  to  that  which  is 
inward,  against  those  sources  from  which  the  corrup- 
tions spring,  that  (in  the  scene  of  this  government) 
would  dishonour  the  name  of  God  and  even  bring  in 
judgment. 

Their  conversation  was  to  be  honest  among  the 
Gentiles.  Christians  bore  the  name  of  God.  The 
mind  of  men,  hostile  to  His  name,  sought  to  bring 
disgrace  upon  it,  by  attributing  to  Christians  the  evil 


I  PETER.  387 

conduct  which  they  themselves  followed  without  re- 
morse, while  at  the  same  time  complaining  (chap. 
iv.  4)  that  they  would  not  go  with  them  in  the  same 
excesses  and  disorder.  The  Christian  had  only  to 
follow  the  path  of  faithfulness  to  God.  In  the  day 
when  God  would  visit  men,  these  calumniators,  with 
their  will  broken  and  their  pride  subdued  by  the 
visitation  of  God,  should  be  brought  to  confess — by 
means  of  the  good  works  which,  in  spite  of  their 
calumnies,  had  always  reached  their  consciences — that 
God  had  acted  in  these  Christians,  that  He  had  been 
present  among  them. 

After  this  general  exhortation,  brief  but  important 
to  believers,  the  apostle  takes  up  the  relative  walk  of 
Christians  in  a  world  where  on  the  one  hand  God 
watches  over  all,  yet  where  He  permits  His  own  to 
suffer,  whether  for  righteousness'  sake  or  for  the  name 
of  Christ,  but  where  they  ought  never  to  suffer  for 
having  done  wrong.  The  path  then  of  the  Christian 
is  marked  out.  He  is  subject  for  the  Lord's  sake  to 
human  ordinances  or  institutions.  He  gives  honour 
to  all  men,  and  to  each  in  his  place,  so  that  no  one 
shall  have  any  reproach  to  bring  against  him.  He  is 
submissive  to  his  masters,  even  if  they  are  bad  men, 
and  yields  to  their  ill-treatment.  Were  he  subject 
only  to  the  good  and  gentle,  a  worldly  slave  would 
do  as  much ;  but  if,  having  done  well,  he  suffers  and 
bears  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  to  God,  this  is 
grace.  It  was  thus  that  Christ  acted,  and  to  this  we  are 
called.  Christ  suffered  in  this  way,  and  never  replied 
by  reproaches  or  threats  to  those  who  molested  Him, 
but  committed  Himself  to  Him  that  judges  righteously. 
To  Him  we  belong.  He  had  suffered  for  our  sins,  in 
order  that,  having  been  delivered  from  them,  we 
should  live  to  God.  These  Christians  from  among  the 
Jews  had  been  as  sheep  going  astray;*  they  were  now 
*  An  allusion,  I  suppose,  to  the  last  verse  of  Psalm  cxix.  Tho 
IL 


388  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

brought  back  to  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  their 
souls.  But  how  entirely  these  exhortations  shew  that 
the  Christian  is  one  who  is  not  of  this  world,  but  has 
his  own  path  through  it :  yet  this  path  was  the  way 
of  peace  in  it ! 

Likewise  wives  were  to  be  subject  to  their  hus- 
bands in  all  modesty  and  purity,  in  order  that  this 
testimony  to  the  effect  of  the  word  by  its  fruits  might 
take  the  place  of  the  word  itself,  if  their  husbands 
would  not  listen  to  it.  They  were  to  rest,  in  patience 
and  meekness,  on  the  faithfulness  of  God,  and  not  be 
alarmed  at  seeing  the  power  of  the  adversaries. 
(Compare  Phil.  i.  28.) 

Husbands  were  in  like  manner  to  dwell  with  the 
wife,  their  affections  and  relationships  being  governed 
by  christian  knowledge,  and  not  by  any  human  pas- 
sion ;  honouring  the  wife,  and  walking  with  her  as 
being  heirs  to^^ether  of  the  orace  of  life. 

Finally,  all  were  to  walk  in  the  spirit  of  peace  and 
gentleness,  carrying  with  them,  in  their  intercourse 
with  others,  the  blessing  of  which  they  were  them- 
selves the  heirs,  the  spirit  of  which  they  ought  con- 
sequently to  bear  ever  with  them.  By  following  that 
which  is  good,  by  having  the  tongue  governed  by  the 
fear  of  the  Lord,  by  avoiding  evil  and  seeking  peace, 
they  would  in  quietness  enjoy  the  present  life  under 
the  eye  of  God.  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over 
the  righteous,  and  His  ears  are  open  to  their  prayers ; 
but  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil. 
And  who,  moreover,  would  harm  them,  if  they  followed 
only  that  which  is  good  ? 

This,  then,  is  the  government  of  God,  the  principle 
on  which  He  superintends  the  course  of  this  world. 
Nevertheless  it  is  not  now  a   direct  and  immediate 


apostle  constantly  puts  the  christian  Jews  on  the  ground  of  the 
blessed  remnant,  only  making  it  a  soul  salvation. 


I  PETER.  389 

government  prevontino-  all  wrong.  The  power  of  evil 
still  acts  upon  the  earth;  those  who  are  animated  hy 
it  shew  themselves  hostile  to  the  righteous,  and  act  by 
means  of  that  fear  which  Satan  is  able  to  produce. 
But  by  giving  the  Lord  His  place  in  the  soul,  this 
fear  which  the  enemy  excites  has  no  longer  a  place 
there.  If  the  heart  is  conscious  of  the  presence  of 
God,  can  that  heart  tremble  at  the  presence  of  the 
enemy  ?  This  is  the  secret  of  boldness  and  peace  in 
confessing  Christ.  Then  the  instruments  of  the  enemy 
seek  to  turn  us  aside,  and  to  overwhelm  us  by  their 
pretensions ;  but  the  consciousness  of  God's  presence 
dissipates  those  pretensions,  and  destroys  all  their 
power.  Resting  on  the  strength  of  His  presence,  we 
are  ready  to  answer  those  who  ask  the  reason  of  our 
hope,  with  meekness  and  holy  reverence  remote  from 
all  levity.  For  all  this  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  good 
conscience.  We  may  carry  a  bad  conscience  to  God, 
that  He  may  pardon  and  have  mercy  on  us ;  but  if  we 
have  a  bad  conscience,  we  cannot  resist  the  enemy — 
we  are  afraid  of  him.  On  the  one  hand,  we  fear  his 
malice ;  on  the  other,  we  have  lost  the  consciousness 
of  the  presence  and  the  strength  of  God.  When 
walking  before  God,  we  fear  nothing;  the  heart  is 
free :  we  have  not  to  think  of  self,  we  think  of  God ; 
and  the  adversaries  are  ashamed  of  having  falsely 
accused  those  whose  conduct  is  unblamable,  and 
against  whom  nothing  can  be  brought  except  the 
calumny  of  their  enemies,  which  calumnies  turn  to 
their  own  shame. 

It  may  be  that  God  may  see  it  good  that  we  should 
suffer.  If  so,  it  is  better  that  we  should  suffer  for 
well  doing  than  for  evil  doing.  The  apostle  gives  a 
touching  motive  for  this  :  Christ  has  suffered  for  sins 
once  for  all ;  let  that  suffice ;  let  us  suffer  only  for 
righteousness.  To  suffer  for  sin  was  His  task ;  He 
accomplished  it,  and  that  for  ever ;  put  to  death,  as  to 

III. 


S90  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

His  life  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  according  to  the 
power  of  the  divine  Spirit. 

The  passage  that  follows  has  occasioned  difficulties 
to  the  readers  of  scripture ;  but  it  appears  to  me 
simple,  if  we  perceive  the  object  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
The  Jews  expected  a  Messiah  corporeally  present,  who 
should  deliver  the  nation,  and  exalt  the  Jews  to  the 
summit  of  earthly  glory.  But  He  was  not  present,  we 
know,  in  that  manner,  and  the  believing  Jews  had  to 
endure  the  scoffs  and  the  hatred  of  the  unbe^'eving, 
on  account  of  their  trust  in  a  Messiah  who  was  not 
present,  and  who  had  wrought  no  deliverance  for  the 
people.  Believers  possessed  the  salvation  of  their 
soul,  and  they  knew  Jesus  in  heaven  ;  but  unbelieving 
men  did  not  care  for  that.  The  apostle  therefore  cites 
the  case  of  Noah's  testimony.  The  believing  Jews 
were  few  in  number,  and  Christ  was  theirs  only  accord- 
ing to  the  Spirit.  By  the  power  of  that  Spirit  He 
had  been  raised  up  from  the  dead.  It  was  by  the 
power  of  the  same  Spirit  that  He  had  gone — without 
being  corporeally  present — to  preach  in  Noah.  The 
world  was  disobedient  (like  the  Jews  in  the  apostle's 
days),  and  eight  souls  only  were  saved ;  even  as  the 
believers  were  now  but  a  little  flock.  But  the  spirits 
of  the  disobedient  were  now  in  prison,  because  they 
did  not  obey  Christ  present  among  them  by  His  Spirit 
in  Noah.  The  long-suffering  of  God  waited  then,  as 
now,  with  the  Jewish  nation ;  the  result  would  be  the 
same.     It  has  been  so. 

This  interpretation  is  confirmed  (in  preference  to 
that  which  supposes  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ  preached 
in  hades  to  souls  which  had  been  confined  there  ever 
since  the  flood)  by  the  consideration  that  in  Genesis  it 
is  said,  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  men, 
but  their  days  shall  be  a  hundred  and  twenty  years." 
That  is  to  say,  His  Spirit  should  strive,  in  the  testi- 
mony of  Noah,  during  a  hundred  and  twenty  years 


I  PETER.  391 

and  no  longer.  Now  it  would  be  an  extraordinary 
thing  that  with  those  persons  only  (for  he  speaks  only 
of  them)  the  Lord  should  strive  in  testimony  after 
th  'ir  death.  Moreover,  we  may  observe  that,  in  con- 
sidering this  expression  to  mean  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
in  Noah,  we  only  use  a  well-known  phrase  of  Peter's  ; 
for  he  it  is,  as  we  have  seen,  who  said,  "  The  Spirit  of 
Christ  which  was  in  the  prophets." 

These  spirits  then  are  in  prison,  because  they  did 
not  hearken  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  Noah.  (Compare 
2  Pet.  ii.  5-9.)  To  this  the  apostle  adds,  the  compa- 
rison of  baptism  to  the  ark  of  Noah  in  the  deluge. 
Noah  was  saved  through  the  water;  we  also;  for  the 
water  of  baptism  typifies  death,  as  the  deluge,  so  to 
speak,  was  the  death  of  the  world.  Now  Christ  has 
passed  through  death  and  is  risen.  We  enter  into 
death  in  baptism  ;  but  it  is  like  the  ark,  because  Christ 
suffered  in  death  for  us,  and  has  come  out  of  it  in 
resurrection,  as  Noah  came  out  of  the  deluge,  to  begin, 
as  it  were,  a  new  life  in  a  resurrection  world.  Now 
Christ,  having  passed  through  death,  has  atoned  for 
siuii;  and  we,  by  passing  through  it  in  spirit,  leave  all 
our  sins  in  it,  as  Christ  did  in  reality  for  us ;  for  He 
was  raised  up  without  the  sins  which  He  expiated  on 
the  cross.  And  they  were  our  sins ;  and  thus,  through 
the  resurrection,  we  have  a  good  conscience.  We  pass 
through  death  in  spirit  and  in  figure  by  baptism. 
The  peace-giving  force  of  the  thing  is  the  resurrection  of 
Christ,  after  He  had  accomplished  expiation ;  by  which 
resurrection  therefore  we  have  a  good  conscience. 

Now  this  is  what  the  Jews  had  to  learn.  The 
Christ  was  gone  up  to  heaven,  all  powers  and  princi- 
palities being  made  subject  to  Him.  He  is  at  the 
right  hand  of  God.  We  have  therefore  not  a  Messiah 
on  earth,  but  a  good  conscience  and  a  heavenly  Christ. 

Chapter  iv.  From  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  to 
the  end  of  verse  7,  the  apostle  continues  to  speak  of 

III.,  IV. 


392  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

the  general  principles  of  God's  government,  exhoriiiii; 
the  Christian  to  act  on  the  principles  of  Christ  Him- 
self, which  would  cause  him  to  avoid  the  walk 
condemned  hj  that  government,  while  waiting  for  the 
judgment  of  the  world  by  the  Christ  whom  he 
served.  Christ  glorified,  as  we  saw  at  the  close  of 
the  previous  chapter,  was  ready  to  judge ;  and  they 
who  were  exasperated  against  the  Christians,  and  who 
were  led  by  their  own  passions,  without  caring  for 
the  coming  judgment,  would  have  to  give  account  to 
that  Judge  whom  they  refused  to  own  as  Saviour. 

Here,  it  will  be  observed,  it  is  suflfering  for  right- 
eousness' sake  (chap.  ii.  19 ;  iii.  17)  in  connection  with 
the  government  and  judgment  of  God.  The  principle 
was  this:  they  accepted,  they  followed  the  Saviour 
whom  the  world  and  the  nation  rejected;  they  walked 
in  His  holy  footsteps  in  righteousness,  as  pilgrims  and 
strangers,  abandoning  the  corruption  that  reigned  in 
the  world.  Walking  in  peace  and  following  after 
good,  they  avoided  to  a  certain  extent  the  attacks  of 
others;  and  the  eyes  of  Him,  who  watches  from  on 
high  over  all  things,  rested  upon  the  righteous. 
Nevertheless,  in  the  relations  of  ordinary  life  (chap. 
ii.  18),  and  in  their  intercourse  with  men,  they  might 
have  to  suffer,  and  to  bear  flagrant  injustice.  Now 
the  time  of  God's  judgment  was  not  yet  come.  Christ 
was  in  heaven;  He  had  been  rejected  on  the  earth, 
and  the  Christian's  part  was  to  follow  Him.  The 
time  of  the  manifestation  of  the  government  of  God 
would  be  at  the  judgment  which  Christ  should  execute. 
Meanwhile  His  walk  on  earth  liad  furnished  the 
pattern  of  that  which  the  God  of  judgment  approved. 
(Chap.  ii.  21-23,  iv.  1  and  following  verses.) 

They  were  to  do  good,  to  suflfer  for  it,  and  to  be 
patient.  This  is  well -pleasing  to  God ;  this  is  what 
Christ  did.  It  was  better  that  they  should  suffer  for 
doing  well,  if  God  saw  fit,  than  for  doing  ill.     Christ 


I  PETER. 

(chap.  ii.  24)  had  borne  onr  sins,  had  suffered  for  our 
sins,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  in  order  that  we,  being 
dead  to  sins,  should  live  for  righteousness,  and  in 
order  to  bring  us  unto  God  Himself.  Christ  is  now 
on  high ;  He  is  ready  to  judge.  When  the  judgment 
shall  come,  the  principles  of  God's  government  will  be 
manifested  and  shall  prevail. 

The  beginning  of  chapter  iv.  requires  some  rather 
more  detailed  remarks.  The  death  of  Christ  is  there 
applied  to  practical  death  unto  sins ;  a  state  presented 
in  contrast  with  the  life  of  the  Gentiles. 

Christ  on  the  cross  (the  apostle  alludes  to  verse  18 
of  the  preceding  chapter)  suffered  in  the  flesh  for  us. 
He  died  in  fact  as  regards  His  human  life.  We  must 
arm  ourselves  with  the  same  mind,  and  allow  of  no 
activity  of  life  or  passions  according  to  the  will  of  the 
old  man,  but  suffer  as  to  the  flesh,  never  yielding  to 
its  will.  Sin  is  the  action  in  us  of  the  will  of  the 
flesh,  the  will  of  the  man  as  alive  in  this  world. 
When  this  will  acts,  the  principle  of  sin  is  there ;  for 
we  ought  to  obey.  The  will  of  God  ought  to  be  the 
spring  of  our  moral  life ;  and  so  much  the  more, 
because  now  that  we  have  the  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil — now  that  the  will  of  the  flesh,  unsubject  to  God, 
is  in  us,  we  must  either  take  the  will  of  God  as  our 
only  motive,  or  act  according  to  the  will  of  the  flesh, 
for  the  latter  is  always  present  in  us. 

Christ  came  to  obey,  He  chose  to  die,  to  suffer  all 
things  rather  than  not  obey.  He  thus  died  to  sin, 
which  never  for  a  moment  found  an  entrance  into  His 
heart.  With  Him,  tempted  to  the  uttermost,  death 
was  preferred  rather  than  disobedience,  even  when 
death  had  the  character  of  wrath  against  sin  and 
judgment.  Bitter  as  the  cup  was.  He  drank  it  rather 
than  not  fulfil  to  the  uttermost  His  Father's  will,  and 
glorify  Him.  Tried  to  the  uttermost  and  perfect  in  it, 
the  temptation  which  ever  assailed  Him  from  without 

IV. 


394  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

and  sought  entrance  (for  He  had  none  within)  was" 
always  kept  outside ;  was  never  entered  into,  nor 
found  a  movement  of  His  will  towards  it ;  drew  out 
obedience,  or  the  perfection  of  the  divine  thoughts  in 
man;  and  by  dying,  by  suffering  in  the  flesh,  He.  had 
done  with  it  all,  done  with  sin  for  ever,  and  entered 
for  ever  into  rest,  after  having  been  tried  to  the 
uttermost,  and  tempted  to  all  things  similarly  to 
us,*  as  regards  the  trial  of  faith,  the  conflict  of  the 
spiritual  life. 

Now  it  is  the  same  thing  with  respect  to  ourselves 
in  daily  life.  If  I  suffer  in  the  flesh,  the  will  of  the 
flesh  is  assuredly  not  in  action ;  and  the  flesh,  in  that 
I  sufl"er,  is  practically  dead — I  have  nothing  more 
to  do  with  sins.f  We  then  are  freed  from  it,  have 
done  with  it,  and  are  at  rest.  If  we  are  content  to 
suffer,  the  will  does  not  act;  sin  is  not  there,  as  to 
fact ;  for  to  suffer  is  not  will,  it  is  grace  acting  in 
accordance  with  the  image  and  the  mind  of  Christ  in 
the  new  man  ;  and  we  are  freed  from  the  action  of  the 
old  man.  It  does  not  act ;  we  rest  from  it ;  we  have 
done  with  it,  no  longer  to  live,  for  the  remainder  of 
our  life  here  below  in  the  flesh,  according  to  the  lusts 
of  man,  but  according  to  the  will  of  God,  which  the 
new  man  follows. 

It  is  enough  to  have  spent  the  past  time  of  our 
lives  in  doing  the  will  of  the  Gentiles  (he  still  speaks 
to  Christians  of  the  circumcision),  and  in  committing 
the  excesses  to  which  they  addicted  themselves,  while 


'•'  It  is  not,  as  in  tlie  Authorised  Version,  ^^  yet  without  sin," 
true  as  that  may  be,  but  x^^P'S  afiapriag,  "  sin  apart."  We  are 
tempted,  being  led  away  by  our  own  lusts.  Christ  had  all  our 
difficulties,  all  our  temptations,  on  the  way,  but  had  nothing  in 
Himself  which  could  lead  Him  wrong — far  surely  from  it — 
nothing  which  answered  to  the  temptation. 

t  Peter  rests  on  the  effect;  Paul,  as  ever,  goes  to  the  root, 
Bomans  vi. 


395 

they  wondered  at  Christians  for  refusing  to  do  the 
same ;  speaking  evil  of  them  for  this  reason.  But  they 
would  have  to  give  account  t(.)  Him,  who  is  ready  to 
judge  the  living  and  the  dead. 

The  Jews  were  accustomed  to  the  judgment  of  the 
living,  for  they  were  the  centre  of  God's  government 
on  the  earth.  The  judgment  of  the  dead,  with  wliich 
we  are  more  familiar,  had  not  been  definitely  revealed 
to  them.  They  were  liable  nevertheless  to  this  judg- 
ment; for  it  was  with  this  object  that  the  promises  of 
God  were  presented  to  them  while  living,  in  order 
that  they  might  either  live  according  to  God  in  the 
spirit,  or  be  judged  as  men  responsible  for  what  they 
had  done  in  the  flesh.  For  the  one  or  other  of 
these  results  would  be  produced  in  every  one  who 
heard  the  promises.  Thus,  in  regard  to  the  Jews,  the 
judgment  of  the  dead  would  take  place  in  connection 
with  the  promises  that  had  been  set  before  them. 
For  this  testimony  from  God  placed  all  who  heard  it 
under  responsibility,  so  that  they  would  be  judged  as 
men  who  had  to  give  account  to  God  of  their  conduct 
in  the  flesh,  unless  they  came  out  of  this  position  of 
life  in  the  flesh  by  being  quickened  through  the  power 
of  the  word  addressed  to  them,  applied  by  the  energy 
of  the  Spirit ;  so  that  they  escaped  from  the  flesh 
through  the  spiritual  life  which  they  received. 

Now  the  end  of  all  things  was  at  hand.  The 
apostle,  while  speaking  of  the  great  principle  of 
responsibility  in  connection  with  the  testimony  of  God, 
draws  the  attention  of  believers  to  the  solemn  thought 
of  the  end  of  all  these  things  on  wliich  the  flesh  rested. 
This  end  drew  near. 

Here,  observe,  Peter  presents,  not  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  to  receive  His  own,  nor  His  manifestation  with 
them,  but  that  moment  of  the  solemn  sanction  of  the 
ways  of  God,  when  every  refuge  of  the  flesh  shall 
disappear,  and  all  the  thoughts  of  man  perish  for  ever. 

IV. 


396  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

As  regards  the  relations  o£  God  with  the  world  in 
government,  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  although  it 
was  not  "  the  end,"  was  of  immense  importance, 
because  it  destroyed  the  very  seat  of  that  government 
on'  the  earth  in  which  the  Messiah  ought  to  have 
reigned,  and  shall  yet  reign. 

God  watches  over  all  things,  takes  care  of  His  own, 
counts  the  hairs  of  their  heads,  makes  everj^thing 
contribute  to  their  highest  good ;  but  this  is  in  the 
midst  of  a  world  which  He  no  longer  owns.  For  not 
only  is  the  earthly  and  direct  government  of  God  set 
aside,  which  took  place  in  the  days  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
and,  in  a  certain  sense,  in  those  of  Saul ;  but  the 
Messiah,  who  ought  to  reign  in  it,  has  been  rejected, 
and  has  taken  the  heavenly  place  in  resurrection, 
which  forms  the  subject  of  this  epistle. 

The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (which  was  to  take 
place  in  those  days)  was  the  final  abolition  of  even  the 
traces  of  that  government,  until  the  Lord  shall  return. 
The  relations  of  an  earthly  people  with  God,  on  the 
ground  of  man's  responsibility,  were  ended.  The 
general  government  of  God  took  the  place  of  the 
former;  a  government  always  the  same  in  principle, 
but  which,  Jesus  having  suflfered  on  the  earth,  still 
allowed  His  members  to  suffer  here  below.  And, 
until  the  time  of  judgment,  the  wicked  will  persecute 
the  righteous,  and  the  righteous  must  have  patience. 
With  regard  to  the  nation,  those  relations  only  sub- 
sisted till  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem ;  the  unbeliev- 
ing hopes  of  the  Jews,  as  a  nation,  were  judicially 
overthrown.  The  apostle  speaks  here  in  a  general 
way,  and  in  view  of  the  effect  of  the  solemn  truth  of 
the  end  of  all  things,  for  Christ  is  still  "ready  to 
judge;"  and  if  there  is  delay,  it  is  because  God  wills 
not  the  death  of  the  sinner,  and  that  He  prolongs  the 
time  of  grace. 

In  view  of  this  end  of  all  that  we  see,  we  ought  to 


I  PETER.  397 

be  sober,  and  watch  in  order  to  pray.  We  ought  to 
have  the  heart  thus  exercised  towards  God,  who 
changes  not,  who  will  never  pass  away,  and  who 
preserves  us  through  all  the  difficulties  and  tempta- 
tions of  this  passing  scene  until  the  day  of  deliver- 
ance which  is  coming.  Instead  of  allowing  ourselves 
to  be  carried  away  by  present  and  visible  things,  we 
must  bridle  self  and  will,  and  commune  with  God. 

This  leads  the  apostle  to  the  inner  position  of 
Christians,  their  relations  among  themselves,  not  with 
God's  general  government  of  the  world.  They  follow 
because  they  are  Christians,  Christ  Himself.  The 
first  thing  that  he  enforces  on  them  is  fervent  charity ; 
not  merely  long-suffering,  which  would  prevent  any 
outbreak  of  the  anger  of  the  flesh,  but  an  energy  of 
love,  which  by  stamping  its  character  on  all  the  ways 
of  Christians  towards  each  other,  would  practically 
set  aside  the  action  of  the  flesh,  and  make  manifest 
the  divine  presence  and  action. 

Now  this  love  covered  a  multitude  of  sins.  He  is 
not  speaking  here  with  a  view  to  ultimate  pardon,  but 
of  the  present  notice  which  God  takes — His  present 
relations  of  government  with  His  people ;  for  we  have 
present  relationships  with  God.  If  the  assembly  is  at 
variance,  if  there  is  little  love,  if  the  intercourse 
among  Christians  is  with  straitened  hearts  and  diffi- 
cult, the  existing  evil,  the  mutual  wrongs,  subsist 
Vjefore  God :  but  if  there  is  love,  which  neither  com- 
mits nor  resents  any  wrongs,  but  pardons  such  things, 
and  only  finds  in  them  occasion  for  its  own  exercise, 
it  is  then  the  love  which  the  eye  of  God  rests 
upon,  and  not  the  evil.  Even  if  there  are  misdeeds — 
sins — love  occupies  itself  about  them,  the  ofiendcr  is 
brought  back,  is  restored,  by  the  charity  of  the  as- 
sembly ;  the  sins  are  removed  from  the  eye  of  God, 
they  are  covered.  It  is  a  quotation  from  the  Book  of 
Proverbs  x.  12:  "Hatred  stirreth  up  strife,  but  love 

IV. 


398  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

covereth  all  sins."  We  have  a  right  to  forgive  them 
— to  wash  the  feet  of  our  brother.  (Compare  James 
V.  15,  and  1  John  v.  16.)  We  not  only  forgive,  but 
love  maintains  the  assembly  before  God  according  to 
His  own  nature  so  that  He  can  bless  it. 

Christians  ought  to  exercise  hospitality  towards 
each  other  with  all  liberality.  It  is  the  expression  of 
love,  and  tends  much  to  maintain  it :  we  are  no  longer 
strangers  to  each  other. 

Gifts  come  next  after  the  exercise  of  grace.  All 
comes  from  God.  As  every  one  had  received  the  gift, 
he  was  to  serve  in  the  gift,  as  a  steward  of  the  varied 
grace  of  God.  It  is  God  who  gives ;  the  Christian  is  a 
servant,  and  under  responsibility  as  a  steward,  on 
God's  part.  He  is  to  ascribe  all  to  God,  in  a  direct 
^'ay  to  God.  If  he  speaks,  he  is  to  speak  as  an  oracle 
of  God,  that  is,  as  speaking  on  God's  part,  and  not 
from  himself.  If  any  one  serves  in  things  temporal, 
let  him  do  it  as  in  a  power  and  an  ability  that  come 
from  God,  so  that,  whether  one  speaks  or  serves, 
God  may  be  glorified  in  all  things  through  Jesus 
Christ.  To  Him,  the  apostle  adds,  be  praise  and 
dominion.     Amen. 

After  these  exhortations  he  comes  to  suffering  for 
the  name  of  Christ.  They  were  not  to  view  the  fiery 
persecutions  that  came  to  try  them,  as  some  strange 
thing  that  had  befallen  them.  On  the  contrary,  they 
were  connected  with  a  suffering  and  rejected  Christ ; 
they  partook  therefore  in  His  sufferings,  and  were  to 
rejoice  in  it.  He  would  soon  appear,  and  these  suffer- 
ings for  His  sake  should  turn  to  their  exceeding  joy 
at  the  revelation  of  His  glory.  They  were  therefore 
to  rejoice  at  sharing  His  sutierings,  in  order  to  be 
tilled  with  abounding  joy  when  His  glory  should  be 
revealed.  If  they  were  reproached  for  the  name  of 
Christ,  it  was  happy  for  them.  The  Spirit  of  God 
rested    on   them.     It   was  the   name   of   Christ   that 


I  PETER.  399 

brought  reproach  on  them.  He  was  in  the  glory  with 
God ;  the  Spirit,  who  came  from  that  glory  and  that 
God,  filled  them  with  joy  in  bearing  the  reproach.  It 
was  Christ  who  was  reproached — Christ  who  was 
glorified — reproached  by  the  enemies  of  the  gospel, 
while  Christians  had.  the  joy  of  glorifying  Him.  It 
will  be  observed,  that  in  this  passage,  it  is  for  Christ 
■  Himself  (as  it  has  been  said)  that  the  believer  suffers ; 
and,  therefore,  the  apostle  speaks  of  glory  and  joy  at 
the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  he  does  not 
mention  in  chapters  ii.  20;  iii.  17.  (Compare  Matt.  v. 
10,  and  ver.  11,  12  of  the  same  chapter.) 

As  an  evil-doer  then  the  Christian  ought  never  to 
sufter ;  but  if  he  suffered  as  a  Christian,  he  was  not  to 
be  ashamed,  but  to  glorify  God  for  it.  The  apostle 
then  returns  to  the  government  of  God;  for  these 
suflferings  of  believers  had  also  another  character.  To 
the  individual  who  suff"ered,  it  was  a  glory :  he  shared 
the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of 
God  rested  on  him ;  and  all  this  should  turn  to 
abounding  joy  when  the  glory  was  revealed.  But  God 
had  no  pleasure  in  allowing  His  people  to  suffer.  He 
permitted  it ;  and  if  Christ  had  to  suffer  for  us  when 
He  who  knew  no  sin  did  not  need  it  for  Himself,  the 
people  of  God  have  often  need  on  their  own  account 
to  be  exercised  with  suffering.  God  uses  the  wicked, 
the  enemies  of  the  name  of  Christ,  for  this  purpose. 
Job  is  the  book  that  explains  this,  independently  of 
all  dispensations.  But  in  every  form  of  God's  deal- 
ings, He  exercises  His  judgments  according  to  the 
order  He  has  established.  He  did  so  with  Israel ;  He 
does  so  with  the  assembly.  The  latter  has  a  heavenly 
portion  ;  and  if  she  attaches  herself  to  the  earth,  God 
allows  the  enemy  to  trouble  her.  Perhaps  the  indi- 
vidual who  suffers  is  full  of  faith  and  devoted  love  to 
the  Lord ;  but,  under  persecution,  the  heart  feels  that 
the  world  is  not  its  rest,  that  it  must  have  its  portion 

IV. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

elsewhere,  its  strength  elsewhere.  We  are  not  of  the 
world  which  persecutes  us.  If  the  faithful  servant 
of  God  is  cut  off  from  this  world  by  persecution,  it 
strengthens  faith,  for  God  is  in  it ;  but  they  from 
the  midst  of  whom  he  is  cut  off,  suffer  and  feel 
that  the  hand  of  God  was  in  it:  His  dealings  tal-:o 
the  form  of  judgment,  always  in  perfect  love,  but  in 
discipline. 

God  judges  everything  according  to  His  own  nature. 
He  desires  that  all  should  be  in  accordance  with  His 
nature.  No  upright  and  honourable  man  would  like 
to  have  the  wicked  near  him,  and  always  before  him ; 
God  assuredly  would  not.  And  in  that  which  is 
nearest  to  Him,  He  must  above  all  desire  that  every- 
thing should  correspond  to  His  nature  and  His  holiness 
— to  all  that  He  is.  I  would  have  everything  around 
me  clean  enough  not  to  disgrace  me ;  but  in  my  own 
house  I  must  have  such  cleanness  as  I  personally 
desire.  Thus  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of 
God:  the  apostle  alludes  to  Ezekiel  ix.  6.  It  is  a 
solemn  principle.  No  grace,  no  privilege,  changes  the 
nature  of  God ;  and  everything  must  be  conformed  to 
that  nature,  or,  in  the  end,  must  be  banished  from  His 
presence.  Grace  can  conform  us,  and  it  does.  It 
bestows  the  divine  nature,  so  that  there  is  a  principle 
of  absolute  conformity  to  God.  But  as  to  practical 
conformity  in  thought  and  deed,  the  heart  and  the 
conscience  must  be  exercised,  in  order  that  the  under- 
standing of  the  heart,  and  the  habitual  desires  and 
aspirations  of  the  will,  should  be  formed  upon  the 
revelation  of  God,  and  continually  directed  towards 
Him. 

Now  if  this  conformity  should  so  fail  that  the 
testimony  of  God  is  injured  by  its  absence,  God,  who 
judges  His  people,  and  who  will  judge  evil  every- 
where, does  so  by  means  of  the  chastisements  which 
He  indicts.     Judgment  begins  at  the  house  of  God. 


I  PETER.  401 

The  righteous  are  saved  with  difficulty.  It  is  evi- 
dently not  redemption  or  justification  that  is  here 
intended,  nor  the  communication  of  life :  those  whom 
the.  apostle  addresses  were  in  possession  of  them.  To 
our  apostle  "  salvation  "  is  not  only  the  present  enjoy- 
ment of  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  but  the  full 
deliverance  of  the  faithful,  which  will  take  place  at 
the  coming  of  Christ  in  glory.  All  the  temptations 
are  contemplated,  all  the  trials,  all  the  dangers,  through 
which  the  Christian  will  pass  in  reaching  the  end  of 
his  career.  All  the  power  of  God  is  requisite,  directed 
by  divine  wisdom,  guiding  and  sustaining  faith,  to 
carry  the  Christian  safely  through  the  wilderness, 
where  Satan  employs  all  the  resources  of  his  subtlety 
to  make  him  perish.  The  power  of  God  will  accom- 
plish it;  but,  from  the  human  point  of  view,  the 
difficulties  are  almost  insurmountable.  Now,  if  the 
righteous — according  to  the  ways  of  God,  who  must 
maintain  His  judgment  conformable  to  the  principles 
of  good  and  evil  in  His  government;  and  who  will  in 
nowise  deny  Himself  in  dealing  with  the  enemy  of 
our  souls — if  the  righteous  were  saved  with  difficulty, 
what  would  become  of  the  sinner  and  the  ungodly  ? 
To  join  them  would  not  be  the  way  to  escape  these 
difficulties.  In  suffering  as  a  Christian,  there  was  but 
one  thing  to  do — to  commit  oneself  to  Him  who 
watched  over  the  judgment  that  He  was  executing. 
For,  as  it  was  His  hand,  one  suffered  according  to  His 
will.     It  was  this  that  Christ  did. 

Observe  here,  that  it  is  not  only  the  government  of 
God,  but  there  is  the  expression,  "  as  unto  a  faithful 
Creator."  The  Spirit  of  God  moves  here  in  this 
sphere.  It  is  the  relationship  of  God  with  this  world, 
and  the  soul  knows  Him  as  the  One  who  created  it, 
and  who  does  not  forsake  the  work  of  His  hands. 
This  is  Jewish  ground — God  known  in  His  connection 
with  the  first  creation.  Trust  in  Him  is  founded  on 
VOL.  V.  IV  D  D 


402  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

Christ;  but  God  is  known  in  His  ways  with  this 
world,  and  with  us  in  our  pilgrimage  here  below, 
where  He  governs,  and  where  He  judges  Christians, 
as  He  will  judge  all  others. 

Chapter  v.  The  apostle  returns  to  christian  details. 
He  exhorts  the  elders,  himself  an  elder ;  for  it  appears 
that  among  the  Jews  this  title  was  rather  character- 
istic than  official.  (Compare  ver.  5.)  He  exhorts  them 
to  feed  the  flock  of  God.  The  apostle  designates 
himself  as  one  who  had  been  a  witness  of  the  suffer- 
ings of  Christ,  and  who  was  to  be  a  partaker  of  the 
glory  that  shall  be  revealed.  It  was  the  function  of 
the  twelve  to  be  witnesses  of  the  life  of  Christ  (John 
XV.),  as  it  was  that  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  testify  of  His 
heavenly  glory.  Peter  places  himself  at  the  two  ends 
of  the  Lord's  history,  and  leaves  the  interval  devoid 
of  all  except  hope,  and  the  pilgrimage  towards  an 
end.  He  had  seen  the  sufferings  of  Christ ;  he  was  to 
share  His  glory  when  He  should  he  revealed.  It  is  a 
Christ  who  puts  Himself  in  relation  with  the  Jews, 
now  known  only  by  faith.  During  His  life  on  earth, 
He  was  in  the  midst  of  the  Jews,  although  suffering 
there  and  rejected.  When  He  shall  appear,  He  will 
again  be  in  relation  with  the  earth  and  with  that  nation. 

Paul  speaks  differently,  while  at  the  same  time 
confirming  these  truths.  He  only  knew  the  Lord 
after  His  exaltation;  he  is  not  a  witness  of  His 
sufferings ;  but  he  seeks  for  the  power  of  His  resurrec- 
tion and  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings.  Paul's 
heart  is  bound  to  Christ  while  He  is  in  heaven,  as 
united  to  Him  above;  and,  although  he  desires  the 
Lord's  appearing,  for  the  restitution  of  all  things  of 
which  the  prophets  had  spoken,  he  rejoices  to  know 
that  he  shall  go  with  joy  to  meet  Him,  and  shall  return 
with  Him  when  He  is  revealed  from  heaven. 

The  elders  were  to  feed  the  flock  of  God  with  a  ready 
mind,  and  not  as  by  constraint,  nor  for  gain,  nor  as 


I  PETEB.  403 

governing  an  inheritance  of  their  own,  but  as  en- 
samples  to  the  flock.  Loving  care  was  to  be  lavished 
upon  it,  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  the  chief  Shepherd, 
with  a  view  to  the  good  of  souls.  Moreover  it  was 
the  flock  of  God  which  they  were  to  feed.  What  a 
solemn  as  well  as  sweet  thought !  How  impossible 
for  anyone  to  entertain  the  notion  of  its  being  his 
flock,  if  he  has  laid  hold  of  the  thought  that  it  is  the 
flock  of  God,  and  that  God  allows  us  to  feed  it ! 

We  may  observe  that  the  heart  of  the  blessed 
apostle  is  where  the  Lord  had  placed  it.  "  Feed  my 
sheep  "  was  the  expression  of  the  Lord's  perfect  grace 
towards  Peter,  when  He  was  leading  him  to  the  humiliat- 
ing but  salutary  confession  that  it  needed  the  eye  of 
God  to  see  that  His  weak  disciple  loved  Him.  At 
the  moment  that  He  convinced  him  of  his  utter 
nothingness,  He  entrusted  to  him  that  which  was 
dearest  to  Himself. 

Thus  we  see,  here,  that  it  is  the  apostle's  care,  the 
desire  of  the  heart,  that  they  should  feed  the  flock. 
Here,  as  elsewhere,  he  does  not  go  beyond  the  Lord's 
appearing.  It  is  at  that  period  that  the  ways  of  God 
in  government — of  which  the  Jews  were  the  earthly 
centre — shall  be  fully  manifested.  Then  shall  the 
crown  of  glory  be  presented  to  him  that  has  been 
faithful,  that  has  satisfied  the  chief  Shepherd's  heart. 

The  young  were  to  submit  themselves  to  those  who 
were  older,  and  all  to  one  another.  All  were  to  be 
clothed  with  humility:  for  God  resists  the  proud,  and 
gives  grace  to  the  humble.  These  are  still  the  prin- 
ciples of  His  government.  Under  His  hand  they  were 
therefore  to  humble  themselves ;  they  should  be 
exalted  in  due  time.  This  was  to  commit  them- 
selves to  God.  He  knew  what  was  needful.  He  who 
loved  them  would  exalt  them  at  the  right  time.  He 
cared  for  them  ;  they  were  to  rest  on  Him,  commit  al! 
their  cares  to  Him. 

V, 


404  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

On  the  other  hand,  they  were  to  be  sober  and 
vigilant,  because  the  adversary  sought  to  devour  them. 
Here — whatever  may  be  his  wiles,  however  he  may 
lie  in  wait  for  Christians — it  is  in  the  character  of  a 
roaring  lion,  one  who  excites  open  persecution,  that 
the  apostle  presents  him.  They  were  to  resist  him, 
stedfast  in  the  faith.  Everywhere  the  same  afflictions 
were  found.  Nevertheless  the  God  of  grace  is  the 
Christian's  confidence.  He  has  called  us  to  participate 
in  His  eternal  glory.  The  apostle's  desire  for  them  is, 
that,  after  they  had  suffered  for  a  time,  the  God  of 
grace  should  make  them  perfect,  complete — should 
stablish  and  strengthen  them,  building  up  their  hearts 
on  the  foundation  of  an  assurance  that  cannot  be 
shaken.     To  Him,  he  adds,  be  glory  and  dominion. 

We  see  that  the  Christians  to  whom  he  wrote  were 
suffering,  and  that  the  apostle  explained  these  suffer- 
ings on  the  principles  of  the  divine  government,  with 
regard  especially  to  the  relation  of  Christians  with 
God,  as  being  His  house,  whether  those  sufferings 
were  for  righteousness'  sake  or  for  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  It  was  but  for  a  time.  The  Christian's  hope 
was  elsewhere ;  christian  patience  was  well -pleasing  to 
God.  It  was  their  glory,  if  it  was  for  the  name  of 
Christ.  Besides  which,  God  judged  His  house,  and 
watched  over  His  people. 


II  PETER 

The  Second  Epistle  of  Peter  is  even  more  simple  than 
the  First.  Like  those  of  Jude  s,nd  John,  it  is  written 
essentially  with  a  view  to  the  seducers,  who,  with 
large  promises  of  liberty,  beguiled  souls  into  sin  and 
licentiousness,  denying  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  in 
fact  disowning  all  His  rights  over  them.  The  epistle 
admonishes  the  same  Christians  to  whom  the  First  was 
written,  pointing  out  the  characteristic  features  of 
these  false  teachers ;  denouncing  them  with  the  utmost 
energy;  explaining  the  long-sufferance  of  God,  and 
announcing  a  judgment  which,  like  His  patience, 
would  befit  the  majesty  of  Him  who  was  to  execute  it. 

But  before  giving  these  warnings,  which  begin 
with  chapter  ii.,  the  apostle  exhorts  Christians  to 
make  their  own  calling  and  election  sure — not  evi- 
dently in  the  heart  of  God,  but  as  a  fact  in  their  own 
hearts,  and  in  practical  life,  by  walking  in  such  a 
manner  as  not  to  stumble ;  so  that  testimony  to  their 
portion  in  Christ  should  be  always  evident,  and  an 
abundant  entrance  be  ministered  to  them. 

These  exhortations  are  founded,  first,  on  that  which 
is  already  given  to  Christians ;  secondly,  on  that  which 
is  future — namely,  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of 
the  kingdom.  In  touching  upon  this  last  subject,  he 
indicates  a  still  more  excellent  portion — the  bright 
Morning  Star,  the  heavenly  Christ  Himself  and  our 
association  with  Him  before  He  appears  as  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness.  Thirdly,  we  shall  see  that  the  warn- 
ings are  founded  also  on  another  basis — namely,  the 
dissolution  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  proving  the 


406  THE  BOOKS    OF   THE   BIBLE. 

instability  of  all  that  unbelief  rested  upon,  and 
furnishing  for  the  same  reason  a  solemn  warning  to 
the  saints  to  induce  them  to  walk  in  holiness. 

The  apostle  describes  his  brethren  as  having  ob- 
tained the  same  precious  faith  as  himself  through  the 
faithfulness  of  God*  to  the  promises  made  to  the 
fathers,  for  that  surely  is  the  force  of  the  word 
"  righteousness  "  in  this  place.  The  faithfulness  of  the 
God  of  Israel  had  bestowed  on  His  people  this  faith 
(that  is  to  say,  Christianity),  which  was  so  precious  to 
them. 

Faith  here  is  the  portion  we  have  now  in  the  things 
that  God  gives,  which  in  Christianity  are  revealed  as 
truths,  while  the  things  promised  are  not  yet  come. 
It  was  in  this  way  that  the  believing  Jews  were  to 
possess  the  Messiah,  and  all  that  God  gave  in  Him,  as 
the  Lord  had  said,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled : 
ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me.  There  are  many 
mansions  in  my  Father's  house;  I  go  to  prepare  a 
place  for  you."  That  is  to  say,  "  You  do  not  visibly 
possess  God ;  you  enjoy  Him  by  believing  in  Him.  It 
is  the  same  with  respect  to  Me :  you  will  not  possess 
Me  corporeally,  but  you  shall  enjoy  all  that  is  in  Me 
— righteousness,  and  all  the  promises  of  God — by  be- 
lieving." It  was  thus  that  these  believing  Jews,  to 
whom  Peter  wrote,  possessed  the  Lord:  they  had 
received  this  precious  faith. 

He  wishes  them,  as  is  the  custom,  "  Grace  and 
peace,"  adding,  "  through  the  knowledge  of  God  and 
of  Jesus  our  Lord."  It  is  the  knowledge  of  God  and 
of  Jesus,  which  is  the  centre  and  the  support  of  faith, 
that  which  nourishes  it,  and  in  which  it  is  developed 
and  divinely  enlarged,  and  which  guards  it  from  the 

*  This  passage  maybe  translated  "of  our  God  and  Sa\dour 
Jesus  Christ,"  and  perhaps  ought  to  be  so  rendered  since  it 
speaks  of  the  faitfulness  of  God  to  His  promise.  The  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews  dwells  also  on  the  fact  that  Jesus  is  Jehovah, 


II    PETER.  407 

vain  imaginings  of  seducers.  But  there  is  a  living 
power  with  this  knowledge — a  divine  power  in  that 
which  God  is  to  believers — as  He  is  revealed  in  this 
knowledge  to  faith ;  and  this  divine  power  has  given 
to  us  all  that  pertains  to  life  and  godliness.  By  the 
realising  knowledge  which  we  possess  of  Him  who 
has  called  us,  this  divine  power  becomes  available  and 
efficacious  for  all  that  appertains  to  life  and  godliness 
— "  the  knowledge  of  him  who  hath  called  us  by  glory 
and  by  virtue." 

Thus  we  have  here,  the  call  of  God  to  pursue  glory 
as  our  object,  gaining  the  victory  by  virtue — spiritual 
courage — over  all  the  enemies  that  we  find  in  our 
path.  It  is  not  a  law  given  to  a  people  already 
gathered  together,  but  glory  proposed  in  order  to  be 
reached  by  spiritual  energy.  Moreover  we  have  divine 
power  acting  according  to  its  own  efficacy,  for  the  life 
of  God  in  us,  and  for  godliness. 

How  precious  it  is  to  know  that  faith  can  use  this 
divine  power,  realised  in  the  life  of  the  soul,  directing 
it  towards  glory  as  its  end !  What  a  safeguard  from 
the  efforts  of  the  enemy,  if  we  are  really  established 
in  the  consciousness  of  this  divine  power  acting  on 
our  behalf  in  grace !  The  heart  is  led  to  make  glory 
its  object ;  and  virtue,  the  strength  of  spiritual  life,  is 
developed  on  the  way  to  it.  Divine  power  has  given 
us  all  needed. 

Now,  in  connection  with  these  two  things — namely, 
with  glory  and  with  the  energy  of  life — very  great 
and  precious  promises  are  given  us;  for  all  the  pro- 
mises in  Christ  are  developed  either  in  the  glory  or  in 
the  life  which  leads  to  it.  By  means  of  these  promises, 
we  are  made  partakers  of  the  divine  nature ;  for  this 
divine  power,  which  is  realised  in  life  and  godliness, 
is  connected  with  these  great  and  precious  promises 
that  relate  either  to  the  glory,  or  to  virtue  in  the  life 
that  leads  to  it — that  is  to  say,  it  is  divine  power 

I. 


408  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

which  develops  itself,  in  realising  the  glory  and 
heavenly  walk  which  characterises  it  in  its  own 
nature.  We  are  thus  made  morally  partakers  of  the 
divine  nature,  by  divine  power  acting  in  us  and  fixing 
the  soul  on  what  is  divinely  revealed.  Precious  truth  ! 
Privilege  so  exalted  !  and  which  renders  us  capable  of 
enjoying  God  Himself,  as  well  as  all  good. 

By  the  same  action  of  this  divine  power,  we  escape 
the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust ;  for 
the  divine  power  delivers  us  from  it.  Not  only  do  we 
not  yield  to  it,  but  we  are  occupied  elsewhere,  and  the 
action  of  the  enemy  upon  the  flesh  is  kept  off;  the 
desires  from  which  one  could  not  cleanse  oneself  are 
removed  ;  the  corrupt  relationship  of  the  heart  with 
its  object  ceases.  It  is  a  real  deliverance  ;  we  have 
the  mastery  over  ourselves  in  this  respect ;  we  are  set 
free  from  sin. 

But  it  is  not  enough  to  have  escaped  by  faith  from 
even  the  inward  dominion  of  the  desires  of  the  flesh ; 
we  must  add  to  faith — to  that  faith  which  realises 
divine  power,  and  the  glory  of  Christ  that  shall  be 
revealed — we  must  add  to  faith,  virtue.  This  is  the 
first  thing.  It  is,  a,3  we  have  said,  the  moral  courage 
which  overcomes  difficulties,  and  governs  the  heart  by 
curbing  all  action  of  the  old  nature.  It  is  an  energy 
by  which  the  heart  is  master  of  itself,  and  is  able  to 
choose  the  good,  and  to  cast  aside  the  evil,  as  a  thing 
conquered  and  unworthy  of  oneself.  This  indeed  is 
grace;  but  the  apostle  is  here  speaking  of  the  thing 
itself,  as  it  is  realised  in  the  heart,  and  not  of  its 
source.  I  have  said  that  this  is  the  first  thing;  be- 
cause, practically,  this  self-government — this  virtue, 
this  moral  energy — is  deliverance  from  evil,  and 
renders  communion  with  God  possible.  It  is  the  one 
thing  which  gives  reality  to  all  the  rest,  for  without 
virtue  we  are  not  really  with  God.  Can  divine  power 
develop  itself  in  the  laxity  of  the  flesh  ?     And  if  we 


II  PETER.  400 

are  not  really  with  God — if  the  new  nature  is  not 
acting — knowledge  is  but  the  puffing  up  of  the  flesh  ; 
patience  but  a  natural  quality,  or  else  hypocrisy ;  and 
so  on  with  the  rest.  But  where  there  is  this  virtue, 
it  is  very  precious  to  add  knowledge  to  it.  We  have 
then  divine  wisdom  and  intelligence  to  guide  our 
walk :  the  heart  is  enlarged,  sanctified,  spiritually 
developed,  by  a  more  complete  and  profound  acquaint- 
ance with  God,  who  acts  in  the  heart  and  is  reflected 
in  the  walk.  We  are  guarded  from  more  errors — we 
are  more  humble,  more  sober-minded :  we  know 
better  where  our  treasure  is,  and  what  it  is,  and 
that  everything  else  is  but  vanity  and  a  hindrance. 
It  is  therefore  a  true  knowledge  of  God  that  is  here 
meant. 

Thus  walking  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  flesh, 
the  will,  the  desires,  are  bridled ;  all  their  practical 
power  diminishes,  and  they  disappear  as  habits  of  the 
soul ;  they  are  not  fed.  We  are  moderate ;  there  is 
self-restraint;  we  do  not  give  way  to  our  desires; 
temperance  is  added  to  knowledge.  The  apostle  is 
not  speaking  of  the  walk,  but  of  the  state  of  the  heart 
in  the  walk.  Still,  being  thus  governed,  and  the  will 
bridled,  one  bears  patiently  with  others;  and  the 
circumstances  that  must  be  passed  through  are,  in  all 
respects,  borne  according  to  the  will  of  God,  be  they 
what  they  may.  We  add  patience  to  temperance. 
The  heart,  tha  spiritual  life,  is  then  free  to  enjoy  its 
true  objects — a  principle  of  deep  importance  in  the 
christian  life.  When  the  flesh  is  at  work  in  one  way 
or  another  (even  if  its  action  is  purely  inward),  if 
there  is  anything  whatever  that  the  oonscience  ought 
to  be  exercised  about,  the  soul  cannot  be  in  the 
enjoyment  of  communion  with  God  in  the  light, 
because  the  effect  of  the  light  is  then  to  bring  the 
conscience  into  exercise.  But  when  the  conscience 
has  nothing  that  is  not  already  judged  in  the  light. 


410  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE  BIBLE. 

the  new  man  is  in  action  with  regard  to  God,  whether 
in  realising  the  joy  of  His  presence  or  in  glorifying 
Him  in  a  life  characterised  by  godliness.  We  enjoy 
communion  with  God ;  we  walk  with  God ;  we  add  to 
patience  godliness. 

The  heart  being  thus  in  communion  with  God, 
affection  flows  out  freely  towards  those  who  are  dear 
to  Him,  and  who,  sharir^g  the  same  nature,  necessarily 
draw  out  the  affections  of  the  spiritual  heart :  brotherly 
love  is  developed. 

There  is  another  principle,  which  crowns  and 
governs  and  gives  character  to  all  others :  it  is  charity, 
love  properly  so  called.  This,  in  its  root,  is  the  nature 
of  God  Himself,  the  source  and  perfection  of  every 
other  quality  that  adorns  christian  life.  The  distinc- 
tion between  love  and  brotherly  love  is  of  deep 
importance ;  the  former  is  indeed,  as  we  have  just 
said,  the  source  whence  the  latter  flows;  but  as  this 
brotherly  love  exists  in  mortal  men,  it  may  be  mingled 
in  its  exercise  with  sentiments  that  are  merely  human, 
with  individual  aftection,  with  the  effect  of  personal 
attractions,  or  that  of  habit,  of  suitability  in  natural 
character.  Nothing  is  sweeter  than  brotherly  affec- 
tions ;  their  maintenance  is  of  the  highest  importance 
in  the  assembly ;  but  they  may  degenerate,  as  they 
may  grow  cool ;  and  if  love,  if  God,  does  not  hold  the 
chief  place,  they  may  displace  Him — set  Him  aside — 
shut  Him  out.  Divine  love,  which  is  the  very  nature 
of  God,  directs,  rules,  and  gives  character  to  brotherly 
love  ;  otherwise  it  is  that  which  pleases  us — that  is, 
our  own  heart — that  governs  us.  If  divine  love 
governs  me,  I  love  all  my  brethren;  I  love  them 
because  they  belong  to  Christ;  there  is  no  partiality. 
I  shall  have  greater  enjoyment  in  a  spiritual  brother; 
but  I  shall  occupy  myself  about  my  weak  brother 
with  a  love  that  rises  above  his  weakness  and  has 
tender  consideration  for  it.     I   shall  concern  myself 


n  PETER.  411 

with  my  brother's  sm,  from  love  to  God,  in  order  to 
restore  my  brother,  rebuking  him,  if  needful ;  nor,  if 
divine  love  be  in  exercise,  can  brotherly  love,  or  its 
name,  be  associated  with  disobedience.  In  a  word, 
God  will  have  His  place  in  all  my  relationships.  To 
exact  brotherly  love  in  such  a  manner  as  to  shut  out 
the  requirements  of  that  which  God  is,  and  of  His 
claims  upon  us,  is  to  shut  out  God  in  the  most 
plausible  way,  in  order  to  gratify  our  own  hearts. 
Divine  love  then,  which  acts  according  to  the  nature, 
character,  and  will  of  God,  is  that  which  ought  to 
direct  and  characterise  our  whole  christian  walk,  and 
have  authority  over  every  movement  of  our  hearts. 
Without  this,  all  that  brotherly  love  can  do  is  to 
substitute  man  for  God.  Divine  love  is  the  bond  of 
perfectness,  for  it  is  God,  who  is  love,  working  in  us 
and  making  Himself  the  governing  object  of  all  that 
passes  in  the  heart. 

Now,  if  these  things  are  in  us,  the  knowledge  of 
Jesus  will  not  be  barren  in  our  hearts.  But  if,  on  the 
contrary,  they  are  wanting,  we  are  blind ;  we  cannot 
see  far  into  the  things  of  God :  our  view  is  contracted ; 
it  is  limited  by  the  narrowness  of  a  heart  governed  by 
its  own  will,  and  turned  aside  by  its  own  lusts.  We 
forget  that  we  have  been  cleansed  from  our  old  sins ; 
we  lose  sight  of  the  position  Christianity  has  given  us. 
This  state  of  things  is  not  the  loss  of  assurance,  but 
the  forgetfulness  of  the  true  christian  profession  into 
which  we  are  brought — purity  in  contrast  with  the 
ways  of  the  world. 

Therefore  we  ought  to  use  diligence,  in  order  to 
have  the  consciousness  of  our  election  fresh  and 
strong,  so  as  to  walk  in  spiritual  liberty.  Thus  doing, 
we  shall  not  stumble ;  and  thus  an  abundant  entrance 
into  the  eternal  kingdom  will  be  our  portion.  Here, 
as  throughout,  we  see  that  the  apostle's  mind  is 
occupied  with  the  government  of  God,  applying  it  to 

1. 


412  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

His  dealing  with  believers,  in  reference  to  their  con- 
duct and  its  practical  consequences.  He  is  not  speak- 
ing in  an  absolute  way  of  pardon  and  salvation,  but  of 
the  kingdom — of  the  manifestation  of  His  power  who 
judges  righteously — whose  sceptre  is  a  sceptre  of 
righteousness.  Walking  in  the  ways  of  God,  we  have 
part  in  that  kingdom,  entering  into  it  with  assurance, 
without  difficulty,  without  that  hesitation  of  soul 
which  is  experienced  by  those  who  grieve  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  get  a  bad  conscience,  and  allow  themselves 
in  things  that  do  not  accord  with  the  character  of  the 
kingdom,  or  who  shew  by  their  negligence  that  their 
heart  is  not  in  it.  If  on  the  contrary  the  heart 
cleaves  to  the  kingdom,  and  our  ways  are  suitable  to 
it,  our  conscience  is  in  unison  with  its  glory.  The 
way  is  open  before  us :  -vve  see  into  the  distance,  and 
we  go  forward,  having  no  impediments  in  our  way. 
Nothing  turns  us  aside  as  we  walk  in  the  path  that 
leads  to  the  kingdom,  occupied  with  things  suitable  to 
it.  God  has  no  controversy  with  one  who  walks  thus. 
The  entrance  into  the  kingdom  is  widely  opened  to 
him  according  to  the  ways  of  God  in  government. 

The  apostle  desires,  therefore,  to  remind  them  of 
these  things,  although  they  knew  them,  purposing,  so 
long  as  he  was  in  his  earthly  tabernacle,  to  stir  up 
their  pure  hearts  to  keep  them  in  remembrance ;  for 
soon  would  he  have  laid  aside  his  earthly  vessel,  as 
the  Lord  had  told  him,  and  by  thus  writing  to  them, 
he  took  care  that  they  should  alwa^^s  bear  them  in 
mind. 

It  is  very  plain  that  he  was  not  expecting  other 
apostles  to  be  raised  up,  nor  an  ecclesiastical  succes- 
sion to  take  their  place  as  guardians  of  the  faith,  or 
as  possessing  sufficient  authority  to  be  a  foundation 
for  the  faith  of  believers.  He  was  to  provide  for  this 
himself,  in  order  that,  on  his  removal,  they  might  find 
something  on  his  part  that  would  remind  the  faithful 


II   PETER.  413 

of  the  instructions  he  had  given  them.  For  this 
purpose  he  wrote  his  epistle. 

The  divine  importance  and  certainty  of  that  which 
he  taught  were  worthy  of  this  labour.  We  have  not. 
says  the  apostle,  followed  cunningly  devised  fables 
when  we  made  known  unto  you  the  power  and  coming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  were  eye-witnesses  of 
His  majesty. 

The  apostle  is  speaking,  as  his  words  plainly  shew, 
of  the  transfiguration.  I  notice  it  here,  in  order  to 
mark  more  evidently  that  in  his  thoughts  of  the 
Lord's  coming  he  does  not  go  beyond  His  appearing  in 
glory.  For  the  moment  He  was  hidden  from  those 
who  trusted  in  Him :  this  was  a  great  trial  of  their 
faith,  for  the  Jews  were  accustomed,  as  we  know,  to 
look  for  a  visible  and  glorious  Messiah.  To  believe 
without  seeing  was  the  lesson  they  had  to  learn ;  and 
it  was  a  magnificent  support  to  their  faith,  this  fact, 
that  the  apostle,  who  taught  them,  had,  with  his  two 
companions,  seen,  with  their  own  eyes,  the  glory  of 
Christ  manifested — had  seen  it  displayed  before  them, 
together  with  that  of  former  saints  who  share  His 
kingdom.  At  that  time  Jesus  received,  in  testimony 
from  God  the  Father,  honour  and  glory ;  a  voice 
addressing  Him  from  the  excellent  glory — from  the 
cloud,  which  was  to  a  Jew  the  well-known  dwelling- 
place  of  Jehovah  the  Most  High  God — owning  Him 
as  His  well-beloved  Son;  a  voice  which  the  three 
apostles  also  heard  (even  as  they  saw  His  glory), 
when  they  were  with  Him  on  the  holy  mount.* 

We  see  that  it  is  here  the  glory  of  the  kingdom, 
and  not  the  dwelling;  in  the  Father's  house  for  ever 

*■  In  Luke  ix.  the  hio[her  part  of  the  blessing  is  brought  before 
us.  They  feared  when  they  entered  into  the  cloud.  God  had 
talked  with  Moses  from  the  cloud  face  to  face,  but  here  they 
enter  into  it.  The  heavenly  and  eternal  character,  what  is 
perpetual  as  moral,  is  much  more  brought  out  in  Luke, 

I. 


414  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

with  the  Lord,  which  occupies  the  apostle.  It  is  a 
manifestation  to  men  living  on  the  earth;  it  is  the 
power  of  the  Lord,  the  glory  which  He  receives  from 
God  the  Father  as  the  Messiah,  acknowledged  to  be 
His  Son,  and  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  before 
the  eyes  of  the  world.  It  is  into  the  everlasting 
kingdom  that  the  apostle  wishes  them  to  have  an 
enlarged  entrance.  It  is  the  power  and  glory  that 
Christ  received  from  God,  which  the  apostle  saw,  and 
to  which  he  bears  testimony.  We  shall  indeed  have 
this  glory,  but  it  is  not  our  portion,  properly  so  called : 
for  this  is  within  the  house,  to  be  the  bride  of  the 
Lamb,  and  it  does  not  display  itself  to  the  world. 
With  regard  however  to  the  assembly  the  two  things 
cannot  be  separated ;  if  we  are  the  bride,  we  shall 
assuredly  participate  in  the  glory  of  the  kingdom.* 
To  the  Jew,  who  was  accustomed  to  look  for  this 
glory  (whatever  might  be  his  idea  respecting  it),  the 
fact  of  the  apostle's  having  seen  it  was  of  inestimable 
importance.  It  was  the  heavenly  glory  of  the  king- 
dom, as  it  shall  be  manifested  to  the  world ;  a  glory 
that  shall  be  seen  when  the  Lord  returns  in  power. 
(Compare  Mark  ix.  1.)  It  is  a  communicated  glory 
which  comes  from  the  excellent  glory.  Moreover  the 
testimony  of  the  prophets  relates  to  the  manifested 
glory ;  they  spoke  of  the  kingdom  and  glory,  and  the 
brightness  of  the  transfiguration  was  a  splendid  con- 
firmation of  their  words.  We  have,  says  the  apostle, 
the  words  of  the  prophets  confirmed.  Those  words 
proclaimed  indeed  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  which 
was  to  come,  and  the  judgment  of  the  world,  which 
was  to  make  way  for  its  establishment  on  earth.  This 
announcement  was  a  light  in  the  darkness  of  our 
world,  truly  a  dark  place,  that  had  no  other  light 

*  Compare   Luke  xii.,  where  the   joy  within  the   house   is 
connected  with  watching ;  the  inheritance  with  service, 


II  PETER.  415 

than  the  testimony  which  God  had  given,  through  the 
prophets,  of  that  which  shall  happen  to  it,  and  of  the 
future  kingdom  whose  light  shall  finally  dispel  the 
darkness  of  separation  from  God  in  which  the  world 
lies.  Prophecy  was  a  light  that  shone  during  the 
darkness  of  the  night ;  but  there  was  another  light  for 
those  that  watched. 

For  the  remnant  of  the  Jews,  the  Sun  of  righteous- 
ness should  rise  with  healing  in  His  wings  ;  the  wicked 
should  be  trodden  as  ashes  under  the  feet  of  the 
righteous.  The  Christian,  instructed  in  his  own  privi- 
leges, knows  the  Lord  in  a  different  •  way  from  this, 
although  he  believes  in  those  solemn  truths.  He 
watches  during  the  night,  which  is  already  far  spent. 
He  sees  in  his  heart,  by  faith,*  the  dawn  of  day,  and 
the  rising  of  the  bright  star  of  the  morning.  He 
knows  the  Lord  as  they  know  Him  who  believe  in 
Him  before  He  is  manifested,  as  coming  for  the 
pure  heavenly  joy  of  His  own  before  the  brightness  of 
the  day  shines  forth.  They  who  watch  see  the  dawn 
of  day ;  they  see  the  morning  star.  Thus  we  have  our 
portion  in  Christ  not  only  in  the  day,  and  as  the 
prophets  spoke  of  Him,  which  all  relates  to  the  earth, 
although  the  blessing  comes  from  on  high ;  we  have 
the  secret  of  Christ  and  of  our  union  with  Him,  and  of 
His  coming  to  receive  us  to  Himself  as  the  morning 
star,  before  the  day  comes.  We  are  His  during  the 
night;  we  shall  be  with  Him  in  the  truth  of  that 
heavenly  bond  which  unites  us  to  Him,  as  set  apart 
for  Himself  while  the  world  does  not  see  Him.  We 
shall  be  gathered  to  Him,  before  the  world  sees  Him, 
that  we  may  enjoy  Himself,  and  in  order  that  the 
world  may  see  us  with  Him  when  He  appears. 

*  This  is  the  construction  of  the  sentence :  "  We  have  also 
the  prophetic  word  confirmed,  in  giving  heed  to  which  ye  do 
well  (as  to  a  Ught  shining  in  a  dark  place),  until  the  day  shall 
dawn,  and  the  morning  star  arise,  in  your  hearts," 

L 


416  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

The  joy  of  our  portion  is,  that  we  shall  be  with 
Himself,  "for  ever  with  the  Lord."  Prophecy  en- 
lightens the  Christian,  and  separates  him  from  the 
world,  by  testimony  to  its  judgment,  and  the  glory  of 
the  coming  kingdom.  The  testimony  of  the  Spirit  to 
the  assembly  does  this,  by  the  attraction  of  Christ 
Himself,  the  bright  Morning  Star — our  portion  while 
the  world  is  still  buried  in  sleep. 

The  bright  morning  star  is  Christ  Himself,  when 
(before  the  day,  which  will  be  produced  by  His 
appearing)  He  is  ready  to  receive  the  assembly,  that 
she  may  enter  into  His  own  peculiar  joy.  Thus  it  is 
said,  "  I  am  the  bright  and  morning  star."  (Rev. 
xxii.  16.)  This  is  what  He  is  for  the  assembly,  as  He 
is  the  root  and  offspring  of  David  for  Israel.  Conse- 
quently, as  soon  as  He  says  "  the  morning  star,"  the 
Spirit,  who  dwells  in  the  assembly  and  inspires  her 
thoughts,  and  the  bride,  the  assembly  itself  which 
waits  for  her  Lord,  say,  "  Come !"  Thus,  in  Revela- 
tion ii.  28,  the  faithful  in  Thyatira  are  promised  by 
the  Lord  that  He  will  give  them  the  morning  star, 
that  is  to  say,  joy  with  Himself  in  heaven.  The 
kingdom  and  the  power  had  been  already  promised 
them  according  to  Christ's  own  rights  (vers.  26,  27) ; 
but  the  assembly's  proper  portion  is  Christ  Himself. 
In  addition  to  the  declaration  of  the  prophets,  with 
regard  to  the  kingdom,  it  is  thus  that  the  assembly 
expects  Him. 

The  apostle  goes  on  to  warn  the  faithful,  that  the 
prophecies  of  scripture  were  not  like  the  utterances  of 
human  will,  and  were  not  to  be  interpreted  as  though 
each  had  a  separate  solution— as  though  every  pro- 
phecy were  sufficient  to  itself  for  the  explanation  of 
its  full  meaning.  They  were  all  parts  of  one  whole, 
having  one  and  the  same  object,  even  the  kingdom  of 
God ;  and  each  event  was  a  preliminary  step  towards 
this  object,  and  a  link  in  the  chain  of  God's  govern- 


II  PETER.  417 

ment  which  led  to  it,  impossible  to  be  explained, 
unless  the  aim  of  the  whole  were  apprehended — the 
revealed  aim  of  the  counsels  of  God  in  the  glory  of 
His  Christ.  For  holy  men,  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
pronounced  these  oracles,  one  and  the  same  Spirit 
directing  and  co-ordaining  the  whole  for  the  develop- 
ment of  the  ways  of  God  to  the  eye  of  faith,  ways 
which  would  terminate  in  the  establishment  of  that 
kingdom,  the  glory  of  which  had  appeared  at  the 
transfiguration. 

Thus  we  have  here  (chap,  i.)  these  three  things : — 
First,  divine  power  for  all  that  appertains  to  life  and 
godliness,  a  declaration  of  infinite  value,  the  pledge 
of  our  true  liberty.  Divine  power  acts  in  us,  it  gives  to 
us  all  needed  to  enable  us  to  walk  in  the  christian  life. 

Secondly,  there  is  the  government  of  God,  in  con- 
nection with  the  faithfulness  of  the  believer,  in  order 
that  a  wide  and  abundant  entrance  into  the  everlast- 
ing kingdom  may  be  granted  us,  and  that  we  may  not 
stumble.  The  great  result  of  this  government  will  be 
manifested  in  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom,  the 
glory  of  which  was  seen  on  the  holy  mount  by  the 
three  apostles. 

But,  thirdly,  for  the  Christian  there  was  something 
better  than  the  kingdom,  something  to  which  the 
apostle  merely  alludes,  for  it  was  not  the  especial 
subject  of  the  communications  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
him  as  it  was  to  the  Apostle  Paul,  namely,  Christ 
taking  the  assembly  to  Himself,  a  point  not  found 
either  in  the  promises  or  the  prophecies,  but  which 
forms  the  precious  and  inestimable  joy  and  hope  of 
the  Christian  taught  of  God. 

This  first  chapter  has  thus  taught  us  the  divine 
aspect  of  the  christian  position,  given  to  the  apostle 
for  the  instruction,  in  the  last  days,  of  believers  from 
among  the  circumcision.  The  next  two  chapters  set 
before  us,  on  the  other  hand,  the  two  forms  of  evil 
VOL.  V.  L,  n.  E  E 


41 S         THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

th«,f  characterise  the  last  days — the  false  and  corrupt 
teaching  of  bad  men,  and  the  unbelief  which  denies 
tiie  return  of  the  Lord  on  the  ground  of  the  stability 
of  the  visible  creation.  The  former  really  denies  the 
Master  who  bought  them.  It  is  no  question  here  as 
to  the  title  of  the  Lord,  nor  of  redemption.  The 
simile  is  of  a  master  who  has  purchased  slaves  at  the 
market,  and  they  disown  and  refuse  to  obey  him. 
Thus  among  the  converted  Jews  there  would  be  false 
teachers,  who  disowned  the  authority  of  Christ — His 
rights  over  them.  Many  would  be  led  away  by  them ; 
and  as  they  bore  the  name  of  Christians,  the  way  of 
truth  would  be  brought  into  disrepute  by  their  means ; 
while  in  fact,  by  their  covetousness  and  hypocritical 
words,  they  would  make  merchandise  of  Christians 
for  their  private  gain,  count  them  as  mere  instruments 
of  it.  But  the  resource  of  faith  is  always  in  God. 
Judgment  would  overtake  them.  The  examples  of 
the  fallen  angels,  of  Noah  and  the  deluge,  of  Lot  and 
Sodom,  proved  that  the  Lord  knew  how  to  deliver  the 
righteous  out  of  their  trials,  and  to  reserve  the 
unrighteous  for  the  day  of  judgment. 

That  which  would  characterise  this  class  of  evildoers 
would  be  the  unbridled  license  of  their  conduct. 
They  would  indulge  their  carnal  lusts,  and  despise  all 
authority  in  a  way  that  angels  would  not  dare  to  do. 
Still  they  would  call  themselves  Christians  and  as- 
sociate with  Christians  in  their  love-feasts,  deceiving 
their  own  hearts,  addicting  themselves  continually  to 
evil,  promising  liberty  to  others,  but  themselves  the 
slaves  of  corruption. 

Now,  to  be  thus  re-entangled  in  evil,  after  having 
escaped  it  through  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and 
Saviour,  was  worse  than  if  they  had  never  known  any- 
thing of  the  way  of  truth.  But  it  was  according  to 
the  true  proverb — The  dog  had  returned  to  his  own 
vomit,  and   the   sow  that  had   been  washed,  to  her 


n  PETER.  419 

wallowing  in  the  mire.  They  were  apostates  there- 
fore ;  but  here  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  so  much 
point  out  the  apostasy  as  the  evil,  because  the  govern- 
ment of  God  is  still  in  view.  In  Jude  the  apostasy  is 
the  prominent  thing.  Peter  tells  us  that  the  angels 
sinned ;  Jude,  that  they  kept  not  their  first  estate. 
But  God  will  judge  the  wicked. 

In  the  last  chapter,  as  we  have  said,  it  is  ma- 
terialism :  trust  in  the  stability  of  that  which  can  be 
seen,  in  contrast  with  trust  in  the  word  of  God  which 
teaches  us  to  look  for  the  coming  of  Jesus,  the  return 
of  the  Lord.  They  judge  by  their  senses.  There  is, 
say  they,  no  appearance  of  change.  This  is  not  the 
case.  To  the  eye  of  man  it  is  indeed  true  that  there 
is  none.  But  these  believers  are  wilfully  ignorant  of 
the  fact  that  the  world  has  been  already  judged  once ; 
that  the  waters,  oat  of  which  by  the  mighty  word  of 
God  the  earth  came,  had  for  the  moment  swallowed  it 
up  again,  all  perishing  except  those  whom  God  pre- 
served in  the  ark.  And  by  the  same  word  the  present 
heavens  and  earth  are  reserved  for  the  day  of  judg- 
ment and  perdition  of  ungodly  men.  It  is  not  that 
the  Lord  is  slack  concerning  the  promise  of  His 
return,  but  that  He  is  still  exercising  grace,  not 
wishing  any  to  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to 
repentance.  And  a  thousand  years  are  to  Him  but  as 
a  day,  and  a  day  as  a  thousand  years.  But  the  day 
of  the  Lord  shall  come,  in  which  all  things  will  pass 
away,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat, 
and  all  that  is  on  the  earth  will  be  consumed. 
Solemn  consideration  for  the  children  of  God,  to 
maintain  them  in  complete  separation  from  evil,  and 
from  all  that  is  seen,  lookinor  for  and  hastenino-  the 
day  in  which  the  heavens  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the 
elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat !  Ever3^thing 
on  which  the  hopes  of  the  flesh  are  founded  shall 
disappear  for  ever. 

II.,  III. 


420  THE   BOOKS   OP  THE   BIBLE. 

Novertlieloss,  tJiere  slmll  be  new  heavens  and  a  new 
eartli,  in  wliich  righteousness  shall  dwell.  It  is  not 
here  said,  "shall  reign,"  which  would  be  the  thousand 
j^eais  of  the  Lord's  dominion  ;  here  it  is  the  eternal 
state,  in  which  the  government,  that  has  brought  all 
things  into  order,  will  terminate,  and  unhindered 
blessing  will  flow  from  God,  the  kingdom  being  given 
up  to  God  the  Father. 

It  is  in  following  out  the  ways  of  God  in  govern- 
ment that  the  apostle  carries  them  on  to  the  eternal 
state,  in  which  the  promise  will  be  finally  accom- 
plished. The  millennium  itself  was  the  restitution,  of 
which  the  prophets  had  spoken;  and,  morally,  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  had  been  changed  by  the 
imprisonment  of  Satan  and  the  reign  of  Christ  (see 
Isaiah  Ixv.  17,  18,  Jerusalem  having  been  made  a 
rejoicing) ;  and  the  heavens  indeed  entirely  cleared 
by  power,  never  to  be  defiled  by  Satan  again,  the 
saints  on  high  too  in  their  eternal  state,  the  earth 
delivered,  but  not  yet  finally  freed.  But,  materially, 
the  dissolution  of  the  elements  was  necessary  for  the 
renewal  of  all  things. 

It  will  be  observed,  that  the  Spirit  does  not  speak 
here  of  the  coming  of  Christ,  except  to  say  that  it  will 
be  scoffed  at  in  the  last  days.  He  speaks  of  the  day 
of  God,  in  contrast  with  the  trust  of  unbelievers  in 
the  stability  of  the  material  things  of  creation,  which 
depends,  as  the  apostle  shews,  on  the  word  of  God. 
And  in  that  day  everything  on  which  unbelievers 
rested  and  will  rest  shall  be  dissolved  and  pass 
away.  This  will  not  be  at  the  commencement  of  the 
day,  but  at  its  close ;  and  here  we  are  free  to  reckon 
this  day,  according  to  the  apostle's  v.^ord,  as  a  thousand 
years,  or  whatever  length  of  period  the  Lord  shall 
see  tit. 

So  solemn  a  dissolution  of  all  that  the  flesh  rests 
upon  should  lead  us  so  to  walk  as  to  be  found  of  the 


n  PETER.  421 

Lord,  wlien  He  comes  to  introduce  that  day,  in  peace 
and  blameless;  accounting  that  tlie  ap[)arent  delay  is 
only  the  Lord's  grace,  exercised  for  the  salvation  of 
souls.  We  may  well  WMit,  if  God  makes  use  of  this 
time  to  rescue  souls  from  jmlgment,  by  bringing  them 
to  the  knowledge  of  Himself,  and  saving  them  with 
an  everlasting  salvation.  This,  the  apostle  sa>'s,  had 
been  taught  by  Paul,  who  wrote  to  them  (the  Hebrew 
believers)  of  these  things,  as  he  did  also  in  his  other 
epistles. 

It  is  interesting  to  see  that  Peter,  who  had  been 
openly  rebuked  before  all  by  Paul,  inti-oduces  him 
here  with  entire  affection.  He  notices  that  Paul's 
epistles  contained  an  exalted  doctrine,  which  they 
who  were  unstable,  and  not  taught  of  God,  perverted. 
For  Peter  in  fact  does  not  follow  Paul  in  the  Held  on 
which  the  latter  had  entered.  This  however  does  not 
prevent  his  speaking  of  Paul's  writings  as  forming  a 
part  of  the  scriptures ;  "  as  also  the  other  scriptures," 
he  says.  This  is  an  important  testimony;  which 
moreover  gives  the  same  character  to  the  writings  of 
one  who  is  able  to  bestow  this  title  on  the  writings  of 
another. 

Let  Christians  then  be  watchful,  and  not  allow 
themselves  to  be  seduced  by  the  errors  of  the  wicked, 
but  strive  to  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  To  Him  be  glory 
both  now  and  for  ever.    Amen  1 


I  JOHN. 

The  Epistle  of  John  has  a  peculiar  character.  It  is 
eterjial  life  manifested  in  Jesus,  and  imparted  to  us — 
the  Hfe  which  was  with  the  Father,  and  which  is  in 
the  Son.  It  is  in'  this  life  that  believers  enjoy  the 
communion  of  the  Father,  that  they  are  in  relationship 
with  the  Father  by  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  and  that 
they  have  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
God's  own  character  is  that  which  tests  it ;  because  it 
proceeds  from  Himself. 

The  first  chapter  establishes  these  two  latter  points: 
namely,  communion  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and 
that  this  communion  must  be  according  to  the  essen- 
tial character  of  God.  The  name  of  Father  is  that 
which  gives  character  to  the  second  chapter.  After- 
wards it  is  that  which  God  is,  w^hich  tests  the  reality 
of  imparted  life. 

The  Epistles  of  Paul,  although  speaking  of  this  life, 
are  in  general  occupied  with  setting  before  Christians 
the  truth  respecting  the  means  of  standing  in  the 
presence  of  God  justified  and  accepted.  The  Epistle 
of  John,  that  is  to  say,  his  First,  shews  us  the  life  that 
comes  from  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  John  sets  God 
before  us,  the  Father  revealed  in  the  Son,  and  eternal 
life  in  Him.  Paul  sets  us  before  God  accepted  in 
Christ.  I  speak  of  what  characterises  them.  Each 
respectively  touches  on  the  other  point. 

Kow,  this  life  is  so  precious,  mai:iifested  as  it  is  in 
the  Person  of  Jesus,  that  the  epistle  now  before  us 
has  in  this  respect  quite  a  peculiar  charm.  When  I, 
too,  turn  my  eyes  to  Jesus,  when  I  contemplate  all  His 


I  JOHN.  423 

obedience,  His  purity,  His  ^race,  His  tenderness,  His 
patience,  His  devotedness.  His  holiness,  His  love.  His 
entire  freedom  from  all  self-seekino^,  I  can  say,  That 
IS  my  hie. 

This  is  immeasurable  grace.  It  may  be  that  it  is 
obscured  in  me ;  but  it  is  none  the  less  true,  that  that 
is  my  life.  Oh  how  do  I  enjoy  it  thus  seen !  How  I 
bless  God  for  it !  What  rest  to  the  soul !  What  pure 
joy  to  the  heart !  At  the  same  time  Jesus  Himself  is 
the  object  of  my  affections;  and  all  my  affections  are 
formed  on  that  holy  object.* 

But  we  must  turn  to  our  epistle.  There  were 
many  pretensions  to  new  light,  to  clearer  views.  It 
was  said  that  Christianity  was  very  good  as  an  ele- 
mentary thing;  but  that  it  was  grown  old,  and  that 
there  was  a  new  light  which  went  far  beyond  that 
twilight  truth. 

The  Person  of  our  Lord,  the  true  manifestation  of 
the  divine  life  itself,  dissipated  all  those  proud  preten- 
sions, those  exaltations  of  the  human  mind  under  the 
influence  of  the  enemy,  which  did  but  obscure  the 
truth,  and  lead  the  mind  of  men  back  into  the  darkness 
whence  they  themselves  proceeded. 

That  which  was  from  the  beginning  (of  Christianity 
til  at  is,  in  the  Person  of  Christ),  that  which  they  had 
heard,  had  seen  with  their  own  eyes,  had  contem- 
plated, had  touched  with  their  own  hands,  of  the 
Word  of  life — that  was  it  which  the  apostle  declared. 
For  the  life  itself  had  been  manifested.  That  life 
which  was  with  the  Father  had  been  manifested  to  the 
disciples.  Could  there  be  anything  more  perfect,  more 
excellent,  any  development  more  admirable  in  the  eyes 
of  God,  than  Christ  Himself,  than  that  Life  which  was 
with  the  Father,  manifested  in  all  its  perfection  in  the 

*  And  this  is  morally  very  important ;  while  it  is  in  Him,  not 
in  myself,  that  I  rejoice  and  delight. 

I, 


424  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE    BIBLE. 

Person  of  the  Son  ?  As  soon  as  the  Person  of  the  Son 
is  the  objecc  of  our  faith,  we  feel  that  perfection  must 
have  been  at  the  be<rinninof. 

The  Person  then  of  the  Son,  the  eternal  life  mani- 
fested in  the  Hesh,  is  our  subject  in  this  epistle. 

Grace  is  consequently  to  be  remarked  here  in  that 
which  regards  life ;  while  Paul  presents  it  in  connec- 
tion with  justification.  The  law  promised  life  upon 
obedience ;  but  life  came  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  in  all 
its  own  divine  perfection,  in  its  human  manifestations. 
Oh  how  precious  is  the  truth  that  this  life,  such  as  it 
was  with  the  Father,  such  as  it  was  in  Jesus,  is  given 
to  us !  In  what  relationships  it  sets  us,  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  with  the  Father  and  with  the  Son 
Himself !  And  this  is  what  the  Spirit  here  first  sets 
before  us.  And  observe,  how  it  is  all  grace  here. 
Farther  on,  indeed.  He  tests  all  pretensions  to  the 
possession  of  fellowship  with  God,  by  displaying  God's 
own  character ;  a  character  from  which  He  can  never 
deviate.  But,  before  entering  on  this,  He  presents  the 
Saviour  Himself,  and  communion  with  the  Father 
and  the  Son  by  this  means,  without  question  and 
without  modification.  This  is  our  position  and  our 
eternal  joy. 

The  apostle  had  seen  that  life,  had  touched  it  with 
his  own  hands ;  and  he  wrote  to  others,  proclaiming 
this,  in  order  that  they  also  should  have  communion 
with  Him  in  the  knowledge  of  the  life  which  had 
been  thus  manifested.*  Now,  inasmuch  as  that  life 
was  the  Son,  it  could  not  be  known  without  knowing 
the  Son,  that  is,  that  which  He  was,  entering  into  His 

*  The  life  has  been  manifested.  Therefore  we  have  no  longer 
to  seek  for  it,  to  grope  after  it  in  the  darkness,  to  explore  at 
random  tiie  indefinite,  or  the  obscurity  of  our  own  hearts,  in 
order  to  find  it,  to  labour  fruitlessly  under  the  law,  in  order  to 
obtain  it.  We  behold  it;  it  is  revealed,  it  is  here,  in  Jesus 
Christ.     He  who  possesses  Christ  possesses  that  life. 


I  JOHN.  425 

thouixhts,  His  feelings:  otherwise  He  is  not  really 
known.  It  was  thus  they  had  communion  with  Him 
— with  the  ISon.  Precious  fact !  to  enter  into  the 
thouulits  (all  the  thoughts),  and  into  the  feelings,  of 
the  Son  of  God  come  down  in  grace:  to  do  this  in 
fellowship  with  Him,  that  is  to  say,  not  only  knowing 
them,  but  sharing  these  thoughts  and  feelings  with 
Him.     In  effect,  it  is  the  life. 

But  we  cannot  have  the  Son  without  having  the 
Father.  He  who  had  seen  Him  had  seen  the  Father; 
and  consequently  he  who  had  connn union  with  the 
Son  had  communion  with  the  Father;  for  their 
thoughts  and  feelings  were  all  one.  He  is  in  the 
Father,  and  the  Father  in  Him.  We  have  fellowship 
therefore  with  the  Father.  And  this  is  true  also, 
when  we  look  at  it  in  another  aspect.  We  know  that 
the  Father  has  entire  delight  in  the  Son.  Now  He 
has  given  us,  by  revealing  the  Son,  to  take  our  delight 
in  Him  also,  feeble  as  we  are.  1  know,  when  I  am 
delighting  in  Jesus — in  His  obedience,  His  love  to  His 
Father,  to  us.  His  single  eye  and  purely  devoted  heart 
— I  have  the  same  feelings,  the  same  thoughts,  as  the 
Father  Himself.  In  that  the  Father  delights,  cannot 
but  delio^ht,  in  Him  in  whom  I  now  delioht,  I  have 
communion  with  the  Father.  So  with  the  Son  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  Father.  All  this  flows,  whether  in 
the  one  or  the  other  point  of  view,  from  the  Person  of 
the  Son,  Herein  our  joy  is  full.  What  can  we  have 
more  than  the  Father  and  the  Son  ?  What  more 
perfect  happiness  than  community  of  thoughts,  feel- 
ings, joys,  and  communion,  with  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  deriving  all  our  joy  from  themselves  ?  And  if  it 
seem  difficult  to  believe,  let  us  remember  that,  in 
truth,  it  cannot  be  otherwise:  for,  in  the  life  of  Christ, 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  source  of  my  thoughts,  feelings, 
communion,  and  He  cannot  give  thoughts  different 
from  those  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.     They  must  be 

I. 


426  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

in  their  nature  the  same.  To  say  that  they  are 
adoring  thoughts  is  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  and 
only  makes  them  more  precious.  To  say  that  they 
are  feeble  and  often  hindered,  while  the  Father  and 
the  Son  are  divine  and  perfect,  is,  if  true,  to  say  the 
Father  and  the  Son  are  God,  are  divine,  and  we  feeble 
creatures.  That  surely  none  will  deny.  But  if  the 
blessed  Spirit  be  the  source,  they  must  be  the  same  as 
to  nature  and  fact. 

This  is  our  christian  position  then,  here  below  in 
time,  through  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God ;  as  the 
apostle  says,  "These  things  write  we  unto  you,  that 
your  joy  may  be  full." 

But  He  who  was  the  life  which  came  from  the 
Father,  has  l)rought  us  the  knowledge  of  God.*  The 
apostle  had  heard  from  His  lips  that  which  God  was 
— knowledge  of  priceless  value,  but  which  searches 
the  heart.  And  this  also  the  apostle,  on  the  Lord's 
part,  announces  to  believers.  This  then  is  the  message 
which  they  had  heard  from  Him,  namely,  that  God  is 
light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness.  With  regard  to 
Christ,  He  spoke  that  which  He  knew,  and  bore 
testimony  to  that  which  He  had  seen.  No  one  had 
been  in  heaven,  save  He  who  came  down  from  thence. 
No  one  had  seen  God.  The  Only-begotten,  who  is  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father,  He  had  declared  Him.  No  one  had 
seen  the  Father,  save  He  who  was  of  God;  He  had 
seen  the  Father.  Thus  He  could,  of  His  own  and 
perfect  knowledge,  reveal  Him.f  Now  God  was  light, 
perfect  purity,  which    makes   manifest  at  the   same 

■''  It  will  be  found  that,  when  grace  to  us  is  spoken  of  in 
John's  writings,  he  speaks  of  the  Father  and  the  Son ;  when  the 
nature  of  God  or  our  responsibility,  he  says  God.  John  iii.  and 
1  John  iv.  may  seem  exceptions,  but  are  not.  It  is  what  God  is 
as  such,  not  personal  action  and  relationship  in  grace. 

t  He  who  had  seen  Him  had  seen  the  Father ;  but  here  the 
apostle  speaks  of  a  message  and  the  revelation  of  His  nature. 


I  JOHN.  427 

time  all  that  is  pure,  and  all  that  is  not  so.  To  have 
communion  with  light,  one  must  oneself  be  light,  be 
of  its  nature,  and  fit  to  be  seen  in  the  perfect  light. 
It  can  only  be  linked  with  that  which  is  of  itself.  If 
there  is  anything  else  that  mingles  with  it,  light  is  no 
lonofer  li^ht.  It  is  absolute  in  its  nature,  so  as  to 
exclude  all  that  is  not  itself. 

Therefore,  if  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with 
Him  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie,  and  do  not  practise 
truth  :  our  life  is  a  perpetual  lie. 

But  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the  light, 
we  (believers)  have  communion  with  one  another,  and 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanses  us  from  all  sin. 
These  are  the  great  principles,  the  great  features  of 
christian  position.  We  are  in  the  presence  of  God 
without  a  veil.  It  is  a  real  thing,  a  matter  of  life  and 
of  walk.  It  is  not  the  same  thing  as  walking  accord- 
ing to  the  light ;  but  it  is  in  the  light.  That  is  to  say, 
that  this  walk  is  before  the  eyes  of  God,  enlightened 
by  the  full  revelation  of  what  He  is.  It  is  not  that 
there  is  no  sin  in  us ;  but,  walking  in  the  light,  the 
will  and  the  conscience  being  in  the  light  as  God  is  in 
it,  everything  is  judged  that  does  not  answer  to  it. 
We  live  and  walk  morally  in  the  sense  that  God  is 
present,  and  as  knowing  Him.  We  walk  thus  in  the 
light.  The  moral  rule  of  our  will  Is  God  Himself, 
God  known.  The  thoughts  that  sway  the  heart  come 
from  Himself  and  are  formed  upon  the  revelation  of 
Himself.  The  apostle  puts  these  things  always  in  an 
abstract  way:  thus  he  says,  "he  cannot  sin,  because 
he  is  born  of  God ;"  and  that  maintains  the  moral  rule 
of  this  life ;  it  is  its  nature ;  it  is  the  truth,  inasmuch 
as  the  man  is  born  of  God.  We  cannot  have  any 
other  measure  of  it:  any  other  would  be  false.  It 
does  not  follow,  alas !  that  wc  are  always  consistent; 
but  we  are  inconsistent  if  we  arc  not  in  this  state  ;  we 
are   not   walking   according  to   the   nature   that  we 

J. 


428  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

possess :  we  are  out  of  our  true  condition  according  to 
that  nature. 

Moreover,  walking  in  the  light,  as  God  is  in  the 
light,  believers  have  conununion  with  each  other. 
Tlie  world  is  selfish.  The  tiesh,  the  passions,  seek 
their  own  gratification;  but,  if  I  walk  in  the  light, 
self  has  no  place  there.  I  can  enjoy  the  light,  and  all 
I  seek  in  it,  with  another,  and  there  is  no  jealousy. 
If  another  possess  a  carnal  thing,  I  am  deprived  of  it. 
In  the  light  we  have  fellow-possession  of  that  which 
He  gives  us,  and  we  enjoy  it  the  more  by  sharing  it 
together.  This  is  a  touchstone  to  all  that  is  of  the 
flesh.  As  much  as  one  is  in  the  light,  so  much  will 
we  have  fellow-enjoyment  with  another  who  is  in 
it.  The  apostle,  as  we  have  said,  states  this  in  an 
abstract  and  absolute  way.  This  is  the  truest  way  to 
know  the  thing  itself.  The  rest  is  only  a  question  of 
realisation. 

In  the  third  place,  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His 
Son  cleanses  us  from  all  sin. 

To  walk  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  it,  to  have  fellow- 
ship with  one  another,  to  be  cleansed  from  all  sin  by 
the  blood;  these  are  the  three  parts  of  christian 
position.  We  feel  the  need  there  is  of  the  last;  for, 
while  walkinoj  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the  lis^ht,  with 
(blessed  be  God)  a  perfect  revelation  to  us  of  Himself, 
with  a  nature  that  knows  Him,  that  is  capable  of 
seeing  Him  spiritually,  as  the  eye  is  made  to  appre- 
ciate light  (for  we  participate  in  the  divine  nature), 
we  cannot  say  that  we  have  no  sin.  The  light  itself 
would  contradict  us.  But  we  can  say  that  the  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ  cleanses  us  perfectly  from  all  sin.* 
Through  the  Spirit  we  enjoy  the  light  together :  it  is 


♦  It  is  not  said  "  has"  nor  "will."  It  does  not  refer  to  time, 
but  to  its  eflficacy.  As  I  might  say  such  a  medicine  cures  the 
ague.    It  is  its  efdcacy. 


I  JOHN.  429 

the  common  joy  of  our  hearts  before  God,  and  well- 
pleasing  to  liim ;  a  testimony  to  our  common  partici- 
pation in  the  divine  nature,  which  is  love  also.  And 
our  conscience  is  no  hindrance,  because  we  know  the 
value  of  the  blood.  We  have  no  conscience  of  sin 
upon  us  before  Ood,  though  we  know  it  is  in  us;  but 
we  have  the  conscience  of  being  clean  from  it  by  the 
blood.  But  the  same  light  which  shews  us  this,  pre- 
vents our  saying  (if  we  are  in  it)  that  we  have  no  sin 
in  us;  we  should  deceive  ourselves  if  we  said  so;  and 
the  truth  would  not  be  in  us ;  for  if  the  truth  were  in 
us,  if  that  revelation  of  the  divine  nature,  which  is 
light,  Christ  our  life,  were  in  us,  the  sin  that  is  in  us 
would  be  judged  by  the  light  itself.  If  it  be  not 
judged,  this  light — the  truth  which  speaks  of  things 
as  they  are — is  not  in  us. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  even  committed  sin 
and  all,  being  judged  according  to  the  light,  is  con- 
fessed (so  that  the  will  no  longer  takes  part  in  it,  the 
pride  of  that  will  being  broken  down),  He  is  faithful 
and  just  to  forgive  us,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all 
iniquity.  If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned*  (as  a 
general  truth),  it  shews  not  only  that  the  truth  is  not 
in  us,  but  we  make  God  a  liar ;  His  word  is  not  in  us, 
for  He  says  that  all  have  sinned.     There  are  the  three 


*  When  speaking  of  sin,  the  apostle  speaks  in  the  present 
tense,  "we  have":  when  speaking  of  sinning,  he  speaks  in  the 
past.  He  does  not  take  for  granted  we  are  going  on  doing  it. 
It  has  been  a  question  whether  the  apostle  speaks  of  first  eommg 
to  the  Lord,  or  subsequent  failures.  I  answer,  he  speaks  in  an 
abstract  and  absolute  way:  confession  brings  througlj  grace 
forgiveness.  If  it  is  our  iirst  coming  to  God,  it  is  for^nveuess 
it  is  in  the  full  and  absolute  sense.  I  am  forgiven  with  God  :  He 
remembers  my  sins  no  more.  If  it  is  subsequent  failure, 
honesty  of  heart  always  confesses,  then  it  is  forgiveness  as 
regards  the  government  of  God,  and  the  present  condition  and 
relationship  of  my  soul  with  Him.  But  the  apostle,  as  every 
where,  speaks  absolutely  and  of  the  principle. 

I. 


430  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

things :  we  lie  ;  the  truth  is  not  in  us ;  we  make  God 
a  liar.  It  is  this  fellowship  with  God  in  the  light, 
which,  in  practical  daily  christian  life,  inseparably 
connects  forgiveness,  and  the  present  sense  of  it  by 
faith,  and  purity  of  heart. 

Thus  we  see  the  christian  position  (ver.  7) ;  and  then 
the  things  which,  in  three  different  ways,  are  opposed 
to  the  truth — to  communion  with  God  in  life. 

The  apostle  wrote  that  which  relates  to  the  com- 
munion with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  in  order  that 
their  joy  might  be  full. 

That  which  he  wrote  according  to  the  revelation  of 
the  nature  of  God,  which  he  had  received  from  Him 
who  was  the  life  from  heaven,  was  in  order  that  they 
should  not  sin.  But  to  say  this  is  to  suppose  that 
they  might  sin.  Not  that  it  is  necessary  they  should 
do  so ;  for  the  presence  of  sin  in  the  flesh  by  no  means 
obliges  us  to  walk  after  the  flesh.  But  if  it  should 
take  place,  there  is  provision  made  by  grace,  in  order 
that  grace  may  act,  and  that  we  may  be  neither 
condemned,  nor  brought  again  under  the  law. 

We  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  One  who 
carries  on  our  cause  for  us  on  high.  Now  this  is  not 
in  order  to  obtain  righteousness,  nor  again  to  wash 
our  sins  away.  All  that  has  been  done.  Divine 
righteousness  has  placed  us  in  the  light,  even  as  God 
Himself  is  in  the  light.  But  communion  is  inter- 
rupted, if  even  levity  of  thought  finds  place  in  our 
heart ;  for  it  is  of  the  flesh,  and  the  flesh  has  no  com- 
munion with  God.  When  communion  is  interrupted, 
when  we  have  sinned  (not  when  we  have  repented; 
for  it  is  His  intercession  that  leads  to  repentance), 
Christ  intercedes  for  us.  Righteousness  is  always 
present — our  righteousness — "  Jesus  Christ  tfte  Right- 
eous." Therefore,  neither  the  righteousness  nor  the 
value  of  the  propitiation  for  sin  being  changed,  grace 
acts  (one  may  say,  acts  necessarily)  in  virtue  of  that 


I  JOHN.  431 

righteousness,  and  of  that  blood  which  is  before  God 
— acts,  on  the  intercession  of  Christ  who  never  forgets 
us,  in  order  to  bring  us  back  to  communion  by  means 
of  repentance.  Thu^,  while  yet  on  earth,  before  Peter 
had  committed  the  sin,  He  prayed  for  him ;  at  the 
given  moment  He  looks  on  him,  and  Peter  repents 
and  weeps  bitterly  for  his  offence.  Afterwards  the 
Lord  does  all  that  is  necessary  to  make  Peter  judge 
the  root  itself  of  the  sin ;  but  all  is  grace. 

It  is  the  same  in  our  case.  Divine  righteousness 
abides — the  immutable  foundation  of  our  relationships 
with  God,  established  on  the  blood  of  Christ.  When 
communion,  which  exists  only  in  the  light,  is  inter- 
rupted, the  intercession  of  Christ,  available  by  virtue 
of  His  blood  (for  propitiation  for  the  sin  has  also  been 
made),  restores  the  soul  that  it  may  still  again  enjoy 
communion  with  God  according  to  the  light,  into 
which  righteousness  has  introduced  it.*  This  pro- 
pitiation is  made  for  the  whole  world,  not  for  the 
Jews  only,  nor  to  the  exclusion  of  any  one  at  all ;  but 
for  the  whole  world,  God  in  His  moral  nature  having 
been  fully  glorified  by  the  death  of  Christ. 

These  three  capital  points — or,  if  you  will,  two 
capital  points,  and  the  third,  namely,  advocacy,  which 
is  supplementary — form  the  introduction,  the  doctrine 
of  the  ■  epistle.  All  the  rest  is  an  experimental  appli- 
cation of  that  which  this  part  contains :  namely,  first 
(life  being  given),  communion  with  the  Father  and 
the  Son;  second,  the  nature  of  God,  light,  which 
manifests  the  falsehood  of  all  pretension  to  com- 
munion with  the  light,  if  the  walk  be  in  darkness; 
and  third,  seeing  that  sin  is  in  us  and  that  we  may 
fail  although  we  are  cleansed  before  God   so  as  to 

Here  the  subject  is  communion,  and  hence  actual  failure  is 
spoken  of;  in  the  Hebrews,  we  have  seen,  it  is  access  to  God 
and  we  are  "  perfected  for  ever,"  and  priesthood  is  for  mercy 
and  help,  not  for  sins,  save  the  gi*eat  act  of  atonement. 

II. 


432  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

enjoy  the  light,  the  advocacy  wliich  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous  can  alwaj'^s  exercise  before  God,  on  the 
ground  of  the  righteousness  which  is  ever  in  His 
presence,  and  the  blood  which  is  shed  for  our  sins,  in 
order  to  restore  our  communion,  when  we  have  lost  it 
by  our  guilty  negligence. 

The  Spirit  now  proceeds  to  develop  the  character- 
istics of  this  divine  life. 

Now  we  are  sanctified  unto  the  obedience  of  Jesus 
Christ,  that  is  to  say,  to  obey  on  the  same  principles 
as  those  on  which  He  obeyed ;  where  His  Father's  will 
was  the  motive  as  well  as  the  rule  of  action.  It  is  the 
obedience  of  a  life  to  which  it  was  meat  and  drink  to 
do  the  will  of  God :  not  as  under  the  law,  in  order  to 
obtain  life.  The  life  of  Jesus  Christ  was  a  life  of 
obedience,  in  which  He  enjoyed  the  love  of  His 
Father  perfectly,  tested  in  all  things  and  so  proved 
perfect.  His  words,  His  commandments,  were  the 
expression  of  that  life ;  they  direct  that  life  in  us,  and 
ought  to  exercise  all  the  authority  over  us  of  Him 
who  pronounced  them. 

The  law  promised  life  to  those  who  obeyed  it. 
Christ  is  the  life.  This  life  has  been  imparted  to  us 
— to  believers.  Therefore,  the  words  which  were  the 
expression  of  that  life,  in  its  perfection  in  Jesus, 
direct  and  guide  it  in  us  according  to  that  perfection. 
Besides  this,  it  has  authority  over  us.  His  command- 
ments are  its  expression.  We  have  therefore  to  obey, 
and  to  walk  as  He  walked — the  two  forms  of  practical 
life.  It  is  not  enough  to  walk  well:  we  must  obey, 
for  there  is  authority.  This  is  the  essential  principle 
of  a  light  walk.  On  the  other  hand,  the  obedience  of 
the  Christian — as  is  evident  by  that  of  Christ  Himself 
— is  not  that  which  we  often  think.  We  call  a  child 
obedient,  who,  having  a  will  of  his  own,  submits 
himself  at  once  when  the  authority  of  the  parent 
intervenes   to   prevent   his    accomplishing    it.      But 


I  JOUN.  433 

Christ  never  obeyed  iu  this  way.  He  came  to  do  the 
will  of  God.  Obedience  was  His  mode  of  being.  His 
Father's  will  was  the  motive,  and,  with  the  love  that 
was  never  separate  from  it,  the  only  motive  of  His 
every  act  and  every  impulse.  This  is  obedience  pro- 
perly called  christian.  It  is  a  new  life  which  delights 
in  doing  the  will  of  Christ,  acknowledging  His  entire 
authority  over  it.  We  reckon  ourselves  to  be  dead  to 
ever3''thing  else;  we  are  alive  unto  God,  we  are  not 
our  own.  We  only  know  Christ  inasmuch  as  we  are 
living  by  His  life ;  for  the  flesh  does  not  know  Him, 
and  cannot  understand  His  life. 

Now,  that  life  is  obedience  :  therefore  he  who  says, 
"I  know  him,"  and  does  not  observe  His  command- 
ments, is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him.  It  does 
not  say  here,  "he  deceives  himself,"  for  it  is  very 
possible  that  he  is  not  self -deceived,  as  in  the  other 
case  of  fancied  communion;  for  here  the  will  is  in 
action,  and  a  man  knows  it,  if  he  will  confess  it.  But 
the  reality  is  not  there ;  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth 
in  the  knowledge  of  Jesus,  which  he  professes,  is  not 
in  him. 

There  are  two  remarks  to  be  made  here.  First, 
that  the  apostle  takes  things  always  as  they  are  in 
themselves  in  an  abstract  way,  without  the  modifica- 
tions that  are  occasioned  by  other  things,  in  the  midst 
of  which,  or  in  relation  with  which,  the  former  are 
found.  Second,  that  the  chain  of  consequences  which 
the  apostle  deduces  is  not  that  of  outward  reasoning, 
the  force  of  which  is  consequently  on  the  surface  of 
the  argument  itself.  He  reasons  from  a  great  inward 
principle,  so  that  one  does  not  see  the  force  of  the 
argument  unless  one  knows  the  fact,  and  even  the 
scope,  of  that  principle;  and,  in  particular,  that  which 
the  life  of  God  is  in  its  nature,  in  its  character,  and  in 
its  action.  But,  without  possessing  it,  we  do  not  and 
cannot  understand  anything  about  it.  There  is.  indeed, 
VOL.  V,  U.  fV 


434  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  authority  of  the  apostle  and  of  the  word  to  tell  us 
that  the  thing  is  so,  and  that  is  sufficient.  But  the 
links  of  his  discourse  will  not  be  understood  without 
the  possession  of  the  life  which  interprets  what  he 
says,  and  which  is  itself  interpreted  by  that  which 
he  says. 

I  return  to  the  text.  "  Whoso  keepeth  his  word,  in 
him  verily  is  the  love  of  God  perfected."  It  is  in  this 
way  that  we  are  conscious  that  we  know  Him.  His 
"  word  "  has  rather  a  wider  sense  than  His  "  command- 
ments." That  is  to  say,  while  it  equally  implies 
obedience,  the  word  is  less  outward.  "Command- 
ments" are  here  details  of  the  divine  life.  His 
"  word  "  contains  its  whole  expression — the  spirit  of 
that  life.*     It  is  universal  and  absolute.     Now  this 

*  Fundamentally  they  are  not  different.  This  is  afl&rmed  in 
verse  7 :  "  The  old  commandment  is  the  word  which  ye  have 
heard  from  the  heginning."  One  might  say  with  perfect  truth 
that  the  commandment  is  the  word  of  Christ *,  but  I  question  if 
it  could  be  said  that  the  word  is  the  commandment.  And  this 
makes  one  conscious  of  the  difference.  The  contrast  of  verses 
4  and  5  is  remarkable,  and  has  its  source  in  the  possession,  and 
the  inteUigent  and  complete  consciousness  of  the  possession,  of 
the  divine  life,  according  to  the  word,  or  its  non-possession. 
He  who  says,  I  know  Him,  and  does  not  keep  His  command- 
ments, is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him ;  for  this  truth  is 
only  that  which  the  word  reveals.  And  if  we  live  of  the  nature 
of  which  the  word  of  Christ  is  the  expression,  and  thus  by  the 
word  know  Him,  we  obey  that  word.  In  another  aspect;  if  we 
are  in  possession  of  this  life,  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,  the 
love  of  God  is  in  us ;  we  have  the  commandments  of  Christ,  His 
word,  the  perfect  love  of  God,  a  walk  according  to  the  walk  of 
Christ,  the  communication  of  the  life  of  Christ  so  that  the  com- 
mandment is  true  in  Him  and  in  us,  the  walk  in  the  light,  the 
love  of  our  brother.  How  rich  a  chain  of  blessings  !  The  pre- 
tensions here  spoken  of  are — to  know  Christ,  to  abide  in  Him, 
to  be  in  the  light.  The  proof  that  the  first  pretension  is  justified 
is  obedience.  Then,  if  we  abide  in  Christ  (which  we  know  by 
keeping  His  word),  we  ought  to  walk  as  He  walked.  That  the 
last  pretension  is  a  true  one  is  proved  by  love  to  our  brother. 
In  the  second,  the  walk  is  maintained  at  all  the  height  of  the 


1  JOHN.  435 

life  is  the  divine  life  manifested  in  Jesus,  and  which 
is  imparted  to  us.  Have  we  seen  it  in  Christ  ?  Do 
we  doubt  that  this  is  love ;  that  the  love  of  God  has 
been  manifested  in  it  ?  If  then  I  keep  His  word ;  if 
the  scope  and  meaning  of  the  life  which  that  word 
expresses  is  thus  understood  and  realised,  the  love  of 
God  is  perfect  in  me.  The  apostle,  as  we  have  seen, 
always  speaks  abstractedly.  If  in  fact  at  any  given 
moment  I  do  not  observe  the  word,  in  that  point  I  do 
not  realise  His  love ;  happy  intercourse  with  God  is 
interrupted.  But  so  far  as  I  am  moved  and  governed 
absolutely  by  His  word.  His  love  is  completely 
realised  in  me ;  for  His  word  expresses  what  He  is, 
and  I  am  keeping  it.  This  is  the  intelligent  com- 
munion with  His  nature  in  its  fulness,  a  nature  in 
which  I  participate ;  so  that  I  know  that  He  is  perfect 
love,  I  am  filled  with  it,  and  this  shews  itself  in  my 
ways:  for  that  word  is  the  perfect  expression  of 
Himself.* 

walk  of  Christ,  as  our  duty :  but  this  walk  is  not  presented  as  a 
proof  that  we  abide  in  Him,  that  we  keep  His  word.  Observe 
that  it  is  not  said,  "We  know  that  we  believe" — this  is  not  the 
question  here  ;  but,  "We  know  that  we  are  in  Mm." 

Let  me  add  here,  that  the  apostle  never  uses  these  proofs,  as 
they  are  so  commonly  used,  to  say,  "hereby  we  doubt."  It  is 
quite  certain  from  verses  12,  13,  that  he  treats  them  as  all  for- 
given or  he  would  not  have  written,  and  as  having  the  Spirit  of 
adoption — even  the  j'oungest  and  feeblest.  Others  sought  to 
make  them  doubt;  and  he  writes  that  then-  hearts  might  be 
assured  before  God,  that  they  might  not  be  seduced  into  doubt- 
ing, as  if  they  had  not  a  full  Christ  and  a  full  Christianity — 
eternal  life.  It  was  the  means  of  keeping  and  holding  fast 
assurance  when  they  had  it,  when  they  might  have  been  shaken, 
not  of  obtaining  it.  They  were  forgiven,  they  were  sons.  When 
others  would  make  them  doubt,  he  writes  that  they  may  be 
fully  assm-ed  that  they  have  no  reason  to  doubt. 

*  This,  I  doubt  not,  is  the  true  meaning  of  John  viii.  25. 
"  In  the  principle  of  my  natm-e,  in  my  being,  that  which  I  am 
saying  to  you."  That  which  He  said  was  essentially  and  com- 
pletely that  which  He  was.     That  which  He  was  is  that  which 


436  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

Consequently  we  know  thus  that  we  are  in  Him, 
for  we  realise  that  which  He  is  in  the  communion  of 
His  nature.  Now  if  we  say  that  we  abide  in  Him,  it 
is  evident,  from  what  we  have  now  seen  in  the  in- 
struction the  apostle  gives  us,  that  we  ought  to  walk 
as  He  walked.  Our  walk  is  the  practical  expression 
of  our  life ;  and  this  life  is  Christ  known  in  His  word. 
And  since  it  is  by  His  word,  we  who  possess  this  life 
are  under  an  intelligent  responsibility  to  follow  it ; 
that  is  to  say,  to  walk  as  He  walked.  For  that  word 
is  the  expression  of  His  life. 

Obedience  then,  as  obedience,  is  thus  far  the  moral 
characteristic  of  the  life  of  Christ  in  us.  But  it  is 
proof  of  that  which,  in  Christianity,  is  inseparable 
from  the  life  of  Christ  in  us:  we  are  in  Him.  (Com- 
pare John  xiv.  29.)  We  know,  not  merely  that  we 
know  Him,  but  that  we  are  in  Him.  The  enjoyment 
of  the  perfect  love  of  God  in  the  path  of  obedience, 
gives  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost  the  consciousness  that  we 
are  in  Him.  But  if  I  am  in  Him,  I  cannot  indeed  be 
what  He  was,  for  He  was  without  sin ;  but  I  ought  to 
walk  as  He  walked.  Thus  I  know  I  am  in  Him. 
But  if  I  make  profession  to  abide  in  Him,  my  heart 
and  spirit  to  be  wholly  there,  I  ought  to  walk  as  He 
walked.  Obedience  as  a  principle,  and  through  keep- 
ing His  word,  and  so  the  love  of  God  perfected  in  me, 
knowing  that  I  am  in  Him,  are  the  formative  principles 
and  character  of  our  life. 

In  verses  7  and  8  the  two  forms  of  the  rule  of  this 
life  are  presented — forms  which,  moreover,  answer  to 
the  two  principles  which  we  have  just  announced.  It 
is  not  a  new  commandment  which  the  apostle  writes 

He  said.  Now  it  is  this  life  which  is  imparted  to  us ;  but  it  was 
the  love  of  God  among  men  and  in  man.  And  this  life  being 
our  life,  and  the  word  of  Cin*ist  giving  us  the  knowledge  of  it, 
and  this  word  being  kept,  His  love  is  realised  in  us  in  all  its 
extent. 


J  .lu  -.  437 

unto  them  but  an  old  one;  it  is  the  woi'd  of  Christ 
from  the  beoinnino:.  Were  it  not  so,  were  it  in  this 
sense  new,  so  much  the  worse  for  him  who  set  it 
forth  ,  for  it  would  no  longer  be  the  expression  of  the 
perfect  life  of  Christ  Himself,  but  some  other  thing, 
or  a  falsification  of  that  which  Christ  had  set  forth, 
'j'his  corresponds  with  the  first  principle,  that  is, 
obedience  to  con.mandments,  to  the  commandments  of 
Christ.  What  He  said  w^as  the  expi-ession  of  what 
He  was.  He  could  command  that  they  should  love 
one  another  as  He  had  loved  them.  Compare  the 
Beatitudes. 

In  another  S3nse  it  was  a  new  commandment;  for 
(by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  being  united  to 
Him  and  drawing  our  life  from  Him)  the  Spirit  of 
God  manifested  tiie  etfect  of  this  life  by  revealing  a 
glorified  Christ  in  a  new  way.  And  now  it  was  not 
only  a  commandment,  but  as  the  thing  itself  was  true 
in  Christ,  it  was  so  in  His  own  as  partakers  of  His 
nature  and  in  Him  ;  He  also  in  them. 

By  this  revelation,  and  by  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  darkness  disappeared,*  passed  awa}^  and 
in  fact  the  true  light  shone.  There  will  be  no  ditierent 
light  in  heaven :  only  then  the  light  will  be  publicly 
displayed  in  glory  without  a  cloud. 

Verse  9.  The  life,  as  in  John  i.  4,  is  now  found  to  be 
the  light  of  men,  only  the  brighter  for  faith  that  Christ 
is  gone,  for  it  is  through  the  rent  veil  it  «hines  n  osb 
brightly.  We  have  had  the  pretension  to  know  Him 
discussed — to  be  in  Him;  now  that  of  being  in  the  light, 
and  this  before  the  Spirit  of  God  applies  in  detail  the 
qualities  of  this  life,  as  a  proof  of  its  existence  to  the 
heart,  in  answer  to  seducers  who  sought  to  terrify 
them  by  new  notions,  as  though  Christians  were  not 

*  The  force  of  the  word  is  not  "  has  disappeared,  passed 
away."  There  is  much  darkness  yet  in  the  world.  As  to  the 
light,  it  has  actually  shone. 


438  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

really  in  possession  of  life,  and,  with  life,  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son.  The  true  light  now  shines. 
And  this  light  is  God ;  it  is  the  divine  nature ;  and, 
as  that  which  was  a  means  of  judging  the  seducers 
themselves,  he  brings  out  another  quality  connected 
with  our  being  in  the  light,  that  is  with  God  fully 
revealed.  Christ  was  it  in  the  world.  We  are  set  to 
be  it,  in  that  we  are  born  of  God.  And  one  who  has 
this  nature  loves  his  brother ;  for  is  not  God  love  ? 
Has  not  Christ  loved  us,  not  being  ashamed  to  call  us 
brethren  ?  Can  I  have  His  life  and  His  nature,  if  I 
do  not  love  the  brethren  ?  No.  I  am  then  walking 
in  darkness;  I  have  no  light  on  my  path.  He  who 
loves  his  brother  dwells  in  the  light;  the  nature  of 
God  acts  in  him ;  and  he  dwells  in  the  bright  spiritual 
intelligence  of  that  life,  in  the  presence  and  in  the 
communion  of  God.  If  any  one  hates,  it  is  evident 
that  he  has  not  divine  light.  With  feelings  according 
to  a  nature  opposed  to  God,  how  can  it  be  pretended 
that  he  is  in  the  light  ? 

Moreover,  there  is  no  occasion  of  stumbling  in  one 
who  loves,  for  he  walks  according  to  divine  light. 
There  is  nothing  in  him  which  causes  another  to 
stumble,  for  the  revelation  of  the  nature  of  God  in 
grate  will  assuredly  not  do  so :  and  it  is  this  which  is 
manifested  in  him  who  loves  his  brother.* 

This  closes  as  an  introductory  statement  the  first 
part  of  the  Epistle.  It  contains  in  the  former  half, 
the  privileged  place  of  Christians,  the  message  giving 
us  the  truth  of  our  state  here,  and  the  provision  for 

*  The  reader  may  compare  here,  with  much  instruction,  what 
is  said  in  Ephesians  iv.  17  to  v.  12,  where  these  two  names  of 
God,  the  only  ones  used  to  reveal  His  nature,  are  also  used  to 
shew  our  path  and  the  true  character  of  the  Christian ;  only 
according  to  that  which  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  by  Paul — the 
counsels  and  work  of  God  in  Christ.  In  John  it  is  more  the 
nature. 


I  JOHN.  439 

failure :  that  ends  with  chapter  ii.  verse  2 ;  in  the 
second  half,  the  proofs  the  Christian  has  of  the  true 
possession  of  the  privilege  according  to  the  message : 
obedience,  and  love  of  the  brethren,  knowing  Christ, 
being  in  Christ,  enjoying  the  perfect  love  of  God,  abid- 
ing in  Him,  being  in  the  light,  forming  the  condition 
which  is  thus  proved. 

Having  established  the  two  great  principles,  obedi- 
ence and  love,  as  proofs  of  the  possession  of  the  divine 
nature,  of  Christ  known  as  life,  and  of  our  abiding  in 
Him,  the  apostle  goes  on  to  address  Christians  per- 
sonally and  to  shew  us  the  position,  on  the  ground  of 
grace,  in  three  different  degrees  of  ripeness.  This 
parenthetical  but  most  important  address  we  will  now 
consider. 

He  begins  by  calling  all  the  Christians  to  whom  he 
was  writing,  "children,"  a  term  of  affection  in  the 
loving  and  aged  apostle.  And  as  he  writes  to  them 
(chap.  ii.  1)  in  order  that  they  should  not  sin,  so  he 
writes  also  because  all  their  sins  were  forgiven  for 
Jesus'  name's  sake.  This  was  the  assured  condition 
of  all  Christians :  that  which  God  had  granted  them  in 
giving  them  faith,  that  they  might  glorify  Him.  He 
allows  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact  of  their  I.eing  pardoned. 
He  writes  to  them  because  they  are  so. 

We  next  find  three  classes  of  Christians :  fathers, 
voung  men,  and  babes.  He  addresses  them  each 
twice,  fathers,  young  men,  babes  (ver.  13) :  fathers,  in 
the  first  half  of  verse  14 ;  young  men,  from  the  second 
half,  to  the  end  of  verse  17  ;  and  babes  from  verse  18 
to  the  end  of  verse  27.  In  verse  28  he  returns  to  all 
Christians  under  the  name  of  "  children." 

That  which  characterises  fathers  in  Christ  is  that 
they  have  known  Him  who  is  from  the  beginning, 
that  is,  Christ.  This  is  all  that  he  has  to  say  about 
them.     All  had  resulted  in  tliat.     He  only  repeats  the 

ni. 


440  THE  ]JOOKS   OF   THE   BIBL:^. 

same  thinjr  agjain,  when,  chang^ing  his  form  of  expres- 
sion, he  begins  anew  with  these  three  classes.  The 
fathers  have  known  Christ.  This  is  the  result  of  all 
clu'istian  experience.  The  flesh  is  judged,  discerned, 
wherever  it  has  mixed  itself  with  (Jhrist  in  our  feel- 
inofs:  it  is  recognised,  experimentally,  as  having  no 
value;  and,  as  the  result  of  experience,  Christ  stands 
alone,  fi-ee  from  all  alloy.  They  have  learnt  to  dis- 
tinguish that  which  has  only  the  appearance  of  good. 
They  are  not  occupied  with  experience — that  would 
be  being  occupied  with  self,  with  one's  own  heart. 
All  that  has  passed  away ;  and  Christ  alone  remains 
as  our  portion,  unmingled  with  aught  besides,  even  as 
He  gave  Himself  to  us.  Moreover  He  is  much  better 
known ;  they  have  experienced  what  He  is  in  so  many 
details,  whether  of  joy  in  communion  with  Him,  or  in 
the  consciousness  of  weakness,  or  in  the  realisation  of 
His  faithfulness,  of  the  riches  of  His  grace,  of  His 
adaptation  to  our  need,  of  His  love,  and  in  the  revela- 
tion of  His  own  fulness ;  so  that  they  are  able  now  to 
say,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Attachment  to 
Himself  characterises  them.  Such  is  the  character  of 
"  fathers  "  in  Christ. 

"Young  men"  are  the  second  class.  They  are 
distinguished  by  spiritual  strength  in  conflict:  the 
energy  of  faith.  They  have  overcome  the  wicked  one. 
For  he  speaks  of  what  their  character  is  as  in  Christ. 
Conflict  they  have  as  such,  but  the  strength  of  Christ 
manifested  in  them. 

The  third  class  is  "babes."  These  know  the  Father. 
We  see  here  that  the  Spirit  of  adoption  and  of  liberty 
characterises  the  youngest  child  in  the  faith  of  Chri  t, 
that  it  is  not  the  result  of  progress.  It  is  tlie  com- 
mencement. We  possess  it  because  we  are  Christians  ; 
and  it  is  ever  the  distinguishing  mark  of  begimiei-s. 
The  others  do  not  lose  it,  but  other  things  distinguish 
them. 


1  JOHJI.  441 

In  a<]fain  addressini^  these  three  classes  of  Christians, 
the  apostle,  as  we  have  seen,  has  only  to  repeat  that 
>vl)ich  he  at  first  said  with  regard  to  the  fathers.  It 
is  the  result  of  christian  life. 

In  the  case  of  the  young  men  he  develops  his  idea 
and  ad<ls  some  exhortations.  "  Ye  are  strong,"  he 
says,  "  and  the  word  of  Gud  abideth  in  you " — an 
important  characteristic.  The  word  is  the  revelation 
of  Gi)d,  and  the  application  of  Christ,  to  the  heart,  so 
that  we  have  thus  the  motives  which  form  and  govern 
it,  and  a  testimony  founded  on  the  state  of  the  heart, 
and  on  convictions  which  have  a  divine  power  in  us. 
It  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  in  our  relations  with  the 
world.  We  have  been  ourselves  formed  by  those 
things  to  which  we  bear  testimony  in  our  relations 
with  the  world,  and  those  thincjs  are  in  us  accordinor 
to  the  power  of  the  word  of  God.  The  wicked  one  is 
thus  overcome ;  for  he  has  only  the  world  to  present 
to  our  lusts  :  and  the  word  abiding  in  us  keeps  us  in 
an  altogether  diHerent  sphere  of  thought  in  which  a 
different  nature  is  enlightened  and  strengthened  by 
divine  communications.  The  tendency  of  the  young 
man  is  toward  the  world:  the  ardour  of  his  nature, 
and  the  vigour  of  his  age,  tend  to  draw  him  away  on 
that  side.  He  has  to  guard  against  this  by  separating 
hiniself  entirely  from  the  world  and  the  things  that 
are  in  it ;  because,  if  any  one  love  the  world,  the  love 
of  the  Father  is  not  in  him,  for  those  things  do  not 
come  from  the  Father.  He  has  a  world  of  His  own, 
of  which  Christ  is  the  centre  and  glory.  The  lusts  of 
the  tlesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life — 
these  are  the  things  that  are  in  the  world  and  that 
characterise  it.  There  are  really  no  other  motives 
besides  these  in  the  world.  Now  these  things  are  not 
of  the  Father. 

The  Father  is  the  source  of  all  that  is  according  to 
His  own  heart — every  grace,  every  spiritual  gift,  the 


442  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

glory,  the  heavenly  holiness  of  all  that  was  manifested 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  that  will  be — all  the  world  of 
glory  to  come,  of  which  Christ  is  the  centre.  And 
all  this  had  only  the  cross  for  its  portion  here  below 
But  the  apostle  is  speaking  here  of  the  source;  and 
assuredly  the  Father  is  not  the  source  of  those  other 
things. 

Now  the  world  passes  away ;  but  he  who  does  the 
will  of  God,  he  who,  in  going  through  this  world, 
takes  for  his  guide,  not  the  desires  of  nature,  but  the 
will  of  God — a  will  which  is  according  to  His  nature 
and  which  expresses  it — such  a  one  shall  abide  for 
ever  according  to  the  nature  and  the  will  that  he  has 
followed  after. 

We  shall  find  that  the  world,  and  the  Father  with 
all  that  is  of  Him,  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit,  the  Son 
and  the  devil,  are  put  respectively  in  opposition. 
Things  are  spoken  of  in  their  source  and  moral  nature, 
the  principles  that  act  in  us  and  that  characterise  our 
existence  and  our  position,  and  the  two  agents  in  good 
and  evil  that  are  opposed  to  each  other,  without 
(thanks  be  to  God  !)  any  uncertainty  as  to  the  issue  of 
the  conflict ;  for  the  weakness  of  Christ,  in  death,  is 
stronger  than  the  strength  of  Satan.  He  has  no  power 
against  that  which  is  perfect.  Christ  came  that  He 
might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil. 

To  the  babes  the  apostle  speaks  principally  of  the 
dangers  to  which  they  were  exposed  from  seducers. 
He  warns  them  with  tender  aflPection,  reminding  them 
at  the  same  time  that  all  the  sources  of  intelligence 
and  strength  were  open  to  them  and  belonged  to  them. 
"  It  is  the  last  time ;"  not  exactly  the  last  days,  but 
the  season  which  had  the  final  character  that  belonged 
to  the  dealings  of  God  with  this  world.  The  Anti- 
christ was  to  come,  and  already  there  were  many 
antichrists :  by  this  it  might  be  known  it  was  the  last 
time.     It  was  not  merely  sin,  nor  the  transgression  of 


1  JOHN.  448 

the  law  ;  but,  Christ  having  already  been  manifested, 
and  being  now  absent  and  hidden  from  the  world, 
there  was  a  formal  opposition  to  the  especial  revelation 
that  had  been  made.  It  was  not  a  vague  and  ignorant 
unbelief ;  it  took  a  definite  shape  as  having  a  will 
directed  against  Jesus.  They  might  for  instance  be- 
lieve all  that  a  Jew  believed,  as  it  was  revealed  in  the 
word ;  but  as  to  the  testimony  of  God  by  Jesus  Christ 
they  opposed  it.  They  would  not  own  Him  to  be  the 
Christ ;  they  denied  the  Father  and  the  Son.  This,  as 
to  religious  profession,  is  the  true  character  of  the 
Antichrist.  He  may  indeed  believe  or  pretend  to 
believe,  that  there  shall  be  a  Christ;  yea,  set  himself 
up  to  be  it.  But  the  two  aspects  of  Christianity  (that 
which,  on  the  one  hand,  regards  the  accomplishment  in 
the  Person  of  Jesus  of  the  promises  made  to  the  Jew ; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  heavenly  and  eternal 
blessings  presented  in  the  revelation  of  the  Father  by 
the  Son),  this  the  Antichrist  does  not  accept.  That 
which  characterises  him  as  Antichrist  is  that  he  denies 
the  Father  and  the  Son.  To  deny  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  is  indeed  the  Jewish  disbelief  that  forms  part 
of  his  character.  That  which  gives  him  the  character 
of  Antichrist  is  that  he  denies  the  foundation  of  Chris- 
tianity. He  is  a  liar  in  that  he  denies  Jesus  to  be  the 
Christ;  consequently  it  is  the  work  of  the  father  of 
lies.  But  all  the  unbelieving  Jews  had  done  as  much 
without  being  Antichrist.  To  deny  the  Father  and 
the  Son  characterises  him. 

But  there  is  something  more.  These  antichrists 
came  out  from  among  the  Christians.  There  was 
apostasy.  Not  that  they  were  really  Christians,  but 
they  had  been  among  the  Christians  and  had  come 
out  from  them.  (How  instructive  for  our  days  also 
is  this  Epistle  !)  It  was  thus  made  manifest  that  they 
were  not  truly  of  the  flock  of  Christ.  All  this  had  a 
tendency  to  shake  the  faith  of  babes  in  Christ.     The 

II. 


444  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

apostle  endeavours  to  strengthen  them.  Tliere  were 
tw(^  means  of  confirming  their  faith,  which  also  in- 
spired the  apostle  with  confidence.  First,  they  liad 
the  unction  of  the  Holy  One ;  secondly,  that  which 
was  from  the  beoinninor  was  the  touchstone  for  all 
new  doctrine,  and  they  already  possessed  that  which 
was  from  the  beo-innino-. 

The  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  an  unction 
and  spiritual  intelligence  in  them,  and  the  truth  which 
they  had  received  at  the  beginning — the  perfect  reve- 
lation of  Christ — these  were  the  safes^uards  ae^ainst 
seducers  and  seductions.  All  heresy  and  all  error  and 
corruption  will  be  found  to  strike  at  the  first  and 
divine  revelation  of  the  truth,  if  the  unction  of  the 
Holy  One  is  in  us  to  judge  them.  Now  this  unction 
is  the  portion  of  even  the  youngest  babes  in  Christ, 
and  they  ought  to  be  encouraged  to  realise  it,  however 
tenderly  they  may  be  cared  for  as  they  were  here  by 
the  apostle. 

What  important  truths  we  discover  here  for  our- 
selves !  The  last  time  already  manifested,  so  that  we 
have  to  be  on  our  guard  against  seducers — persons 
moreover  issuing  from  the  bosom  of  Christianity. 

The  character  of  this  Antichrist  is  that  he  denies 
the  Father  and  the  Son.  Unbelief  in  its  Jewisli  form 
is  also  again  manifested — owning  that  there  is  a  Christ, 
but  denying  that  Jesus  is  He.  Our  security  against 
these  seductions  is  the  unction  from  the  Holy  One — 
the  Holy  Ghost,  but  in  especial  connection  with  the 
holiness  of  God,  which  enables  us  to  see  clearly  into 
the  truth  (another  characteristic  of  the  Spirit) ;  and, 
secondly,  that  that  abide  in  us  which  we  have  heard 
from  the  beginning.  It  is  this  evidently  which  we 
have  in  the  written  word.  "Development"  note  it 
well,  is  not  that  which  we  have  from  the  beginning. 
By  its  very  name  it  sins  radically  against  the  safeguard 
pointed  out  by  the  apostle.     That  which  the  church 


I  JOHN.  445 

has  taught,  as  developnient  of  the  truth,  whencesoevcr 
she  may  have  received  it,  is  not  that  which  has  been 
heard  from  the  beo^inninp'. 

There  is  another  point  indicated  here  by  the  apostle 
that  ought  to  be  noticed.  People  might  pretend  by 
giving  God  in  a  vague  way  the  name  of  Father,  that 
they  possessed  Him  without  the  true  possession  of  the 
Son,  Jesus  Christ.  This  cannot  be.  He  who  has 
not  the  Son  has  not  the  Father.  It  is  by  Him  that 
the  Father  is  revealed,  in  Him  that  the  Father  is 
known. 

If  the  truth  that  we  have  received  from  the  be- 
ginning abides  in  us,  we  abide  in  the  Son  and  in  the 
Father;  for  this  truth  is  the  revelation  of  the  Son, 
and  is  revealed  by  the  Son,  who  is  the  truth.  It  is 
living  truth  if  it  abides  in  us;  thus,  by  possessing  it, 
we  possess  the  Son,  and  in  the  Son,  the  Father  also. 
We  abide  in  it,  and  thereby  we  have  eternal  life. 
(Compare  John  xvii.  3.) 

Now  the  apostle  had  happy  confidence  that  the 
unction  which  they  had  received  of  Him  abode  in 
them,  so  that  they  needed  not  to  be  taught  of  others, 
for  this  same  unction  taught  them  with  respect  to 
all  things.  It  was  the  truth,  for  it  was  the  Holy 
Ghost  Himself  acting  in  the  w^ord,  which  was  the 
revelation  of  the  truth  of  Jesus  Himself,  and  there 
was  no  lie  in  it.  Thus  should  they  abide  in  Him 
according  to  that  which  it  had  taught  them. 

Observe  also,  here,  that  the  effect  of  this  teaching 
by  the  unction  from  on  high  is  twofold  with  regard  to 
the  discernment  of  the  truth.  They  knew  that  no  lie 
was  of  the  truth ;  possessing  this  truth  from  God,  that 
which  w^as  not  it  was  a  lie.  They  knew  that  this 
unction  w^hich  taught  them  of  all  things  was  the 
truth,  and  that  there  was  no  lie  in  it.  The  unction 
taught  them  all  things,  that  is  to  say,  all  the  truth,  as 
truth  of  God.     Therefore  that  which  was  not  it  was 

II. 


446  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLEi 

a  lie,  and  there  was  no  lie  in  the  unction.  Thus 
the  sheep  hear  the  voice  of  the  good  Shepherd;  if 
another  calls  them,  it  is  not  His  voice,  and  that  is 
enough.  They  fear  it  and  fly  from  it,  because  they  do 
not  know  it. 

With  verse  27  ends  the  second  series  of  exhortations 
to  the  three  classes.  The  apostle  begins  again  with 
the  whole  body  of  Christians  (ver.  28).  This  verse 
appears  to  me  to  correspond  with  verse  8  of  the  Second 
Epistle,  and  with  chapter  iii.  of  the  First  Epistle  to 
the  Corinthians. 

The  apostle,  having  ended  his  address  to  those  who 
were  all  in  the  communion  of  the  Father,  applies  the 
essential  principles  of  the  divine  life,  of  the  divine 
nature  as  manifested  in  Christ,  to  test  those  who 
claimed  participation  in  it ;  not  in  order  to  make  the 
believer  doubt,  but  for  the  rejection  of  that  which 
was  false.  I  say,  "  not  to  make  the  believer  doubt ;" 
for  the  apostle  speaks  of  his  position,  and  of  the 
position  of  those  to  whom  he  was  writing,  with  the 
most  perfect  assurance.  (Chap.  iii.  1,  2.)*  He  had 
spoken,  in  re-commencement  at  verse  28,  of  the  ap- 
pearing of  Jesus.  This  introduces  the  Lord  in  the 
full  revelation  of  His  character,  and  gives  rise  to  the 
scrutiny  of  the  pretensions  of  those  who  called  them- 

*  I  have  noticed,  farther  on,  the  striking  way  in  which  God 
and  Christ  are  spoken  of  as  one  Being  or  Person,  not  as  doctrine 
as  to  the  two  natures,  but  Christ  is  before  the  apostle's  mind, 
and  He  is  spoken  of  in  the  same  sentence,  now  as  God,  now  as 
appearing  as  man.  Thus  in  chapter  ii.  28  He  comes.  In  29 
the  righteous  man  is  born  of  Him,  and  we  are  children  of  God. 
But  the  world  did  not  know  Him.  Now  it  is  Christ  on  earth. 
Chapter  iii.  2  we  are  children  of  God,  but  in  the  same  verse  He 
appears  and  we  are  like  Him.  But  what  makes  this  yet  more 
wonderful  is  that  we  are  identified  with  Him  too.  We  are 
called  children  because  that  is  His  title  and  relationship.  The 
world  does  not  know  us,  for  it  did  not  know  Him.  We  know 
we  shall  be  like  Him  when  He  appears.  We  are  giveo  the  same 
place  here  and  there,  (Compare  chap.  v.  20.) 


1  JOHN.  447 

selves  by  His  name.  There  are  two  proofs  which 
belong  essentially  to  the  divine  life,  and  a  third 
which  is  accessory  as  privilege:  righteousness  or 
obedience,  and  love,  and  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

Righteousness  is  not  in  the  flesh.  If  therefore  it  is 
really  found  in  any  one,  he  is  born  of  Him,  he  derives 
his  nature  from  God  in  Christ.  We  may  remark, 
that  it  is  righteousness  as  it  was  manifested  in  Jesus  ; 
for  it  is  because  we  know  that  He  is  righteous,  that 
we  know  that  "  he  who  doeth  righteousness  is  born  of 
liim."  It  is  the  same  nature  demonstrated  by  the 
same  fruits. 

Chapter  iii.  Now  to  say  that  we  are  born  of  Him  is 
to  say  that  we  are  children  of  God.*  What  a  love  is 
that  which  the  Father  has  bestowed  on  us,  that  we 
should  be  called  children  If  Therefore  the  world 
knows  us  not,  because  it  knew  Him  not.  The  apostle 
returns  here  to  His  appearing  and  its  effect  on  us. 
We  are  children  of  God :  this  is  our  present  sure  and 
known  position ;  we  are  born  of  God.  That  which  we 
shall  be  is  not  yet  manifested ;  but  we  know  that — 
associated  with  Jesus  as  we  are  in  the  same  relation- 
ship with  the  Father,  Himself  being  our  life — we 
sliall  be  like  Him  when  He  appears.  For  it  is  to  this 
we  are  predestined,  to  see  Him  as  He  now  is  with  the 
Father,  from  which  the  life  came  which  was  mani- 
fested in  Him  and  imparted  to  us,  and  to  appear  in 
the  same  glory. 

Having  then  the  hope  of  seeing  Him  as  He  is,  and 
knowing  that  I  shall  be  perfectly  like  Him  when  He 
appears,  I  seek  to  be  as  like  Him  now  as  possible, 

*  See  previous  note. 

t  John  uses  habitually  the  word  "  children,"  not  "  sons,"  as 
the  more  distinctly  expressing  that  we  are  of  the  same  family. 
We  are  as  Christ  before  God  and  in  the  world,  and  so  will  bo 
when  He  appears. 

III. 


448  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

since  I  already  possess  this  life — He  being  in  me, 
my  life. 

This  is  the  measure  of  our  practical  purification. 
We  are  not  pure  as  He  is  pure ;  but  we  take  Christ,  as 
He  is  in  heaven,  for  the  pattern  and  measure  of  our 
purification,  we  purify  ourselves  according  to  His 
purity,  knowing  that  we  shall  be  perfectly  like  Him 
when  He  is  manifested.  Before  marking  the  contrast 
between  the  principles  of  the  divine  life  and  of  the 
enemy,  he  sets  before  us  the  true  measure  of  purity 
(he  will  give  that  of  love  in  a  moment)  for  the  chil- 
dren, inasmuch  as  they  are  partakers  of  His  nature 
and  have  the  same  relationship  with  God. 

There  are  two  remarks  to  be  made  here.  First, 
"  hope  in  him  "  does  not  mean  in  the  believer ;  but  a 
hoDe  that  has  Christ  for  its  object.  Second,  it  is 
striking  to  see  the  way  in  which  the  apostle  appears 
to  confound  God  and  Christ  together  in  this  epistle; 
and  uses  the  word  "  Him  "  to  signify  Christ,  when  he 
had  just  been  speaking  of  God,  and  vice  versa.  We 
may  see  the  principle  of  this  at  the  end  of  chapter  v. : 
"We  are  in  him  that  is  true,  [that  is  to  say]  in  his 
Son  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  true  God  and  eternal 
life."  In  these  few  words  we  have  the  key  to  the 
epistle:  Christ  is  the  life.  It  is  evidently  the  Son; 
but  it  is  God  Himself  who  is  manifested,  and  the  per- 
fection of  His  nature,  which  is  the  source  of  life  to  us 
also,  as  that  life  was  found  in  Christ  as  man.  Thus  I 
can  speak  of  God  and  say,  "  Born  of  him ;"  but  it  is  in 
Jesus  that  God  was  manifested,  and  from  Him  that  I 
derive  life ;  so  that  "Jesus  Christ "  and  "  God  "  are 
interchanged  with  each  other.  Thus  "  He  shall  ap- 
pear" (chap.  ii.  28)  is  Christ,  He  is  righteous;  the 
righteous  one  "is  born  of  him."  But  in  chapter  iii.  1 
it  is  "  born  of  God,"  "children  of  God  ;"  but  the  world 
did  not  know  Him :  here  it  is  Christ  on  earth ;  and 
"  when  he  shall  appear,"  it  is  again  Christ  and  w^ 


I  JOIJN.  449 

purify  ourselves  "  even  as  He  is  pure."  There  are 
many  other  examples. 

It  is  said  of  the  believer,  "  he  purifies  himself :"  this 
shews  that  he  is  not  pure,  as  Christ  is.  He  needed 
not  to  purify  Himself.  Accordingly  it  is  not  said,  he 
is  pure  as  Christ  is  pure  (for  in  that  case  there  would 
be  no  sin  in  us) ;  but  he  purifies  himself  according  to 
the  purity  of  Christ  as  He  is  in  heaven,  having  the 
same  life  as  the  life  of  Christ  Himself. 

Having  set  forth  the  positive  aspect  of  christian 
purity,  he  goes  on  to  speak  of  it  in  other  points  of 
view,  as  one  of  the  characteristic  proofs  of  the  life  of 
God  in  the  soul. 

He  who  commits  sin  (not  transgresses  the  law,* 
but)  acts  lawlessly.  His  conduct  is  without  the 
restraint,  without  the  rule  of  law.  He  acts  without 
curb  ;  for  sin  is  the  acting  without  the  curb  of  law  or 
restraint  of  another's  authority,  acting  from  our  own 
will.  Christ  came  to  do  His  Father's  will,  not  His 
own.  But  Christ  was  manifested  that  He  might  take 
away  our  sins,  and  in  Him  there  is  no  sin ;  so  that  he 
who  commits  sin  acts  against  the  object  of  the  mani- 
festation of  Christ,  and  in  opposition  to  the  nature  of 
which,  if  Christ  is  our  life,  we  are  partakers.  There- 
fore he  who  abides  in  Christ  does  not  practise  sin  ;  he 
who  sins  has  neither  seen  Him  nor  known  Him.  All 
depends,  we  see,  on  participation  in  the  life  and  nature 
of  Christ.  Let  us  not  then  deceive  ourselves.  He 
who  practises  righteousness  is  righteous,  as  He  is 
righteous :  for,  by  partaking  in  the  life  of  Christ,  one 
is  before  God  according  to  the  perfection  of  Him  who 

*  In  Romans  ii.  12,  the  word  is  used  in  contrast  with  law- 
breaking,  or  sinning  under  law.  That  is,  the  Greek  word  here 
used  for  what  is  translated  "transgression  of  the  law"  is  that 
used  for  sinning  without  law,  in  contrast  with  sinning  under  law, 
and  being  judged  by  it.  I  do  not  dissemble  that  this  chaugiLig 
what  is  a  definition  of  sin  is  a  very  serious  thing. 

VOL.   V.  III.  <^'Q 


450  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

is  there,  the  head  and  source  of  that  life.  But  we  are 
thus  as  Christ  before  God,  because  He  Himself  is 
really  our  life.  Our  actual  life  is  not  the  measure 
of  our  acceptance ;  it  is  Christ  who  is  so.  But  Christ 
is  our  life,  if  we  are  accepted  according  to  His  ex- 
cellence ;  for  it  is  as  living  of  His  life  that  we  partici- 
pate in  this. 

But  the  judgment  is  more  than  negative.  He  who 
practises  sin  is  of  the  devil,  has  morally  the  same  nature 
as  the  devil ;  for  he  sinneth  from  the  beginning :  it  is 
his  original  character  as  the  devil.  Now  Christ  was 
manifested  that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the 
devil ;  how  then  can  one  who  shares  the  character  of 
this  enemy  of  souls  be  with  Christ  ? 

On  the  other  hand,  he  who  is  born  of  God  does  not 
practise  sin.  The  reason  is  evident ;  he  is  made  a  par- 
taker of  the  nature  of  God ;  he  derives  his  life  from 
Him.  This  principle  of  divine  life  is  in  him.  The 
seed  of  God  remains  in  him ;  he  cannot  sin,  because  he 
is  born  of  God.  This  new  nature  had  not  in  it  the 
principle  of  sin,  so  as  to  commit  it.  How  could  it  be 
that  the  divine  nature  should  sin  ? 

Having  thus  designated  the  two  families,  the  family 
of  God  and  that  of  the  devil,  the  apostle  adds  the 
second  mark,  the  absence  of  which  is  a  proof  that  one 
is  not  of  God.  He  had  already  spoken  of  righteous- 
ness ;  he  adds  the  love  of  the  brethren.  For  this  is 
the  message  that  they  had  received  from  Christ  Him- 
self, that  they  should  love  one  another.  In  verse  12 
he  shews  the  connection  between  the  two  things :  that 
hatred  of  a  brother  is  fed  by  the  sense  one  has  that 
his  works  are  good,  and  one's  own  evil.  Moreover  we 
are  not  to  wonder  that  the  world  hates  us:  for  we 
know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life, 
because  we  love  the  brethren.  If  this  love  is  an 
essential  proof  of  being  renewed,  it  is  quite  natural 
that  it  should  not  be  found  in  the  men  of  the  world. 


I  JOHN.  451 

But,  this  being  the  case,  he  who  does  not  love  his 
brother  (solemn  thought !)  abides  in  death.  In  addi- 
tion to  this,  he  who  does  not  love  his  brother  is  a 
murderer,  and  a  murderer  has  not  eternal  life.  There 
is  the  absence  of  the  divine  nature,  death  ;  but  more, 
the  activity  of  the  old  man  in  the  opposite  nature 
is  there,  he  hafces,  and  is  in  spirit  the  activity  of 
death — a  murderer. 

Further,  as  in  the  case  of  righteousness  and  of 
purity,  we  have  Christ  as  the  measure  of  this  love. 
We  know  love  by  this,  that  He  laid  down  His  life  for 
us ;  we  ought  to  lay  down  ours  for  the  brethren.  Now, 
if  our  brother  has  need,  and  we  possess  this  world's 
good,  but  do  not  provide  for  his  necessity,  is  that  the 
divine  love  which  made  Christ  lay  down  His  life  for 
us  ?  It  is  by  this  real  and  practical  love  that  we 
know  we  are  in  the  truth,  and  that  our  heart  is 
confirmed  and  assured  before  God.  For  if  there  is 
nothing  on  the  conscience,  we  have  confidence  in  His 
presence;  but  if  our  own  heart  condemns  us,  God 
knows  yet  more. 

It  is  not  here  the  means  of  being  assured  of  our 
salvation,  but  of  having  confidence  in  the  presence  of 
God.  We  cannot  have  it  with  a  bad  conscience  in  the 
practical  sense  of  the  word,  for  God  is  always  light 
and  always  holy. 

We  also  receive  all  that  we  ask  for,  when  we  walk 
thus  in  love  before  Him,  doing  that  which  is  pleasing 
in  His  sight ;  for  thus  walking  in  His  presence  with 
confidence,  the  heart  and  its  desires  respond  to  this 
blessed  influence,  being  formed  by  the  enjoyment  of 
communion  with  Him  in  the  light  of  His  countenance. 
It  is  God  who  animates  the  heart;  this  life,  and  this 
divine  nature,  of  which  the  epistle  speaks,  being  in 
full  activity  and  enlightened  and  moved  by  the  divine 
presence  in  which  it  delights.  Thus  our  requests  are 
only   for   the   accomplishment   of   desires   that   arise 

III. 


452  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

when  this  life,  when  our  thoughts,  are  filled  with  the 
presence  of  God  and  with  the  communication  of  His 
nature.  And  He  lends  His  power  to  the  fulfilment  of 
these  desires,  of  which  He  is  the  source,  and  which 
are  formed  in  the  heart  by  the  revelation  of  Himself. 
(Compare  John  xv.  7.) 

This  is  indeed  the  position  of  Christ  Himself  when 
here  below  :  only  that  He  was  perfect  in  it.  (Compare 
John  viii.  29 ;  xi.  42.) 

And  here  it  is  the  commandment  of  God  which  He 
desires  us  to  obey ;  namely,  to  believe  on  the  name  of 
His  Son  Jesus ;  and  to  love  one  another,  as  He  gave  us 
commandment. 

Now  he  who  keeps  His  commandments  dwells  in 
Him ;  and  He  dwells  also  in  this  obedient  man.  It 
will  be  asked  whether  God  or  Christ  is  here  meant  ? 
The  apostle,  as  we  have  seen,  confounds  them  together 
in  his  thought.  That  is  to  say,  the  Holy  Ghost  unites 
them  in  our  minds.  We  are  in  Him  who  is  true,  that 
is,  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  Christ,  who  is  the 
presentation  of  God  to  men  in  life  in  man ;  and  to  the 
believer  He  is  the  communication  of  that  life,  so  that 
God  too  dwells  in  him,  in  the  revelation,  in  its  divine 
excellence  and  perfection,  of  the. nature  which  the 
believer  shares  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  who 
dwells  in  him,  so  that  love  is  alike  enjoyed  and 
exercised. 

But  what  marvellous  grace  to  have  received  a  life,  a 
nature,  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  enjoy  God  Him- 
self, who  dwells  in  us,  and  by  which,  since  it  is  in 
Christ,  we  are  in  fact  in  the  enjoyment  of  this  com- 
munion, this  relationship  with  God !  He  who  has  the 
Son  has  life  ;  but  God  then  dwells  in  him  as  the  por- 
tion, as  well  as  the  source  of  this  life ;  and  he  who  has 
the  Son  has  the  Father. 

What  marvellous  links  of  vital  and  living  enjoy- 
ment through  the  communication  of  the  divine  nature 


I  JOHN.  453 

of  Him  who  is  its  source  ;  and  that  according  to  its 
perfection  in  Christ !  Such  is  the  Christian  according 
to  grace.  Therefore  also  he  is  obedient,  because  this 
life  in  the  man  Christ  (and  it  is  thus  that  it  becomes 
ours)  was  obedience  itself,  the  true  relationship  of 
man  to  God. 

Practical  righteousness,  then,  is  a  proof  that  we  are 
born  or  Him  who,  in  His  nature,  is  its  source.  In 
presence  also  of  the  world's  hatred,  we  know  that  we 
have  passed  from  death  unto  life  because  we  love  the 
brethren.  Thus,  having  a  good  conscience,  we  have 
confidence  in  God,  and  we  receive  from  Him  whatso- 
ever we  ask,  walking  in  obedience  and  in  a  way  that 
is  pleasing  to  Him.  Thus  walking,  we  dwell  in  Him* 
and  He  in  us. 

A  third  proof  of  our  christian  privileges  arises  here. 
The  Spirit  whom  He  has  given  us  is  the  proof  that 
He  Himself  dwells  in  us,  the  manifestation  of  the 
presence  of  God  in  us.  He  does  not  here  add  that  we 
abide  in  Him,  because  the  subject  here  is  the  manifes- 
tation of  the  presence  of  God.  The  presence  of  the 
Spirit  demonstrates  it.  But  in  abiding  in  Him  there 
is,  as  we  shall  see  farther  on,  the  enjoyment  of  that 
which  He  is,  and  consequently  moral  communion  with 
His  nature.  He  who  obeys  enjoys  this  also,  as  we 
have  seen.  Here  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
us  is  spoken  of  as  demonstration  of  one  part  only  of 
this  truth,  namely,  that  God  is  in  us.  But  the  pre- 
sence of  God  in  us  according  to  grace,  and  according 
to  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  involves  also  communion 
with  that  nature ;  we  dwell  also  in  Him  from  whom 
we  derive  this  grace,  and  all  the  spiritual  forms  of 

-''  Here  dwelling  in  Him  comes  first,  because  it  is  practical 
realisation  in  an  obedient  heart.  His  dwelling  in  us  is  then 
pursued  apart  as  known  by  the  Spirit  given  to  us,  to  guard 
against  being  misled  by  evil  spirits.  In  chapter  iv.  7,  he  resumes 
the  indwelhng  in  connection  with  the  love  of  God. 

III. 


454  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLK 

that  nature,  in  communion  and  practical  life.  It  is  in 
verses  12  and  16  of  chapter  iv.  that  our  apostle  speaks 
of  this. 

Practical  righteousness  or  obedience,  the  love  of  the 
brethren,  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  are 
the  proofs  of  our  relationship  to  God.  He  who  obeys 
the  Lord's  commandments  in  practical  righteousness 
dwells  in  Him,  and  He  in  him.  The  Spirit  given  is  the 
proof  that  He  dwells  in  us. 

Now,  to  make  use  of  this  last  proof,  caution  was 
required,  for  many  false  prophets  would  assume,  and 
even  in  the  time  of  the  apostle  had  already  assumed, 
the  semblance  of  having  received  communications  from 
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  insinuated  themselves  among 
the  Christians.  (Chap,  iv.)  It  was  necessary  therefore 
to  put  them  on  their  guard,  by  giving  them  the  sure 
mark  of  the  real  Spirit  of  God.  The  first  of  these  was 
the  confession  of  Jesus  come  in  the  flesh.  It  is  not 
merely  to  confess  that  He  is  come,  but  to  confess  Him 
thus  come.  The  second  was  that  He  who  really  knew 
God  hearkened  to  the  apostles.  In  this  way  the 
writings  of  the  apostles  become  a  touchstone  for  those 
who  pretend  to  teach  the  assembly.  All  the  word  is 
so,  doubtless ;  but  I  confine  myself  here  to  that  which 
is  said  in  this  place.  The  teaching  of  the  apostles  is 
formally  a  touchstone  for  all  other  teaching — I  mean 
that  which  they  themselves  taught  immediately.  If 
any  one  tells  me  that  others  must  explain  or  develop 
it  to  have  the  truth  and  certainty  of  faith,  I  reply, 
"  You  are  not  of  God,  for  he  who  is  of  God  hearkens 
to  them ;  and  you  would  have  me  not  to  hearken  to 
them;  and  whatever  may  be  your  pretext,  you  prevent 
my  doing  so."  The  denial  of  Jesus  come  in  the  flesh 
is  the  spirit  of  Antichrist.  Not  to  hear  the  apostles  is 
the  provisional  and  preparatory-  form  of  the  evil. 
True  Christians  had  overcome  the  spirit  of  error  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  who  dwelt  in  them. 


I  JOHN.  .     455 

The  three  tests  of  true  Christianity  are  now  dis- 
tinctly laid  down,  and  the  apostle  pursues  his  exhor- 
tations, developing  the  fulness  and  intimacy  of  our 
relationships  with  a  God  of  love,  maintaining  that 
participation  of  nature  in  which  love  is  of  God,  and 
he  who  loves  is  born  of  God — partakes  therefore  of 
His  nature,  and  knows  Him  (for  it  is  by  faith  that  he 
received  it)  as  partaking  of  His  nature.  He  who  loves 
not  does  not  know  God.  We  must  possess  the  nature 
that  loves  in  order  to  know  what  love  is.  He  then 
who  does  not  love  does  not  know  God,  for  God  is  love. 
Such  a  person  has  not  one  sentiment  in  connection 
with  the  nature  of  God ;  how  then  can  he  know  Him  ? 
No  more  than  an  animal  can  know  what  a  man's 
mind  or  understanding  is  when  he  has  not  got  it. 

Give  especial  heed,  reader,  to  this  immense  pre- 
rogative, which  flows  from  the  whole  doctrine  of  the 
epistle.  The  eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father 
has  been  manifested  and  has  been  imparted  to  us: 
thus  we  are  partakers  of  the  divine  nature.  The 
affections  of  that  nature  acting  in  us  rest,  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  enjoyment  of  communion 
with  God  who  is  its  source ;  we  dwell  in  Him  and  He 
in  us.  The  first  thing  is  the  statement  of  the  truth 
in  us.  The  actings  of  this  nature  prove  that  He  dwells 
J— that,  if  we  thus  love,  God  Himself  dwells  in  us.  He 
who  works  this  love  is  there.  But  He  is  infinite  and 
the  heart  rests  in  Him ;  we  know  at  the  same  time 
that  we  dwell  in  Him  and  He  in  us,  because  He  has 
given  us  of  His  Spirit.  But  this  passage,  so  rich  in 
blessing,  demands  that  we  should  follow  it  with 
order. 

He  begins  with  the  fact  that  love  is  of  God.  It  is 
His  nature :  He  is  its  source.  Therefore  he  who 
loves  is  born  of  God,  is  a  partaker  of  His  nature. 
Also  he  knows  God,  for  he  knows  what  love  is,  and 
God  is  its  fulness.     This  is  the  doctrine  which  makes 

IV. 


456  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

everything  depend  on  our  participation  in  the  divine 
nature. 

x^sow  this  might  be  transformed  on  the  one  hand 
into  mysticism,  by  leading  us  to  fix  our  attention  on 
our  love  for  God,  and  love  in  us,  that  being  God's 
nature,  as  if  it  was  said,  love  is  God,  not  God  is  love, 
and  by  seeking  to  fathom  the  divine  nature  in  our- 
selves; or  to  doubt  on  the  other,  because  we  do  not 
find  the  effects  of  the  divine  nature  in  us  as  we  would. 
In  effect,  he  who  does  not  love  (for  the  thing,  as  ever 
in  John,  is  expressed  in  an  abstract  way)  does  not 
know  God,  for  God  is  love.  The  possession  of  the 
nature  is  necessary  to  the  understanding  of  what  that 
nature  is,  and  for  the  knowledge  of  Him  who  is  its 
perfection. 

But,  if  I  seek  to  know  it  and  have  or  give  the  proof 
of  it,  it  is  not  to  the  existence  of  the  nature  in  us  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  directs  the  thoughts  of  the  believers 
as  their  object.  God,  he  has  said,  is  love ;  and  this 
love  has  been  manifested  towards  us  in  that  He  has 
given  His  only  Son,  that  we  might  live  through  Him. 
The  proof  is  not  the  life  in  us,  but  that  God  has  given 
His  Son  in  order  that  we  might  live,  and  further  to 
make  propitiation  for  our  sins.  God  be  praised !  we 
know  this  love,  not  by  the  poor  results  of  its  action  in 
ourselves,  but  in  its  perfection  in  God,  and  that  even 
in  a  manifestation  of  it  towards  us,  which  is  wholly 
outside  ourselves.  It  is  a  fact  outside  ourselves  which 
is  the  manifestation  of  this  perfect  love.  We  enjoy  it 
by  participating  in  the  divine  nature ;  we  know  it  by 
the  infinite  gift  of  God's  Son.  The  exercise  and  proof 
of  it  are  there. 

The  full  scope  of  this  principle  and  all  the  force  of 
its  truth  are  stated  and  demonstrated  in  that  which 
follows.  It  is  striking  to  see  how  the  Holy  Spirit,  in 
an  epistle  which  is  essentially  occupied  with  the  life  of 
Christ  and  its  fruits  in  us,  gives  the  proof  and  full  cha- 


I  JOHN.  457 

racter  of  love  in  that  which  is  wholly  without  our- 
selves. Nor  can  anything  be  more  perfect  than  the 
way  in  which  the  love  of  God  is  here  set  forth,  from 
the  time  it  is  occupied  with  our  sinful  state  till  we 
stand  before  the  judgment-seat.  God  has  thought  of  all: 
love  toivards  us  as  sinners,  verses  9, 10  ;  in  us  as  saints, 
verse  12  ;  with  us  as  perfect  in  our  condition  in  view  of 
the  day  of  judgment,  verse  17.  In  the  first  verses,  the 
love  of  God  is  manifested  in  the  gift  of  Christ ;  first, 
to  give  us  life — we  were  dead ;  secondly,  to  make  pro- 
pitiation— we  were  guilty.  Our  whole  case  is  taken 
up.  In  the  second  of  these  verses  the  great  principle 
of  grace,  what  love  is,  where  and  how  known,  is 
clearly  stated  in  words  of  infinite  importance  as  to 
the  very  nature  of  Christianity.  Herein  is  love,  not 
that  we  have  loved  God  (that  was  the  principle  of  the 
law),  but  in  that  He  has  loved  us,  and  has  given  His 
Son  to  make  propitiation  for  our  sins.  Here,  then,  it 
is  that  we  have  learnt  that  which  love  is.  It  was 
perfect  in  Him  when  we  had  no  love  for  Him ;  perfect 
in  Him  in  that  He  exercised  it  towards  us  when  we 
were  in  our  sins,  and  sent  His  Son  to  be  the  propitia- 
tion for  them.  The  apostle  then  affirms,  no  doubt, 
that  he  who  loves  not  knows  not  God.  The  pretension 
to  possess  this  love  is  judged  by  this  means  ;  but  in 
order  to  know  love  we  must  not  seek  for  it  in  our- 
selves, but  seek  it  manifested  in  God  when  ive  had 
none.  He  gives  the  life  which  loves,  and  He  has 
made  propitiation  for  our  sins. 

And  now  with  regard  to  the  enjoyment  and  the 
privileges  of  this  love : — if  God  has  so  loved  us  (this 
is  the  ground  that  He  takes)  we  ought  to  love  one 
another. 

No  one  has  ever  seen  God :  if  we  love  one  another, 
God  dwells  in  us.  His  presence,  Himself  dwelling  in 
us,  rises  in  the  excellency  of  His  nature  above  all  the 
barriers  of  circumstances,  and  attaches  us  to  those 

IV. 


458  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

who  are  His.  It  is  God  in  the  power  of  His  nature 
which  is  the  source  of  thought  and  feeling  and  diffuses 
itself  among  them  in  whom  it  is.  One  can  understand 
this.  How  is  it  that  I  love  strangers  from  another  land, 
persons  of  different  habits,  whom  I  have  never  known, 
more  intimately  than  members  of  my  own  family 
after  the  flesh  ?  How  is  it  that  I  have  thoughts  in 
common,  objects  infinitely  loved  in  common,  affections 
powerfully  engaged,  a  stronger  bond  with  persons 
whom  I  have  never  seen,  than  with  the  otherwise 
dear  companions  of  my  childhood  ?  It  is  because 
there  is  in  them  and  in  me  a  source  of  thoughts  and 
affections  which  is  not  human.  God  is  in  it.  God 
dwells  in  us.  What  happiness  !  What  a  bond  !  Does 
He  not  communicate  Himself  to  the  soul  ?  Does  He 
not  render  it  conscious  of  His  presence  in  love  ? 
Assuredly,  yes.  And  if  He  is  thus  in  us,  the  blessed 
source  of  our  thoughts,  can  there  be  fear,  or  distance, 
or  uncertainty,  with  regard  to  what  He  is  ?  None 
at  all.  His  love  is  perfect  in  us.  We  know  Him 
as  love  in  our  souls:  the  second  great  point  in  this 
remarkable  passage,  the  enjoyment  of  divine  love  in 
our  souls. 

The  apostle  has  not  yet  said,  "We  know  that  we 
dwell  in  him."  He  will  say  it  now.  But,  if  the  love 
of  the  brethren  is  in  us,  God  dwells  in  us.  When  it  is 
in  exercise,  we  are  conscious  of  the  presence  of  God,  as 
perfect  love  in  us.  It  fills  the  heart,  and  thus  is 
exercised  in  us.  Now  this  consciousness  is  the  effect 
of  the  presence  of  His  Spirit,  as  the  source  and  power 
of  life  and  nature,  in  us.  He  has  given  us,  not  here  "  his 
Spirit" — the  proof  that  He  dwells  in  us,  but  "of 
his  Spirit;"  we  participate  by  His  presence  in  us 
in  divine  affection  through  the  Spirit,  and  thus  we  not 
only  know  that  He  dwells  in  us,  but  the  presence  of 
the  Spirit,  acting  in  a  nature  which  is  that  of  God  in 
us,  makes  us  conscious  that  we  dwell  in  Him.     For 


I  JOHN.  459 

He  is  the  infiniteness  and  perfection  of  that  which  is 
now  in  us. 

The  heart  rests  in  this,  and  enjoys  Him,  and  is 
hidden  from  all  that  is  outside  Him,  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  perfect  love  in  which  (thus  dwelling  in 
Him)  one  finds  oneself.  The  Spirit  makes  us  dwell  in 
God,  and  gives  us  thus  the  consciousness  that  He 
dwells  in  us.  Thus  we,  in  the  savour  and  conscious- 
ness of  the  love  that  was  in  it,  can  testify  of  that  in 
which  it  was  manifested  beyond  all  Jewish  limits, 
that  the  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of 
the  world.  We  shall  see  further  another  character 
of  it. 

If  we  compare  verse  12  of  our  chapter  iv.  with 
chapter  i.  18  of  the  Gospel  by  John,  we  shall  better 
apprehend  the  scope  of  the  apostle's  teaching  here. 
The  same  difficulty,  or  if  you  will,  the  same  truth  is 
presented  in  both  cases.  No  one  has  ever  seen  God. 
How  is  this  met  ? 

In  John  i.  18  the  only  begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father,  He  has  declared  Him.  He  who 
is*  in  the  most  perfect  intimacy,  in  the  most  absolute 
proximity  and  enjoyment  of  the  Father's  love,  the 
one  eternal,  sufficient  object  that  knew  the  love  of  the 
Father  as  His  only  Son,  has  revealed  Him  unto  men 
as  He  has  Himself  known  Him.  What  is  the  answer 
in  our  epistle  to  this  same  difficulty?  "If  we  love 
one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us,  and  his  love  is  per- 
fected in  us."  By  the  communication  of  the  divine 
nature,  and  by  the  dwelling  of  God  in  us,  we  inwardly 
enjoy  Him  as  He  has  been  manifested  and  declared  by 
His  only  Son.  His  love  is  perfect  in  us,  known  to  the 
heart,  as  it  has  been  declared  in  Jesus.     The  God  who 

*  Note,  it  is  not  "was."  It  is  never  said  in  scripture,  as 
often,  He  left  the  Father's  bosom;  but  "the  only  begotten  Son 
who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father."  As  so  knowing  God,  He 
reveals  Him  on  earth. 

IV. 


460  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

has  been  declared  by  Him  dwells  in  us.  What  a 
thought !  that  this  answer  to  the  fact  that  no  one  has 
ever  seen  God  is  equally,  that  the  only  Son  has  de- 
clared Him,  and  that  He  dwells  in  us.  What  light 
this  throws  upon  the  words,  "  which  thing  is  true  in 
him  and  in  you!"*  For  it  is  in  that  Christ  has 
become  our  life  that  we  can  thus  enjoy  God  and 
His  presence  in  us  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
And  from  this  we  have  seen  that  the  testimony  of 
verse  14  flows. 

We  see,  also,  the  distinction  between  God  dwelling 
in  us  and  we  in  God,  even  in  that  which  Christ  says  of 
Himself.  He  abode  always  in  the  Father,  and  the 
Father  in  Him ;  but  He  says,  "  The  Father  who 
dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeth  the  works."  Through  His 
word  the  disciples  ought  to  have  believed  in  them 
both ;  but  in  that  which  they  had  seen — in  His  works 
— they  had  rather  seen  the  proof  that  the  Father 
dwelt  in  Him.  They  who  had  seen  Him  had  seen  the 
Father.  But  when  the  Comforter  was  come,  at  that 
day  they  should  know  that  Jesus  was  in  His  Father — 
divinely  one  with  the  Father. 

He  does  not  say  that  we  are  in  God,  nor  in  the 
Father,-|-  but  that  we  dwell  in  Him,  and  we  know  it, 
because  He  has  given  us  of  His  Spirit.  We  have 
already  noticed  that  He  says  (chap.  iii.  24)  "hereby 
we  know  that  he  [God]  abideth  in  us,  because  he  has 
given  us  his  Spirit."  Here  he  adds,  We  know  that  we 
dwell  in  God,  because  it  is — not  the  manifestation,  as 
a  proof,  but — communion  with  God  Himself.  We 
know  that  we  dwell  in  Him,  always  as  a  precious 

*  This  gives  us  too,  in  their  highest  character  and  subject,  the 
difference  between  the  Gospel  and  Epistle. 

t  The  only  expression  in  the  word  that  has  some  resemblance 
to  it  is  "  the  church  of  the  Thessalonians,  which  is  in  God  the 
Father,"  This  is  addressed  to  a  numerous  corporation  in  quite 
another  sense. 


I  JOHN. 

truth — an  unchangeable  fact ;  sensibly,  when  His  love 
is  active  in  the  heart.  Consequently  it  is  to  this 
activity  that  the  apostle  immediately  turns  by  adding 
"and  we  have  seen  and  do  testify,  that  the  Father 
sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  This 
was  the  proof  for  every  one,  of  that  love  which 
the  apostle  enjoyed — as  all  believers  do — in  his  own 
heart.  It  is  important  to  notice  how  the  passage  thus 
first  presents  the  fact  of  God's  dwelling  in  us,  then  the 
effect  (as  He  is  infinite),  our  dwelling  in  Him,  and 
then  the  realisation  of  the  first  truth  in  conscious 
reality  of  life. 

We  may  remark  here  that,  while  God's  dwelling  in 
us  is  a  doctrinal  fact  and  true  of  every  real  Christian, 
our  dwelling  in  Him,  though  involved  in  it,  is  con- 
nected with  our  state.  Thus  chapter  iii.  24,  "  He  that 
keepeth  his  commandments  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he 
in  him."  Chapter  iv.  16,  "  He  that  dwelleth  in  love 
dwelleth  in  God  and  God  in  him." 

Love  one  to  another  is  indeed  taken  as  the  proof 
that  God  is  there,  and  His  love  is  perfected  in  us — 
this  to  contrast  the  manner  of  His  presence  with  that 
of  Christ.  (John  i.  18.)  But  what  we  thus  know  is 
dwelling  in  Him  and  He  in  us.  In  each  case  this 
knowledge  is  by  the  Spirit.  Verse  15  is  the  universal 
fact:  verse  16  brings  it  fully  up  to  its  source.  We 
have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  to 
us.  His  nature  is  there  declared  in  itself  (for  we  joy 
in  God) ;  God  is  love,  and  he  who  dwells  in  love  dwells 
in  God  and  God  in  him.  There  is  none  anywhere 
else :  if  we  partake  of  His  nature,  we  partake  of  it, 
and  he  who  abides  in  it  abides  in  God  who  is  the 
fulness  of  it.  But  then  remark  that  while  what  He  is 
is  insisted  on.  His  personal  being  is  carefully  insisted 
on.     He  dwells  in  us. 

And  here  comes  in  a  principle  of  deep  importance. 
It  might  pe^-haps  be  said  that  this  dwelling  of  God  in 

IV. 


462  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

US  and  our  dwelling  in  Him  depended  on  a  large 
measure  of  spirituality,  the  apostle  having  in  fact 
spoken  of  the  highest  possible  joy.  But  although  the 
degree  in  which  we  intelligently  realise  it  is  in  effect  a 
matter  of  spirituality,  yet  the  thing  in  itself  is  the 
portion  of  every  Christian.  It  is  our  position,  because 
Christ  is  our  life,  and  because  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
given  us.  "  Whosoever  shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the 
Son  of  God,  God  dwelleth  in  him  and  he  in  God." 
How  great  the  grace  of  the  gospel !  How  admirable 
our  position  because  it  is  in  Jesus  that  we  possess  it ! 
It  is  important  to  hold  fast  this,  that  it  is  the  portion 
of  every  Christian,  the  joy  of  the  humble,  the  strongest 
reproach  to  the  conscience  of  the  careless. 

The  apostle  explains  this  high  position  by  the  pos- 
session of  the  divine  nature — the  essential  condition 
of  Christianity.  A  Christian  is  one  who  is  a  partaker 
of  the  divine  nature,  and  in  whom  the  Spirit  dwells. 
But  the  knowledge  of  our  position  does  not  flow  from 
the  consideration  of  this  truth,  though  it  depends  on 
its  being  true,  but  of  that  of  God's  own  love,  as  we 
have  already  seen.  And  the  apostle  goes  on  to  say, 
"  We  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath 
to  us."  This  is  the  source  of  our  knowledge  and 
enjoyment  of  these  privileges,  so  sweet  and  so  mar- 
vellously exalted,  but  so  simple  and  so  real  to  the 
heart  when  they  are  known. 

We  have  known  love,  the  love  that  God  has  for  us, 
and  we  have  believed  it.  Precious  knowledge!  by 
possessing  it  we  know  God ;  for  it  is  thus  that  He  has 
manifested  Himself.  Therefore  can  we  say,  "  God  is 
love."  There  is  none  beside.  Himself  is  love.  He 
is  love  in  all  its  fulness.  He  is  not  holiness,  He  is 
holy ;  but  He  is  love.  He  is  not  righteousness ;  He  is 
righteous.* 

"-  Righteousness    and    holiness   suppose  reference   to  other 


I  JOHN.  463 

By  dwelling  then  in  love  I  dwell  in  Him,  which  I 
could  not  do  unless  He  dwelt  in  me,  and  this  He  does. 
Here  he  puts  it  first,  that  we  dwell  in  Him,  because  it 
is  God  Himself  who  is  before  our  eyes,  as  the  love  in 
which  we  dwell.  Therefore,  when  thinking  of  this 
love,  I  say  that  I  dwell  in  Him,  because  I  have  in  my 
heart  the  consciousness  of  it  by  the  Spirit.  At  the 
same  time  this  love  is  an  active  energetic  principle  in 
us ;  it  is  God  Himself  who  is  there.  This  is  the  joy  of 
our  position — the  position  of  every  Christian. 

Verses  14  and  16  present  the  twofold  effect  of  the 
manifestation  of  this  love. 

First,  the  testimony  that  the  Father  has  sent  the 
Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Quite  outside 
the  promises  made  to  the  Jews  (as  everywhere  in 
John),  this  work  is  the  fruit  of  that  which  God 
Himself  is.  Accordingly  ^uhosoever  confesses  Jesus 
to  be  that  Son  enjoys  all  the  fulness  of  its  blessed 
consequences. 

Secondly,  the  Christian  has  believed  for  himself  in 
this  love,  and  he  enjoys  it  according  to  its  fulness. 
There  is  only  this  modification  of  the  expression  of  the 
glorious  fact  of  our  portion — that  the  confession  of 
Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God  is  primarily  here  the  proof 
that  God  dwells  in  us,  although  the  other  part  of  the 
truth  equally  says  that  he  who  confesses  Him  dwells 
also  in  God. 

When  speaking  of  our  portion  in  communion,  as 
believing  in  this  love,  it  is  said,  that  he  who  dwells  in 
love  dwells  in  God ;  for  in  effect  that  is  where  the 


things ;  thus,  evil  to  be  known,  rejection  of  evil,  and  judgment. 
Love,  though  exercised  towards  others,  is  what  He  is  in  Him- 
self. The  other  essential  name  that  God  bears  is  "light."  We 
are  said  to  be  "light  in  the  Lord"  as  partakers  of  the  divine 
nature ;  not  love,  which  is,  though  the  divme  nature,  sove- 
reign in  grace.  "We  cannot  therefore  be  said  to  be  love.  (See 
Eph.  iv.,  v.) 

IV. 


464  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

heart  is.  Here  also  the  other  part  of  the  truth  is 
equally  true ;  God  dwells  in  hiin  likewise. 

I  have  spoken  of  the  consciousness  of  this  dwelling 
in  God,  for  it  is  thus  only  that  it  is  known.  But  it  is 
important  to  remember  that  the  apostle  teaches  it  as 
a  truth  that  applies  to  every  believer.  These  might 
have  excused  themselves  for  not  appropriating  these 
statements  as  too  high  for  them ;  but  this  fact  judges 
the  excuse.  This  communion  is  neglected.  But  God 
dwells  in  every  one  who  confesses  that  Jesus  is  Son  of 
God,  and  he  in  God.  What  an  encouragement  for  a 
timid  believer !     What  a  rebuke  for  a  careless  one  ! 

The  apostle  returns  to  our  relative  position,  viewing 
God  as  outside  ourselves,  as  Him  before  whom  we  are 
to  appear  and  with  whom  we  have  always  to  do. 
This  is  the  third  great  proof  and  character  of  love  in 
which  it  is  complete,  testifying,  as  I  have  already 
said,  that  God  has  thought  on  all  as  to  us  from  our 
sinful  state  to  the  day  of  judgment. 

Herein  is  love  perfect  with  us  (in  order  that  we 
may  have  boldness  for  the  day  of  judgment),  namely, 
that  as  He  is,  such  are  we  in  this  world.  In  truth, 
what  could  give  us  a  more  complete  assurance  for  that 
day  than  to  be  as  Jesus  Himself — like  the  judge  ? 
He  who  will  judge  in  righteousness  is  our  righteous- 
ness. We  are  in  Him  the  righteousness  according  to 
which  He  will  judge.  We  are  in  respect  of  judgment 
as  He  is.  Truly  this  can  give  us  perfect  peace.  But 
observe,  that  it  is  not  only  in  the  day  of  judgment 
that  this  is  so  (it  gives  us  boldness  for  it),  but  we  are 
it  in  this  world.  Not  as  He  was,  but  in  this  world 
we  are  as  He  is,  and  have  our  known  place  already,  as 
needed,  and  according  to  the  nature  and  counsels  of 
God,  for  that  day.  It  is  ours  as  being  livingly 
identified  with  Him. 

Now  in  love  there  is  no  fear ;  there  is  confidence. 
If  I  am  sure  that  a  person  loves  me,  I  do  not  fear 


I  JOHN.  465 

him.  If  I  am  only  desiring  to  be  the  object  of  his 
affection,  I  may  fear  that  I  am  not  so,  and  may  even 
fear  himself.  Nevertheless  this  fear  would  always 
tend  to  destroy  my  love  for  him  and  my  desire  to  be 
loved  by  him.  There  is  incompatibility  between  the 
two  affections — there  is  no  fear  in  love.  Perfect  love 
then  banishes  fear ;  for  fear  torments  us,  and  torment 
is  not  the  enjoyment  of  love.  He  therefore  who  fears 
does  not  know  perfect  love.  And  now  what  does  he 
mean  by  "  perfect  love"  ?  It  is  that  which  God  is,  and 
which  He  has  fully  displayed  in  Christ,  and  given  us 
to  know  and  to  enjoy  by  His  presence  in  us,  so  that 
we  dwell  in  Him.  The  positive  proof  of  its  complete 
perfectness  is  that  we  are  such  as  Christ  is.  It  is 
manifested  towards  us,  perfected  in  us,  and  made 
perfect  with  us.  But  that  which  we  enjoy  is  God, 
who  is  love,  and  we  enjoy  Him  by  His  being  in  us,  so 
that  love  and  confidence  are  in  our  hearts,  and  we 
have  rest.  That  which  I  know  of  God  is  that  He  is 
love,  and  love  to  me,  and  nothing  else  but  love  to  me, 
because  it  is  Himself  who  is  so.  Therefore  there  is 
no  fear.* 

If  we  inquire  practically  into  the  history,  so  to 
speak,  of  these  affections ;  if  we  seek  to  separate  that 
which  in  the  enjoyment  is  united,  because  the  divine 
nature  in  us,  which  is  love,  enjoys  love  in  its  perfec- 
tion in  God  (His  love  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  by  His 
presence  therefore) ;  if  we  wish  to  specify  the  rela- 
tionship in  which  our  hearts  find  themselves  with  God 


*  It  is  striking  to  see  that  he  does  not  say,  We  ought  to  love 
Him  because  He  first  loved  us ;  but  we  love  Him.  We  cannot 
know  and  enjoy  love  to  us  without  loving.  The  sense  of  love  to 
us  is  always  love.  It  is  not  known  and  valued  without  its  being 
there.  My  sense  of  love  in  another  is  love  to  him.  We  ought 
to  love  the  brethren,  because  it  is  not  their  love  to  us  which  is 
the  spring  of  it,  though  it  may  nourish  it  in  this  way.  But  w« 
love  God  because  He  first  loved  ua. 

vol..  V.  IV,  H  H 


406  THE  BOOKS   OP  THE  BIBLE. 

in  regard  to  this,  here  it  is :  "  we  love  him  because  he 
first  loved  us."  It  is  grace  and  it  must  be  grace, 
because  it  is  God  who  is  to  be  glorified. 

Here,  it  will  be  worth  our  while  to  notice  the  order 
of  this  remarkable  passage.  Verses  7-10 :  We  possess 
the  nature  of  God ;  consequently  we  love ;  we  are  bom 
of  Him,  and  we  know  Him.  But  the  manifestation  of 
love  towards  us  in  Christ  Jesus  is  the  proof  of  that 
love;  it  is  thus  that  we  know  it.  Verses  11-16:  We 
enjoy  it  by  dwelling  in  it.  It  is  present  life  in  the 
love  of  God  by  the  presence  of  His  Spirit  in  us ;  the 
enjoyment  of  that  love  by  communion,  in  that  God 
dwells  in  us,  and  we  thus  dwell  in  Him.  Verse  17 : 
His  love  is  perfected  with  us ;  the  perfection  of  that 
love,  viewed  in  the  place  that  it  has  given  us  in  view 
of  judgment — we  are,  in  this  world,  such  as  Christ  is. 
Verses  18-19  :  it  is  thus  fully  perfected  with  us.  Love 
to  sinners,  communion,  perfection  before  God,  give  us 
the  moral  and  characteristic  elements  of  that  love — 
what  it  is  in  our  relationship  with  God. 

In  the  first  passage,  where  the  apostle  speaks  of  the 
manifestation  of  this  love,  he  does  not  go  beyond  the 
fact  that  one  who  loves  is  born  of  God.  The  nature  of 
God  (which  is  love)  being  in  us,  he  who  loves  knows 
Him,  for  he  is  born  of  Him — ^has  His  nature  and 
realises  what  it  is. 

It  is  that  which  God  has  been  with  regard  to  the 
sinner  which  demonstrates  His  nature  of  love.  After- 
wards, that  which  we  learnt  as  sinners  we  enjoy  as 
saints.  The  perfect  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  the 
heart,  and  we  dwell  in  Him.  As  already  with  Jesus 
in  this  world,  and  as  He  is,  fear  has  no  place  in  one  to 
whom  the  love  of  God  is  a  dwelling-place  and  rest. 

Verse  20 :  the  reality  of  our  love  to  God,  fruit  of  His 
love  to  us,  is  now  tested.  If  we  say  that  we  love  God  and 
do  not  love  the  brethren,  we  are  liars ;  for  if  the  divine 
nature,  so  near  us  (in  the  brethren  near  us),  and  Christ's 


I  JOHN.  467 

value  for  them,  does  not  awaken  our  spiritual  affec- 
tions, how  then  can  He  who  is  afar  off  do  so  ?  This 
also  is  His  commandment,  that  he  who  loves  God  love 
his  brother  also.  Obedience  is  found  here  also.  (Com- 
pare John  xiv.  31.) 

Love  for  the  brethren  proves  the  reality  of  our  love 
for  God.  And  this  love  must  be  universal,  must  be 
in  exercise  towards  all  Christians,  for  whoever  believes 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God ;  and  he  who 
loves  a  person  will  love  one  who  is  born  of  Him.  And 
if  the  being  born  of  Him  is  the  motive,  we  shall  love 
all  that  are  born  of  Him.  (Chap.  v.  i.) 

But  a  danger  exists  on  the  other  side.  It  may  be, 
that  we  love  the  brethren  because  they  are  pleasant  to 
us ;  they  furnish  us  with  agreeable  society,  in  which 
our  conscience  is  not  wounded.  A  counter-proof  is 
therefore  given  us.  "  Hereby  we  know  that  we  love 
the  children  of  God,  if  we  love  God  and  keep  his 
commandments."  It  is  not  as  children  of  God  that  I 
love  the  brethren,  unless  I  love  God  of  whom  they 
are  born.  I  may  love  them  individually  as  com- 
panions, or  I  may  love  some  among  them,  but  not  as 
the  children  of  God,  if  I  do  not  love  God  Himself.  If 
God  Himself  has  not  His  true  place  in  my  heart,  that 
which  bears  the  name  of  love  to  the  brethren  shuts 
out  God ;  and  that  in  so  much  the  more  complete  and 
subtle  manner,  because  our  link  with  them  bears  the 
sacred  name  of  brotherly  love. 

Now  there  is  a  touchstone  even  for  this  love  of  God, 
namely,  obedience  to  His  commands.  If  I  walk  witli 
the  brethren  themselves  in  disobedience  to  their 
Father,  it  is  certainly  not  because  they  are  His  chil- 
dren that  I  love  them.  If  it  were  because  I  loved  the 
Father  and  because  they  were  His  children,  I  should 
assuredly  like  them  to  obey  Him.  To  walk  then  in 
disobedience  with  the  children  of  God,  under  the 
pretext  of  brotherly  love,  is  not  to  love  them  as  the 

V. 


468  THE  BOOKS   OP  THE  BIBLE. 

children  of  God.  If  I  loved  them  as  such,  I  should 
love  their  Father  and  my  Father,  and  I  could  not  walk 
in  disobedience  to  Him  and  call  it  a  proof  that  I  loved 
them  because  they  were  His. 

If  I  also  loved  them  because  they  were  His  chil- 
dren, I  should  love  all  who  are  such,  because  the  same 
motive  engages  me  to  love  them  all. 

The  universality  of  this  love  with  regard  to  all  the 
children  of  God ;  its  exercise  in  practical  obedience  to 
His  will :  these  are  the  marks  of  true  brotherly  love. 
That  which  has  not  these  marks  is  a  mere  carnal 
party  spirit,  clothing  itself  with  the  name  and  the 
forms  of  brotherly  love.  Most  certainly  I  do  not  love 
the  Father  if  I  encourage  His  children  in  disobedience 
to  Him. 

Now  there  is  an  obstacle  to  this  obedience,  and 
that  is  the  world.  The  world  has  its  forms,  which  are 
very  far  from  obedience  to  God.  When  we  are  occu- 
pied only  with  Him  and  His  will,  the  world's  enmity 
soon  breaks  out.  It  also  acts,  by  its  comforts  and  its 
delights,  on  the  heart  of  man  as  walking  after  the 
flesh.  In  short,  the  world  and  the  commandments  of 
God  are  in  opposition  to  each  other;  but  the  com- 
mandments of  God  are  not  grievous  to  those  who  are 
born  of  Him,  for  he  who  is  born  of  God  overcomes 
the  world.  He  possesses  a  nature  and  a  principle  that 
surmount  the  difficulties  that  the  world  opposes  to  his 
walk.  His  nature  is  the  divine  nature,  for  he  is  born 
of  God ;  his  principle  is  that  of  faith.  His  nature  is 
insensible  to  the  attractions  which  this  world  offers  to 
the  flesh,  and  that  because  it  has,  altogether  apart 
from  this  world,  a  spirit  independent  of  it,  and  an 
object  of  its  own  which  governs  it.  Faith  directs  its 
steps,  but  faith  does  not  see  the  world,  nor  that  which 
is  present.  Faith  believes  that  Jesus,  whom  the  world 
rejected,  is  the  Son  of  God.  The  world  therefore  has 
lost  its  power  over  it.     Its  aflections  and  its  trust  are 


1  JOHN.  469 

fixed  on  Jesus,  who  was  crucified,  owning  Him  as  the 
Son  of  God.  Thus  the  believer,  detached  from  the 
world,  has  the  boldness  of  obedience,  and  does  the  will 
of  God  which  abides  for  ever. 

The  apostle  sums  up,  in  a  few  words,  the  testimony 
of  God  respecting  the  life  eternal  which  He  has 
given  us. 

This  life  is  not  in  the  first  Adam,  it  is  in  the 
Second — in  the  Son  of  God.  Man,  as  born  of  Adam, 
does  not  possess  it,  does  not  acquire  it.  He  ought 
indeed  to  have  gained  life  under  the  law.  This 
characterised  it,  "Do  this  and  live."  But  man  did 
not  and  could  not. 

God  gives  him  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  His 
Son.  He  who  has  the  Son  has  life,  and  he  who  has 
not  the  Son  has  not  life. 

Now  what  is  the  testimony  rendered  to  this  gift  of 
life  eternal  ?  The  witnesses  are  three :  the  Spirit,  the 
water,  and  the  blood.  This  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  is 
He  who  came  by  water  and  by  blood ;  not  by  water 
only,  but  by  water  and  by  blood.  The  Spirit  also 
bears  witness  because  He  is  truth.  That  to  which 
they  bear  witness  is  that  God  has  given  us  eternal 
life,  and  that  this  life  is  in  His  Son.  But  whence  did 
this  water  and  the  blood  flow  ?  It  was  from  the  pierced 
side  of  Jesus.  It  is  the  judgment  of  death  pronounced 
and  executed  (compare  Rom.  viii.  3)  on  the  flesh,  on  all 
that  is  of  the  old  man,  on  the  first  Adam.  Not  that 
the  sin  of  the  first  Adam  was  in  the  flesh  of  Christ, 
but  that  Jesus  died  in  it  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  "In 
that  he  died  he  died  unto  sin  once."  Sin  in  the  flesh 
was  condemned  in  the  death  of  Christ  in  the  flesh. 
There  was  no  other  remedy.  The  flesh  could  not  be 
modified  nor  subjected  to  the  law.  The  life  of  the 
first  Adam  was  nothing  but  sin  in  the  principle  of  its 
will ;  it  could  not  be  subject  to  the  law.  Our  purification 
as  to  the  old  man  is  its  death.    He  who  is  dead  is 

V. 


470  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

justified  from  sin.  We  are  therefore  baptised  to  have 
part  in  the  death  of  Jesus.  We  are  crucified  with 
Christ ;  nevertheless  we  live,  but  not  we,  it  is  Christ 
who  lives  in  us.  Participating  in  the  life  of  Christ 
risen,  we  reckon  ourselves  as  dead  with  Him  ;  for  why 
live  of  this  new  life,  this  life  of  the  second  Adam,  if 
we  could  live  before  God  in  the  life  of  the  first  Adam  ? 
No ;  by  living  in  Christ  we  have  accepted  by  faith 
the  sentence  of  death,  passed  by  God  on  the  first 
Adam.  This  is  christian  purification :  even  the  death 
of  the  old  man,  because  we  are  made  partakers  of  life 
in  Christ  Jesus.  "  We  are  dead  " — crucified  with  Him. 
We  need  a  perfect  purification  before  God ;  we  have  it, 
for  that  which  was  impure  no  longer  exists :  what 
exists,  as  born  of  God,  is  perfectly  pure. 

He  came  by  water — a  powerful  testimony,  as  flow- 
ing from  the  side  of  a  dead  Christ,  that  life  is  not  to 
be  sought  for  in  the  first  Adam ;  for  Christ,  as  coming 
for  man,  taking  up  his  cause,  the  Christ  come  in  the 
flesh,  had  to  die :  else  He  had  remained  alone  in  His 
own  purity.  Life  is  to  be  sought  for  in  the  Son  of 
God  risen  from  among  the  dead.  Purification  is  by 
death. 

But  it  was  not  by  water  only  that  He  came  ;  it  was 
also  by  blood.  The  expiation  of  our  sins  was  as 
necessary  as  the  moral  purification  of  our  souls.  We 
possess  it  in  the  blood  of  a  slain  Christ.  Death  alone 
could  expiate  them  and  blot  them  out.  And  Jesus 
died  for  us.  The  guilt  of  the  believer  no  longer  exists 
before  God ;  Christ  has  put  Himself  in  his  place.  The 
life  is  on  high,  and  we  are  raised  up  together  with  Him, 
God  having  forgiven  us  all  our  trespasses.  Expiation 
is  by  death. 

The  third  witness  is  the  Spirit:  put  first  in  the 
)rder  of  their  testimony  on  earth,  as  He  alone  gives 
witness  in  power  so  that  we  know  the  other  two ;  last, 
in  their  historic  order,  for  such  in  fact  was  that  orderj 


I  JOHN.  471 

death  first  and  only  thereafter  the  Holy  Ghost.*  In 
effect  it  is  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  His  presence  in 
us,  which  enables  us  to  appreciate  the  value  of  the 
water  and  the  blood.  We  should  never  have  under- 
stood the  practical  bearing  of  the  death  of  Christ,  if 
the  Holy  Ghost  were  not  to  the  new  man  a  revealing 
power  of  its  import  and  its  efficacy.  Now  the  Holy 
Ghost  came  down  from  a  risen  and  ascended  Christ; 
and  thus  we  know  that  eternal  life  is  given  us  in  the 
Son  of  God. 

The  testimony  of  these  three  witnesses  meets  to- 
gether in  this  same  truth,  namely,  that  grace — that 
God  Himself — has  given  us  eternal  life;  and  that 
this  life  is  in  the  Son.  Man  had  nothing  to  do  in 
it,  except  by  his  sins.  It  is  the  gift  of  God.  And 
the  life  that  He  gives  is  in  the  Son.  The  testimony  is 
the  testimony  of  God.  How  blessed  to  have  such  a 
testimony,  and  that  from  God  Himself,  and  in  perfect 
grace! 

We  have  then  the  three  things :  the  cleansing,  the 
expiation,  and  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the 
witness  that  eternal  life  is  given  us  in  the  Son,  who 
was  slain  for  man  when  in  relationship  with  man  here 
below.  He  could  but  die  for  man  as  he  is.  Life  is 
elsewhere,  namely,  in  Himself. 

Here  the  doctrine  of  the  epistle  ends.  The  apostle 
wrote  these  things  in  order  that  they  who  believed  in 
the  Son  might  know  that  they  had  eternal  life.  He 
does  not  give  means  of  examination  to  make  the 
faithful  doubt  whether  they  had  eternal  life ;  but — 
seeing  that  there  were  seducers  who  endeavoured  to 
turn  them  aside  as  deficient  in  something  important, 
and  who  presented  themselves  as  possessing  some 
superior  light — he  points  out  to  them  the  marks  of 
life,  in  order  to  re-assure  them ;  developing  the  excel- 

*  Even  the  orderly  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  so.  (See 
Acts  ii.  88.) 

V. 


472  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

lence  of  that  life,  and  of  their  position  as  enjoying  it ; 
and  in  order  that  they  might  understand  that  God  had 
given  it  to  them,  and  that  they  might  be  in  no  wise 
shaken  in  mind. 

He  then  speaks  of  the  practical  confidence  in  God 
which  flows  from  all  this — confidence  exercised  with  a 
view  to  all  our  wants  here  below,  all  that  our  hearts 
desire  to  ask  of  God. 

We  know  that  He  always  listens  to  everything  that 
we  ask  in  accordance  with  His  will.  Precious  privi- 
lege! The  Christian  himselt  would  not  desire  any- 
thing to  be  granted  him  that  was  contrary  to  the  will 
of  God.  But  for  everything  that  is  according  to  His 
will,  His  ear  is  ever  open  to  us,  ever  attentive.  He 
always  hearkens ;  He  is  not  like  man,  often  occupied 
so  that  he  cannot  listen,  or  careless  so  that  he  will  not. 
God  always  hears  us,  and  assuredly  He  does  not  fail 
in  power :  the  attention  He  pays  us  is  a  proof  of  His 
good-will.  We  receive  therefore  the  things  that  we 
ask  of  Him.  He  grants  our  requests.  What  a  sweet 
relationship  !  What  a  high  privilege  !  And  it  is  one 
also  of  which  we  may  avail  ourselves  in  charity  for 
others. 

If  a  brother  sins  and  God  chastises  him,  we  may 
petition  for  that  brother,  and  life  shall  be  restored 
him.  Chastisement  tends  to  the  death  of  the  body 
(compare  Job  xxxiii.,  xxxvi. ;  James  v.  14,  15) ;  we 
pray  for  the  offender  and  he  is  healed.  Otherwise  the 
sickness  takes  its  course.  All  unrighteousness  is  sin, 
and  there  is  such  sin  as  is  unto  death.  This  does  not 
seem  to  me  to  be  some  particular  sin,  but  all  sin  which 
has  such  a  character  that,  instead  of  awakening  chris- 
tian charity,  it  awakens  christian  indignation.  Thus 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  committed  a  sin  unto  death.  It 
was  a  lie,  but  a  lie  under  such  circumstances  that  it 
excited  horror  rather  than  compassion.  We  can  easily 
understand  this  in  other  cases. 


I  JOHN.  473 

Thus  far  as  to  sin  and  its  chastisement.  But  the 
positive  side  is  also  brought  before  us.  As  born  of 
God,  we  do  not  commit  sin  at  all,  we  keep  ourselves, 
and  "the  wicked  one  toucheth  us  not."  He  has 
nothing  wherewith  to  entice  the  new  man.  The 
enemy  has  no  objects  of  attraction  to  the  divine  nature 
in  us,  which  is  occupied,  by  the  action  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  with  divine  and  heavenly  things,  or  with  the 
will  of  God.  Our  part  therefore  is  so  to  live — the 
new  man  occupied  with  the  things  of  God  and  of  the 
Spirit. 

The  apostle  ends  his  epistle  by  specifying  these  two 
things :  our  nature,  our  mode  of  being,  as  Christians ; 
and  the  object  that  has  been  communicated  to  us  in 
order  to  produce  and  nourish  faith. 

We  know  that  we  are  of  God;  and  that  not  in  a 
vague  way,  but  in  contrast  with  all  that  is  not  us — a 
principle  of  immense  importance,  which  makes  chris- 
tian position  exclusive  by  its  very  nature.  It  is  not 
merely  good,  or  bad,  or  better ;  but  it  is  of  God.  And 
nothing  which  is  not  of  God  (that  is  to  say,  which 
has  not  its  origin  in  Him)  could  have  this  character 
and  this  place.  The  whole  world  lies  in  the  wicked 
one. 

The  Christian  has  the  certainty  of  these  two  things 
by  virtue  of  his  nature,  which  discerns  and  knows 
that  which  is  of  God,  and  thereby  judges  all  that  is 
opposed  to  it.  The  two  are  not  merely  good  and 
bad,  but  of  God  and  of  the  enemy.  This  as  to  the 
nature. 

With  regard  to  the  object  of  this  nature,  we  know 
that  the  Son  of  God  is  come — a  truth  of  immense 
importance  also.  It  is  not  merely  that  there  is  good 
and  that  there  is  evil ;  but  the  Son  of  God  has  Himself 
come  into  this  scene  of  misery,  to  present  an  object  to 
our  hearts.  But  there  is  more  than  this.  He  has 
given  us  an  understanding  that  in  the  midst  of  all  the 
T. 


474  THE  BOOKS   OP  THE  BIBLE. 

falsehood  of  this  world,  of  which  Satan  is  the  prince, 
we  may  know  Him  that  is  true — the  true  One.  Im- 
mense privilege  which  alters  our  whole  position ! 
The  power  of  the  world  by  which  Satan  blinded  us  is 
completely  broken,  and  we  are  brought  into  the  true 
light;  and  in  that  light  we  see  and  know  Him  who  is 
true,  who  is  in  Himself  perfection ;  that  by  which  all 
things  can  be  perfectly  discerned  and  judged  according 
to  truth.  But  this  is  not  all.  We  are  in  this  true 
One,  partakers  of  His  nature,  and  abiding  in  Him, 
and  in  order  that  we  may  enjoy  the  source  of  truth.* 
Now  it  is  in  Jesus  that  we  are.  It  is  thus,  it  is  in 
Him,  that  we  are  in  connection  with  the  perfections 
of  God. 

We  may  again  remark  here — that  which  gives  a 
character  to  the  whole  Epistle — the  manner  in  which 
God  and  Christ  are  united  in  the  apostle's  mind.  It  is 
on  account  of  this  that  he  so  frequently  says,  "  He," 
when  we  must  understand  "  Christ,"  although  he 
had  previously  spoken  of  God :  for  instance,  chapter 
V.  20.  And  here,  "  We  are  in  him  that  is  true  [that  is 
to  say],  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  true  God 
and  eternal  life." 

Behold  then  the  divine  links  of  our  position !  We 
are  in  Him  who  is  true ;  this  is  the  nature  of  Him  in 
whom  we  are.  Now,  in  reality  as  to  the  nature,  it  is 
God  Himself ;  as  to  the  Person,  and  as  to  the  manner 
of  being  in  Him,  it  is  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  in 
the  Son,  in  the  Son  as  man,  that  we  are  in  fact  as 
to  His  Person ;  but  He  is  the  true  God,  the  veritable 
God. 

Nor  is  this  all;  but  we  have  life  in  Him.     He  is 

*  I  have  already  noticed  this  passage  as  being  a  kind  of  key 
to  the  way  we  really  know  God,  and  dwell  in  Him.  It  speaks 
of  God  as  Him  we  know,  in  whom  we  are,  explaining  it  by  say- 
ing, that  it  is  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord ;  only  here,  as 
follows  in  the  text,  it  is  truth  and  not  love. 


I  JOHN.  475 

also  the  eternal  life,  so  that  we  possess  it  in  Him.    We 
know  the  true  God,  we  have  eternal  life. 

All  that  is  outside  this  is  an  idol.  May  God  pre- 
serve us  from  it,  and  teach  us  by  His  grace  to  preserve 
ourselves  from  it !  This  gives  occasion  to  the  Spirit  of 
God  to  speak  of  "  the  truth  "  in  the  two  short  Epistles 
that  follow. 


II  JOHN. 

The  Second  and  Third  Epistles  of  John  insist  on  the 
truth.  The  Second  warns  the  faithful  against  the  re- 
ception of  those  who  do  not  teach  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,  especially  the  truth  respecting  the  Person  of 
Christ.  The  Third  encourages  believers  to  receive  and 
help  those  who  teach  it.  Accordingly  they  both  (and 
the  Second  especially)  lay  stress  on  "  the  truth." 

The  apostle  loved  this  elect  lady,  "  in  the  truth  ;**  as 
did  also  all  those  who  had  known  the  truth,  and  that 
for  the  truth's  sake.  He  wished  her  blessing  in  truth 
and  in  love.  He  rejoiced  that  he  had  found  some  who 
were  her  children  walking  in  the  truth.  He  desired 
that  there  should  be  mutual  love  among  Christians, 
but  this  was  love,  that  they  should  keep  the  com- 
mandments; for  many  deceivers  were  come  into  the 
world.  Now  whosoever  transgressed,  and  did  not 
abide  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  had  not  God.  He  ends 
his  epistle,  of  which  we  have  given  an  almost  com- 
plete summary,  by  exhorting  this  lady,  in  case  any 
one  should  come  and  not  bring  this  doctrine,  not  to 
receive  him  into  her  house,  nor  say  to  him,  "God 
bless  you,  or  be  with  you,"  or  "  I  salute  you."  For  to 
do  so  would  be  to  make  herself  a  partaker  in  the  evil 
he  was  doing. 

The  false  doctrine  which  was  abroad  at  that  moment 
was  the  denial  of  the  truth  of  Christ  come  in  the  flesh ; 
but  the  apostle  says  in  a  general  way  that,  if  any  one 
transgressed  and  did  not  abide  in  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,  he  had  not  God. 


II  JOHN.  477 

We  learn  several  important  things  in  this  little 
epistle.  The  mission  of  a  man  who  went  about 
preaching  was  never  brought  into  question,  but  the 
doctrine  which  he  brought;  if  he  brought  sound 
doctrine  he  was  welcome. 

A  woman  having  the  word — as  this  epistle,  for 
example — was  capable  of  judging  his  doctrine,  and 
responsible  to  do  so.  Inexorable  rigour  was  to  be 
maintained,  if  the  doctrine  as  to  the  Person  of  Christ 
was  touched.  The  door  was  to  be  shut  against  who- 
ever falsified  it.  They  were  not  even  to  say  to  him, 
"  I  salute  you ;"  for  they  who  did  so  became  partakers 
of  his  evil  work.  It  would  be  to  help  on  the  deceits  of 
Satan. 

Moreover  the  semblance  of  love  which  does  not 
maintain  the  truth,  but  accommodates  itself  to  that 
which  is  not  the  truth,  is  not  love  according  to  God. 
It  is  the  takino-  advantao^e  of  the  name  of  love  in 
order  to  help  on  the  seductions  of  Satan.  In  the  last 
days  the  test  of  true  love  is  the  maintenance  of  the 
truth.  God  would  have  us  love  one  another  ;  but  the 
Holy  Ghost,  by  whose  power  we  receive  this  divine 
nature,  and  who  pours  the  love  of  God  into  our  hearts, 
is  the  Spirit  of  truth  ;  and  His  office  is  to  glorify 
Christ.  Therefore  it  is  impossible  that  a  love  which 
can  put  up  with  a  doctrine  that  falsifies  Christ,  and 
which  is  indifi'erent  to  it,  can  be  of  the  Holy  Ghost — 
still  less  so,  if  such  indifference  be  set  up  as  the  proof 
of  that  love. 

The  doctrine  of  the  reward  and  crown  of  glory, 
which  the  labourer  possesses  in  the  fruits  of  his  minis- 
try, is  presented  in  a  very  strong  light  in  verse  8. 
This  Second  Epistle  puts  Christians  on  their  guard 
against  all  that  is  equivocal  with  respect  to  the 
Person  of  Christ;  and  exhorts  to  an  unwavering 
firmness  on  this  point. 


Ill  JOHN. 

The  Third  Epistle  encourages  the  believer  to  the 
exercise  of  hospitality,-  whether  towards  the  known 
brethren  or  strangers,  and  to  all  benevolent  care  in 
furthering  their  journey  when  departing,  provided 
that  they  come  with  the  truth  and  for  the  truth's 
sake  without  salary  or  provision.  Gains  received 
them  as  it  appears,  and  was  helpful  to  them  both  in 
his  own  house  and  on  their  journey.  Diotrephes,  on 
the  contrary,  did  not  love  these  strangers,  who  went 
about,  it  is  said,  without  a  formal  mission  and  without 
any  visible  means  of  subsistence.  They  had  gone 
forth  for  the  Lord's  sake  and  had  received  nothing 
from  the  Gentiles.  If  they  in  reality  came  out  of  love 
to  that  name,  one  did  well  to  receive  them. 

Again  the  apostle  insists  on  the  truth,  as  character- 
ising real  love :  "  Whom  I  love  in  the  truth,"  he  says 
to  Gains.  He  rejoiced  when  the  brethren  (those,  I 
imagine,  whom  Gains  had  received  into  his  house  and 
helped  on  their  journey)  testified  of  the  truth  that 
was  in  him,  as  in  effect  he  walked  in  the  truth.  The 
apostle  had  no  greater  joy  than  that  of  hearing  that 
his  children  walked  in  the  truth.  In  receiving  those 
who  went  forth  to  preach  the  truth,  they  helped  the 
truth  itself;  they  were  co-workers  with  it.  Diotre- 
phes would  have  nothing  to  do  with  this ;  he  not  only 
refused  to  receive  these  itinerant  preachers,  but 
excommunicated  those  who  did  so.  He  claimed  autho- 
rity for  himself.  The  apostle  would  remember  it.  It 
was  their  duty  to  do  good.  "  He  that  doeth  good  is 
of  God." 


Ill  JOHN.  479 

He  goes  so  far,  with  regard  to  the  truth,  as  to  say, 
that  the  truth  itself  bore  witness  to  Demetrius.  I 
suppose  that  the  latter  had  propagated  it,  and  that  the 
establishment  and  confirmation  of  the  truth  every- 
where— at  least  where  he  had  laboured — was  a 
testimony  with  regard  to  himself. 

This  insistence  on  the  truth,  as  the  test  for  the  last 
days,  is  very  remarkable;  and  so  is  this  preaching 
itinerancy  by  persons  who  took  nothing  of  the  Gen- 
tiles when  they  came  forth,  leaving  it  to  God  to  cause 
them  to  be  received  of  those  who  had  the  truth  at 
heart,  the  truth  being  their  only  passport  among  Chris- 
tians, and  the  only  means  by  which  the  apostle  could 
guard  the  faithful.  It  appears  that  they  were  of  the 
Jewish  race,  for  he  says,  "  receiving  nothing  of  the 
Gentiles,"  the  apostle  thus  making  the  distinction.  I 
notice  this,  because,  if  it  be  so,  the  force  of  the  expres- 
sion "  and  not  for  ours  only "  (1  John  ii.  2)  becomes 
simple  and  evident,  which  it  is  not  to  every  one.  The 
apostle,  as  Paul  does,  makes  the  difference  of  us,  Jews, 
though  one  in  Christ.  We  may  also  remark  that  the 
apostle  addressed  the  assembly,  and  not  Diotrephes,  its 
head ;  and  that  it  was  this  leader  who,  loving  pre- 
eminence, resisted  the  apostle's  words,  which  the 
assembly,  as  it  appears,  were  not  inclined  to  do. 

Gaius  persevered  in  his  godly  course,  in  spite  of  the 
ecclesiastical  authority  (whatever  may  have  been  its 
right  or  pretended  right)  which  Diotrephes  evidently 
exercised :  for  he  cast  persons  out  of  the  assembly. 

When  the  apostle  came,  he  would  (like  Paul)  mani- 
fest his  real  power.  He  did  not  own  in  himself  an 
ecclesiastical  authority  to  remedy  these  things  by  a 
command.  These  Epistles  are  very  remarkable  in  this 
respect.  With  regard  to  those  who  went  about 
preaching,  the  only  means  he  had,  even  in  the  case  of 
a  woman,  was  to  call  her  attention  to  the  truth.  The 
authority  of  the  preacher  lay  altogether  in  that.     His 


480  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

competency  was  another  matter.  The  apostle  knew 
no  authority  which  sanctioned  their  mission,  the 
absence  of  which  would  prove  it  to  be  false  or  unau- 
thorised. The  whole  question  of  their  reception  lay 
in  the  doctrine  which  they  brought.  The  apostle  had 
no  other  way  to  judge  of  the  authority  of  their  mis- 
sion: there  was  then  no  other ;  for,  had  there  been  any, 
that  authority  would  have  flowed  from  him.  He 
would  have  been  able  to  say,  "  Where  are  the  proofs 
of  their  mission  ?"  He  knew  none  but  this — do  they 
bring  the  truth  ?  If  not,  do  not  salute  them.  If  they 
bring  the  truth,  you  do  well  to  receive  them,  in  spit* 
of  all  the  Diotrephes  in  the  world. 


>it«t 


JUDE. 

The  Epistle  of  Jude  develops  the  history  of  the 
apostasy  of  Christendom,  from  the  earliest  elements 
that  crept  into  the  assembly  to  corrupt  it,  down  to  its 
judgment  at  the  appearing  of  our  Lord,  but  as  moral 
apostasy  by  turning  the  grace  of  God  into  lascivious- 
ness.  In  John  they  are  gone  out ;  here  they  have 
crept  in,  corrupting.  It  is  a  very  short  epistle,  and 
containing  instruction  presented  with  much  brevity, 
and  with  the  energetic  rapidity  of  the  prophetic  style, 
but  of  immense  weight  and  extensive  bearing. 

The  evil  which  had  stolen  in  among  Christians 
would  not  cease  until  destroyed  by  judgment. 

We  have  already  noticed  this  difference  between 
the  Epistle  of  Jude  and  the  Second  of  Peter,  that 
Peter  speaks  of  sin,  Jude  of  apostasy,  the  departure  of 
the  assembly  from  its  primitive  state  before  God. 
Departure  from  the  holiness  of  faith  is  the  subject 
that  Jude  treats.  He  does  not  speak  of  outward 
separation.  He  views  Christians  as  a  number  of 
persons  professing  a  religion  on  the  earth,  and  origi- 
nally true  to  that  which  they  professed.  Certain 
persons  had  crept  in  among  them  unawares.  They 
fed  themselves  without  fear  at  the  love-feasts  of  the 
Christians;  and  although  the  Lord  would  come  at- 
tended by  all  His  saints  (so  that  the  faithful  will 
have  been  already  caught  up),  yet  in  the  judgment 
these  persons  are  still  accounted  to  be  in  the  same 
class — "to  convince,"  he  says,  **  all  that  are  ungodly 
among  them."  They  may  indeed  be  in  open  rebellion 
at  the  moment  of  judgment,  but  they  were  indi- 
VOL.  V.  II 


482  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE    BIBLE. 

vi< hulls  wlio  had  once  formed  a  part  of  the  company 
of  Chi'i.stians;  they  were  really  apostates,  enemies  left 
behind. 

When  it  is  said,  "  These  be  they  who  separate  them- 
selves," it  does  not  mean  openly  from  the  visible 
assembly,  for  he  speaks  of  them  as  in  the  midst  of  it ; 
but  they  set  themselves  apart,  being  in  it,  as  more 
excellent  than  others,  like  the  Pharisees  among  the 
Jews.  Jude  points  them  out  as  being  in  the  midst  of 
the  Christians,  and  presenting  themselves  as  such. 
The  judgment  falls  upon  this  class  of  persons  ;  the 
taking  up  of  the  saints  has  left  them  behind  for 
judgment. 

Jude  begins  by  declaring  the  faithfulness  of  God 
and  the  character  of  His  care  for  the  saints,  which 
answers  to  the  prayer  of  Jesus  in  John  xvii.  They 
were  called  ones,  sanctified  by  God  the  Father,  and 
preserved  in  Jesus  Christ.  Happy  testimony  !  which 
magnifies  the  grace  of  God.  "  Holy  Father,"  our 
Lord  said,  "  keep  them :"  and  these  were  sanctified 
by  God  the  Father,  and  preserved  in  Jesus  Christ. 
The  apostle  speaks  with  a  view  to  the  forsaking  by 
many  of  the  holy  faith ;  he  addresses  those  who  were 
kept. 

He  had  purposed  writing  to  them  of  the  salvation 
common  to  all  Christians ;  but  he  found  it  needful  to 
exhort  them  to  stand  fast,  to  contend  for  the  faith 
once  given  to  the  saints.  For  already  was  that  faith 
being  corrupted  by  the  denial  of  the  rights  of  Christ 
to  be  Lord  and  Master ;  and  thus  also,  by  giving  the 
reins  to  self-will,  they  abused  grace,  and  turned  it 
into  a  principle  of  dissoluteness.  These  are  the  two 
elements  of  the  evil  which  the  instruments  of  Satan 
introduced,  the  rejection  of  the  authority  of  Christ 
(not  His  name) :  and  the  abuse  of  grace,  in  order  to 
indulge  their  own  lusts.  In  both  cases  it  was  the 
will  of   man,  which  they  set  free   from   everything 


JUDE.  483 

that  bridled  it.  The  expression  "  Lord  God  "  points 
out  this  character  of  God.  "Lord"  here  is  not 
the  word  generally  used;  it  is  Sfo-TroVijc,  that  is, 
"  master." 

Having  pointed  out  the  evil  which  had  secretly 
crept  in,  the  epistle  goes  on  to  shew  them  that  the 
judgment  of  God  is  executed  upon  those  who  do  not 
walk  according  to  the  position  in  which  God  had 
originally  placed  them. 

The  evil  was,  not  only  that  certain  men  had  crept 
in  among  them — in  itself  an  immense  evil,  because  the 
action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  thereby  hindered  among 
Christians — but  that,  definitely,  the  entire  testimony 
before  God,  the  vessel  which  held  this  testimony, 
would  become  (as  had  been  already  the  case  with  the 
Jews)  corrupt  to  such  a  degree  that  it  would  bring 
down  upon  itself  the  judgment  of  God.  And  it  has 
become  thus  corrupt. 

This  is  the  great  principle  of  the  downfall  of  the 
testimony  established  by  God  in  the  world  by  means 
of  the  corruption  of  the  vessel  which  contains  it,  and 
which  bears  its  name.  In  pointing  out  moral  corrup- 
tion as  characterising  the  state  of  professors,  Jude 
cites,  as  example  of  this  downfall  and  of  its  judgment 
the  case  of  Israel,  who  fell  in  the  wilderness  (with  the 
exception  of  two,  Joshua  and  Caleb)  and  that  of  the 
angels  who,  not  having  kept  their  first  estate,  are 
reserved  in  chains  of  darkness  unto  the  judgment  of 
the  great  day. 

This  last  example  suggests  to  him  another  case,  that 
of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha,  which  presents  immorality 
and  corruption  as  the  cause  of  judgment.  Their  con- 
dition is  a  perpetual  testimony  here  on  earth  to  their 
judgment. 

These  ungodly  men,  with  the  name  of  Christians, 
are  but  dreamers ;  for  the  truth  is  not  in  them.  The 
two  principles  which  we  have  noticed  are  developed 


484  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

in  them :  filthiness  of  the  flesh,  and  contempt  for 
authority.  The  latter  manifests  itself  in  a  second 
form,  namely,  the  license  of  the  tongue,  the  self-will 
that  manifests  itself  by  speaking  evil  of  dignities. 
Whereas,  the  text  says,  the  archangel  Michael  durst 
not  rail  even  against  the  devil,  but  with  the  gravity 
of  one  who  acts  according  to  God,  appealed  to  the 
judgment  of  God  Himself. 

Jude  then  sums  up  the  three  kinds  or  characters  of 
the  evil  and  of  estrangement  from  God  ;  first,  that  of 
nature,  the  opposition  of  the  flesh  to  the  testimony  of 
God  and  His  true  people,  the  impetus  which  this 
enmity  gives  to  the  will  of  the  flesh  ;  in  the  second 
place,  ecclesiastical  evil,  teaching  error  for  reward, 
knowing  all  the  while  that  it  is  contrary  to  the  truth 
and  against  the  people  of  God;  thirdly,  open  opposi- 
tion, rebellion,  against  the  authority  of  God  in  His 
true  King  and  Priest. 

At  the  time  when  Jude  wrote  his  epistle,  those 
persons  whom  Satan  introduced  into  the  church  in 
order  to  stifle  its  spiritual  life  and  to  bring  on  the 
result  which  the  Spirit  views  prophetically,  were 
dwelling  in  the  midst  of  the  saints,  took  part  in  those 
pious  feasts  at  which  they  gathered  together  in  token 
of  their  brotherly  love.  They  were  "  spots  "  in  those 
"  feasts  of  charity,"  feeding  without  fear  in  the  pas- 
tures of  the  faithful.  The  Holy  Ghost  denounces 
them  energetically.  They  were  doubly  dead,  by 
nature  and  by  their  apostasy ;  without  fruit,  bearing 
fruit  that  perished,  as  out  of  season ;  plucked  up  by 
the  roots ;  foaming  out  everywhere  their  own  shame ; 
wandering  stars,  reserved  for  darkness.  Of  old  the 
Spirit  had  announced  by  the  mouth  of  Enoch  the 
judgment  that  should  be  executed  upon  them.  This 
presents  a  very  important  aspect  of  the  instruction 
here  given ;  namely,  that  this  evil  which  had  crept  in 
amono'  the  Christians  would   continue   and   still   be 


JUDE.  485 

found  when  the  Lord  should  return  for  judgment. 
He  would  come  with  the  myriads  of  His  saints  to 
execute  judgment  upon  all  tlie  ungodly  among  them 
for  their  acts  of  iniquity  and  their  ungodly  words 
which  they  have  spoken  against  Him.  There  would 
be  a  continuous  system  of  evil  from  those  in  the 
apostles'  time  till  the  Lord  came.  This  is  a  solemn 
witness  to  what  would  go  on  among  Christians. 

It  is  quite  remarkable  to  see  the  inspired  writer 
identifying  the  favourers  of  licentiousness  with  the 
rebels  who  will  be  the  object  of  judgment  in  the  last 
day.  It  is  the  same  spirit,  the  same  work  of  the 
enemy,  although  restrained  for  the  moment,  which 
will  ripen  for  the  judgment  of  God.  Alas  for  the 
assembly !  It  is,  however,  but  the  universal  progres- 
sion of  man.  Only  that,  grace  having  fully  revealed 
God  and  delivered  from  the  law,  there  must  now  be 
either  holiness  of  heart  and  soul,  and  the  delights  of 
obedience  under  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,  or  else 
licence  and  open  rebellion.  In  this  the  proverb  is 
true,  that  the  corruption  of  that  which  is  the  most 
excellent  is  the  worst  of  corruptions.  We  must  add 
here,  that  the  admiration  of  men,  in  order  to  gain 
advantage  by  them,  is  another  characteristic  feature  of 
these  apostates.     It  is  not  to  God  that  they  look. 

Now  the  apostles  had  already  warned  the  saints  that 
these  mockers  would  come,  walking  after  their  own 
lusts,  exalting  themselves,  not  having  the  Spirit,  but 
being  in  the  state  of  nature. 

Practical  exhortation  follows  for  those  who  were 
preserved.  According  to  the  energy  of  spiritual  life, 
and  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  were  by 
grace  to  build  themselves  up,  and  to  keep  themselves 
in  the  coinmimion  of  God.  The  faith  is,  to  the  be- 
liever, a  most  holy  faith  ;  he  loves  it,  because  it  is  so  ; 
it  puts  him  into  relationship  and  communion  with  God 
Himself.     That  which  he  has  to  do  in  the  painful 


486  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

circumstances  of  which  the  apostle  speaks  (whatever 
may  be  the  measure  of  their  development),  is  to  build 
himself  up  in  this  most  holy  faith.  He  cultivates 
communion  with  God,  and  profits  through  grace  by 
the  revelations  of  His  love.  The  Christian  has  his 
own  proper  sphere  of  thought,  in  which  he  hides  him- 
self from  the  evil  that  surrounds  him,  and  grows  in  the 
knowledge  of  God  from  whom  nothing  can  separate 
him.  His  own  portion  is  always  the  more  evident  to 
him,  the  more  the  evil  increases.  His  communion 
with  God  is  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  whose  power  he 
prays,  and  who  is  the  link  between  God  and  his  soul ; 
and  his  prayers  are  according  to  the  intimacy  of  this 
relationship,  and  animated  by  the  intelligence  and 
energy  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Thus  they  kept  themselves  in  the  consciousness,  the 
communion,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  love  of  God. 
They  abode  in  His  love  while  sojourning  here  below, 
but,  as  their  end,  they  were  waiting  for  the  mercy  uf 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life.  In  effect 
when  one  sees  what  are  the  fruits  of  the  heart  of  man, 
one  feels  that  it  must  be  His  mercy  which  presents  us 
without  spot  before  His  face  in  that  day  for  eternal 
life  with  a  God  of  holiness.  No  doubt  it  is  His 
unchangeable  faithfulness,  but,  in  the  presence  of  so 
much  evil,  one  thinks  rather  of  the  mercy.  Compare, 
in  the  same  circumstances,  what  Paul  says  in  2  Timo- 
thy i.  16.  It  is  mercy  which  has  made  the  difference 
between  those  that  fall  and  those  that  stand.  (Com- 
pare Ex.  xxxiii.  19.)  We  must  also  distinguish  between 
those  who  are  led  away.  There  are  some  who  are 
only  drawn  aside  by  others,  others  in  whom  the  lusts 
of  a  corrupt  heart  are  working ;  and  where  we  see  the 
latter  we  must  manifest  hatred  to  everything  that 
testifies  this  corruption,  as  a  thing  that  is  unbearable. 

The  Spirit  of  God  in  this  epistle  does  not  bring 
forward  the  efficacy  of  this  red(5mption.     He  is  occu- 


JUDE.  487 

pied  with  the  crafty  devices  of  the  enemy,  with  his 
efforts  to  connect  the  actings  of  the  human  will  with 
the  profession  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  thus  to  bring 
about  the  corruption  of  the  assembly,  and  the  down- 
fall of  Christians,  by  putting  them  on  the  road  to 
apostasy  and  judgment.  Confidence  is  in  God;  to 
Him  the  sacred  writer  addresses  himself  in  closing  his 
epistle,  as  he  thinks  of  the  faithful  to  whom  he  was 
writing.  Unto  Him,  he  says,  who  is  able  to  keep  us 
from  falling,  and  to  present  us  unspotted  before  the 
presence  of  His  glory  with  exceeding  joy. 

It  is  important  to  observe  the  way  in  which  the 
Spirit  of  God  speaks  in  the  Epistles  of  a  power  that 
can  keep  us  from  every  fall,  and  unblamable  ;  so  that 
a  thought  only  of  sin  is  never  excusable.  It  is  not 
that  the  flesh  is  not  in  us,  but  that,  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  acting  in  the  new  man,  it  is  never  necessary 
that  the  flesh  should  act  or  influence  our  life.  (Com- 
pare 1  Thess.  V.  22.)  We  are  united  to  Jesus:  He 
represents  us  before  God,  He  is  our  righteousness. 
But  at  the  same  time  He  who  in  His  perfection  is  our 
righteousness  is  also  our  life ;  so  that  the  Spirit  aims 
at  the  manifestation  of  this  same  perfection,  practical 
perfection,  in  the  daily  life.  He  who  says  "  I  abide  in 
Him,"  ought  to  walk  as  He  walked.  The  Lord  also 
says,  "  Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  as  your  Father  which 
is  in  heaven  is  perfect." 

There  is  progress  in  this.  It  is  Christ  risen  who  is 
the  source  of  this  life  in  us,  which  ascends  again 
towards  its  source,  and  which  views  the  risen  and 
glorified  Christ,  to  whom  we  shall  be  conformed  in 
glory,  as  its  end  and  aim.  (See  Phil,  iii.)  But  the 
eff*ect  of  this  is,  that  we  have  no  other  aim  :  "  this  one 
thing  I  do."  Thus,  whatever  may  be  the  degree  of 
realisation,  the  motive  is  always  perfect.  The  flesh 
does  not  come  in  at  all  as  a  motive,  and  in  this  sense 
we  are  blameless. 


488  THE   BOOKS   OP  THE   BIBLE. 

The  Spirit  then — since  Christ  who  is  our  righteous- 
ness is  our  life — links  our  life  to  the  final  result  of  an 
unblamable  condition  before  God.  The  conscience 
knows  by  grace  that  absolute  perfection  is  ours,  be- 
cause Christ  is  our  righteousness  ;  but  the  soul  which 
rejoices  in  this  before  God  is  conscious  of  union  with 
Him,  and  seeks  the  realisation  of  that  perfection 
according  to  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  by  whom  we  are 
thus  united  to  the  Head. 

To  Him  who  can  accomplish  this,  preserving  us 
froQi  every  kind  of  fall,  our  epistle  ascribes  all  glory 
and  dominion  throughout  all  ages. 

That  which  is  peculiarly  striking  in  the  Epistle  of 
Jude  is  that  he  pursues  the  corruption  of  the  assembly 
from  the  creeping  in  of  some  unawares  on  to  its  final 
judgment,  shewing  withal  that  it  is  not  arrested  but 
passes  through  its  various  phases  to  that  day. 


THE    REVELATION. 

As  regards  Peter  and  Paul,  we  have  scriptural  autho- 
rity for  regarding  them  as  the  apostles  respectively  of 
the  circumcision  and  of  'the  uncircuracision.  Peter 
and  the  twelve  remained  at  Jerusalem  when  the 
disciples  were  scattered,  and,  continuing  (though  God 
was  careful  to  maintain  unity)  the  work  of  Christ  in 
the  remnant  of  Israel,  gathered  into  an  assembly  on 
earth  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.  Paul, 
having  received  the  ministry  of  the  assembly,  as  of  the 
gospel  to  every  creature  under  heaven  (Col.  i.),  as  a 
wise  master-builder,  lays  the  foundation.  Peter  sets 
us  off  as  pilgrims  on  our  journey  to  follow  Christ 
risen  towards  the  inheritance  above.  Paul,  in  the  full 
development  of  his  doctrine  (though  owning  this,  as  in 
Philippiansiii.),  shews  us  the  saints  sitting  in  heavenly 
places  in  Christ,  heirs  of  all  which  He  is  heir  of.  All 
this  was  dispensational,  and  it  is  full  of  instruction. 
But  John  holds  a  different  place.  He  does  not  enter 
on  dispensation ;  nor,  though  once  or  twice  stating  the 
fact  (as  xiii.  1 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xvii.  24 ;  xx.  17),  does  he  take 
the  saint,  nor  even  the  Lord  Himself,  up  to  heaven. 
Jesus,  for  him,  is  a  divine  Person,  the  Word  made 
flesh  manifesting  God  and  His  Father,  eternal  life 
come  down  to  earth.  The  Epistle  of  John  treats 
the  question  of  our  partaking  of  this  life,  and  its 
characters. 

But  at  the  close  of  the  Gospel,  after  stating  the 
sending  of  the  Comforter  on  His  going  away,  Christ 
opens  to  the  disciples  (though  in  a  mysterious  way) 
the  continuation  of  God's  dealings  with  the  earth,  of 


490  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

which  John  ministerially  is  the  representative,  linking 
the  manifestation  of  Christ  on  earth  at  His  first  com- 
ing with  His  manifestation  at  His  second;  Christ's 
Person,  and  eternal  life  in  Him,  being  the  abiding 
security  and  living  seed  of  God,  when  dispensa- 
tionally  all  was  corrupted,  and  in  confusion  and  decay. 
If  all  were  in  disorder  outwardly,  eternal  life  was  the 
same. 

The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  formed  a  momentous 
epoch  as  to  these  things,  because  the  Jewish  assembly, 
formed  as  such  at  Pentecost,  had  ceased  (nay,  it  had 
even  before);  only  the  judicial  act  was  then  accom- 
plished. Christians  had  been  warned  to  leave  the 
camp.  The  breach  of  Christianity  with  Judaism  was 
consummated.  Christ  could  no  longer  take  up  the 
assembly,  established  in  the  remnant  of  the  Jews,  as 
His  own  seat  of  earthly  authority.*  But  alas !  the 
assembly,  as  Paul  had  established  it  too,  had  already 
fallen  from  its  first  estate — could  in  no  sense  take  up 
the  fallen  inheritance  of  Israel.  All  seek  their  own, 
says  Paul,  not  the  things  of  Jesus  Christ.  All  they  of 
Asia — Ephesus,  the  beloved  scene  where  all  Asia  had 
heard  the  word  of  God — had  forsaken  him.  They 
who  had  been  specially  brought  with  full  intelligence 
into  the  assembly's  place  could  not  hold  it  in  the 
power  of  faith.  Indeed,  the  mystery  of  iniquity  was 
at  work  before  this,  and  was  to  go  on  and  grow  until 
the  hindrance  to  the  final  apostasy  were  removed. 

Here,  in  this  state  of  universal  declension  and  ruin, 
John's    ministry    comes    in.      Stability    was    in    the 

'•'  This  was  morally  true  Iroin  Acts  iii.,  where  the  Jewish 
leaders  refuse  the  testimony  to  a  glorified  Christ  who  would 
return,  as  they  had  rejected  a  humbled  One.  Acts  vii.,  by  the 
mouth  of  Stephen,  closes  God's  dealings  with  them  in  testi- 
mony, and  the  heavenly  gathering  begins,  his  spirit  being 
received  on  high.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  closed  Jewish 
history  judicially. 


THE   REVELATION.  491 

Person  of  Christ,  for  eternal  life  first,  but  for  the 
ways  of  God  upon  earth  too.  If  the  assembly  was 
spued  out  of  His  mouth,  He  was  the  faithful  witness, 
the  beo-innincr  of  the  creation  of  God.  Let  us  trace 
the  links  of  this  in  his  Gospel.  In  John  xx.,  as  else- 
where noticed  in  detail,  we  have  a  picture  of  God's 
ways  from  the  resurrection  of  Christ  till  we  come  to 
the  remnant  of  Israel  in  the  latter  days,  represented 
by  Thomas's  look  on  the  pierced  One  and  believing  by 
seeing.  In  chapter  xxi.  we  have,  besides  the  remnant, 
the  full  millennial  gathering.  Then  at  the  close  of  the 
chapter,  the  special  ministry  of  Peter  and  John  is 
pointed  out,  though  mysteriously.  The  sheep  of  Jesus 
of  the  circumcision  are  confided  to  Peter;  but  this 
ministry  was  to  close  like  Christ's.  The  assembly 
would  not  be  established  on  this  ground,  any  more 
than  Israel.  There  was  no  tarrying  here  till  Christ 
came.*  Peter's  ministry  in  fact  was  closed,  and  the 
circumcision  assembly  left  shepherdless,  before  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  put  an  end  to  all  such  con- 
nection for  ever.  Peter  then  asks  as  to  John.  The 
Lord  answers,  confessedly  mysteriously,  but  putting 
off*,  as  that  which  did  not  concern  Peter  who  was  to 
follow  Him,  the  closing  of  John's  ministry,  prolonging 
it  in  possibility  till  Christ  came.  Now,  in  fact,  the 
Bridegroom  tarried ;  but  the  service  and  ministry  of 
John  by  the  word  (which  was  all  that  was  to  remain, 
and  no  apostle  in  personal  care)  did  go  on  to  the 
return  of  Christ. 

John  was  no  master-builder  like  Paul — had  no 
dispensation  committed  to  him.  He  was  connected 
with  the  assembly  in  its  earthly  structure  like  Peter, 
not  in  the  Ephesus  or  heavenly  one ;  he  was  not  the 
minister  of  the  circumcision,  but  carried  on  the  earthly 

*  Paul,  of  course,  is  no  way  noticed.  For  him  the  assembly 
belonged  to  lieaven — was  the  body  of  Christ,  the  house  of  God. 
He  was  a  builder. 


492  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

system  among  the  Gentiles,  only  holding  fast  the 
Person  of  Christ.  His  special  place  was  testimony  to 
the  Person  of  Christ  come  to  earth  with  divine  title 
over  it — power  over  all  flesh.  This  did  not  break  the 
links  with  Israel,  as  Paul's  ministry  did,  but  raised 
the  power  which  held  all  together  in  the  Person  of 
Christ  to  a  height  which  carried  it  through  any  hidden 
time,  or  hidden  power,  on  to  its  establishment  over 
the  world  at  the  end  ;  it  did  not  exclude  Israel  as  such, 
but  enlarged  the  scene  of  the  exercise  of  Christ's 
power  so  as  to  set  it  over  the  world,  and  did  not 
establish  it  in  Israel  as  its  source,  though  it  might 
establish  Israel  itself  in  its  own  place  from  a  heavenly 
source  of  power. 

What  place  does  the  assembly  then  hold  in  this 
ministry  of  John,  found  as  it  is  in  the  Book  of 
Revelation  ?  None  in  its  Pauline  character,  save  in 
one  phrase,  coming  in  after  the  Revelation  is  closed, 
where  its  true  place  in  Christ's  absence  is  indicated. 
(Chap.  xxii.  17.)  We  have  the  saints  at  the  time,  in 
their  own  conscious  relationship  to  Christ,  in  reference, 
too,  to  the  royal  and  priestly  place  to  His  God  and 
Father,  in  which  they  are  associated  with  Himself. 
But  John's  ministerial  testimony,  as  to  the  assembly, 
views  it  as  the  outward  assembly  on  earth*  in  its 
state  of  decay — Christ  judging  this — and  the  true 
assembly,  the  capital  city  and  seat  of  God's  govern- 
ment over  the  world,  at  the  end,  but  in  glory  and 
grace.     It  is  an  abode,  and  where  God  dwells  and  the 

*  And  hence  in  particular  assemblies,  which  of  course  could 
be  judged  and  removed.  There  is  another  point  of  divine  wis- 
dom here.  Though  we  have,  I  doubt  not,  the  whole  history  of 
the  assembly  to  its  end  in  this  world,  it  is  given  in  facts  then 
present,  so  that  there  should  be  no  putting  off  the  coming  of  the 
Lord.  So,  in  the  parables,  the  virgins  who  go  to  sleep  are  the 
same  that  wake  up  ;  the  servants  that  receive  the  talents  are  the 
same  found  on  the  Lord's  return,  though  we  know  ages  have 
passed  and  death  come  in. 


THE  REVELATION.  493 

Lamb.  All  this  facilitates  our  intelligence  of  the 
objects  and  bearing  of  the  book.  The  assembly  has 
failed ;  the  Gentiles,  grafted  in  by  faith,  have  not 
continued  in  God's  goodness.  The  Ephesian  assembly, 
the  intelligent  vessel,  and  expression  of  what  the 
assembly  of  God  was,  had  left  its  first  estate,  and 
unless  it  repented,  the  candlestick  was  to  be  removed. 
The  Epliesus  of  Paul  becomes  the  witness  on  earth  of 
decay  and  of  removal  out  of  God's  sight,  even  as  Israel 
had  been  removed.  God's  patience  would  be  shewn 
towards  the  assembly  as  it  had  been  towards  Israel ; 
but  the  assembly  would  not  maintain  God's  testimony 
in  the  world  any  more  than  Israel  had.  John  does 
maintain  this  testimony,  ministerially  judging  the 
assemblies  by  Christ's  word,*  and  then  the  world  from 
the  throne,  till  Christ  comes  and  takes  to  Himself  His 
great  power  and  reigns.  During  this  transition-deal- 
ing of  the  throne  the  heavenly  saints  are  seen  on  high. 
When  Christ  comes,  they  come  with  Him. 

The  first  part,  then,  of  the  Epistles  of  John  is  the 
continuation,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Gospel  before  the  last 
two  dispensational  chapters;  the  Revelation,  that  of 
these  last  two  chapters  (xx.,  xxi.),  where,  Christ  being 
risen  and  no  ascension  given,  the  dispensational  deal- 
ings of  God  are  largely  intimated  in  the  circumstances 
which  occur;  while  it  is  shewn  at  the  same  time  that 
He  could  not  personally  set  up  the   kingdom  then. 


*  Note  this  immensely  important  principle :  the  chui'cli  judged 
by  the  word,  not  the  church  a  judge  ;  and  the  individual  Chris- 
tian called  to  give  heed  to  this  judgment.  The  church  (I  use 
the  word  designedly  here  as  used  to  claim  this  authority)  cannot 
be  an  authority  when  the  Lord  calls  me,  if  I  have  ears  to  hear, 
to  hear  and  receive  the  judgment  pronounced  by  Him  on  it.  I 
judge  its  state  by  the  words  of  the  Spirit,  am  bound  to  do  so :  it 
cannot  be  an  authority  therefore  on  the  Lord's  behalf  over  me 
in  that  state.  Discipline  is  not  in  question  here,  but  the  church 
as  wielding  authority. 


494  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

He  must  ascend  first.  The  two  short  epistles  shew 
us  that  truth  (truth  as  to  His  Person)  was  the  test  of 
true  love,  and  to  be  held  fast  when  what  was  anti- 
christian  came  in ;  and  the  free  liberty  of  the  minis- 
tration of  the  truth  to  be  held  fast  against  assumed 
ecclesiastical  or  clerical  authority,  as  contrasted  with 
the  assembly.  The  apostle  had  written  to  the  assembly. 
Diotrephes  rejected  free  ministry. 

I  now  turn  to  the  book  itself. 

The  revelation  is  one  belonging  to  Jesus  Christ, 
which  God  gave  Him,  and  He  signifies  it  to  John. 
Though  God  over  all  blessed  for  ever,  He  is  here  seen 
as  Son  of  man,  the  rejected  Messiah  or  Lamb,  and  so 
Head  over  all  things.  This  fact,  that  the  revelation  is 
one  confided  to  Him,  is  important,  because  it  at  once 
makes  it  the  testimony  of  Jesus  and  the  word  of  God, 
being  communicated  by  Jesus,  and  given  to  Him  by 
God.  This  testimony  of  Jesus  and  word  of  God  comes 
as  a  vision  to  John,  who  bare  record  of  all  he  saw. 
All  of  it  is  prophetic  in  character,  not  the  Spirit  of 
God  the  messenger  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  s  grace 
to  the  assembly  in  its  own  place — a  direct  inspired 
communication  to  the  assembly  itself  for  itself  as  in 
its  own  right  place — but  a  prophetic  revelation  to 
John  about  it  as  in  the  world,  and  about  the  world 
itself. 

The  assembly  being  already  in  decay  and  to  be 
removed,  whatever  the  delay  of  grace,  the  time  was  at 
hand,  and  the  rejection  of  the  assembly  on  earth  to  be 
taken  as  a  starting-point.  Another  system  was  to  be 
set  up.  The  apostle  had  not  his  face  turned  towards 
the  assemblies  at  all,  but  his  back.  The  mind  of  the 
Spirit  is  towards  Christ's  taking  the  kingdom.  Still 
Christ  was  yet  amongst  them,  but  as  Son  of  man,  the 
character  in  which  He  judges  and  inherits  the  world. 
The  apostle  turns  and  sees  Him.  Still  it  behoved,  if 
he  was  recounting  the  coming  dealing  with  the  world 


THE   REVELATION.  41)5 

in  jndement,  to  notice  by  the  bye  "the  things  that 
are."  .By  giving  them  in  seven  contemporary  churches, 
no  time  was  necessary ;  it  left  the  iinal  results  as  at 
the  door,  for  they  were  in  the  last  days,  yet  it  gave,  if 
there  was  delay,  opportunity  for  a  full  moral  picture 
of  the  whole  of  the  assembly's  history.  I  see  in 
this  only  the  wisdom  of  the  Spirit,  and  exactly  the 
character  of  John's  ministry.  "  If  I  will  that  he  tarry 
till  I  come." 

I  cannot  doubt  then  for  a  moment  that  (while  pro- 
fessedly of  universal  application  for  every  one  that 
had  an  ear,  not  an  address  to  the  general  conscience  of 
the  assembly)  the  seven  assemblies  represent  the 
history  of  Christendom,  the  assembly  as  under  man's 
responsibility,  the  fact  of  the  judgment  of  the  world 
coming  afterwards  on  its  close  (the  assemblies  being 
"  the  things  that  are  ")  and  the  character  of  events,  be- 
ginning with  the  assembly  leaving  its  first  love,  and 
ending  with  holding  fast  till  He  comes,  and  with  being 
spued  out  of  Christ's  mouth.  The  adoption  of  the  num- 
ber seven,  which  cannot  mean  completeness  at  the  same 
time  because  the  states  are  different ;  the  reference  to 
Christ's  coming ;  the  reference  to  the  great  tribulation 
to  come  on  all  the  earth  in  the  letter  to  Philadelphia ; 
the  clear  object  of  warning  the  assembly  till  Christ 
came,  the  world  being  then  in  scene  for  judgment: 
all  leave  no  cloud  upon  the  conclusion  that  the 
seven  churches  are  successive  phases  of  the  professing 
assembly's  history,  though  not  exactly  consecutive 
(the  fourth  going  on  to  the  end;  new  phases  then 
commencing,  and  going  on  to  the  end  collaterally 
also).* 

But  though  the  assembly  be  thus  spoken  of,  God 
Himself   appears   here   as   the   administrator   of   the 

*  There  are  moral  reasons  fi'om  the  contents.  We  shall  see, 
fartlier  on,  that  the  structure  of  the  book  hilly  confirms  this. 

JU 


496  THE  Books  of  the  bible. 

world,  even  when  addressing  the  assembly ;  and  Christ 
as  man  coming  under  Him  to  this  purpose,  the  Holy 
Ghost  being  noticed  as  the  direct  agent  of  power  in 
the  sevenfold  perfection  in  which  it  is  exercised.  It  is 
not  the  Father  and  the  Son,  but  God  who  is,  yet  who 
embraces  past  and  future  in  His  being,  and  is  never 
inconsistent  with  Himself,  making  good  in  time  all  in 
which  He  has  announced  Himself  in  the  past.  The 
form  of  this  however  is  peculiar  here.  It  is  not 
merely  the  abstract  idea  of  Jehovah,  who  was,  and  is, 
and  is  to  come.  He  is  first  announced  by  His  pre- 
sent absolute  existence,  "  from  him'  who  is,"  the  "  I 
am,"  God  Himself ;  and  then  to  connect  Himself  with 
previous  dealings  (not  present  relationships)  declares 
that  He  is  the  One  who  was  (had  revealed  Himself  in 
previous  ages  to  the  earth  or  to  men,  to  the  Abrahams 
and  Moseses  of  old  time),  and  at  the  same  time  was 
the  coming  One*  who  would  make  good  everything 
revealed  of  and  by  Himself.  Jesus  Christ  (who  comes 
last  as  the  Man  in  immediate  connection  with  God's 
witness  to,  and  government  of,  the  earth)  is  presented 
as  the  faithful  witness — as  He  was  personally  on  earth 
— of  God ;  as  risen  from  the  dead  (but  no  ascension  or 
headship  of  the  assembly),  taking  all  in  this  cha- 
racter, not  after  the  flesh ;  and  lastly,  in  government 
not  yet  made  good,  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the 
earth. 

The  saints  then  express  their  own  consciousness  of 
what  He  has  done  for  them,  yet  still  in  reference  to 
the  kingdom,  not  as  the  body  or  bride,  or  their  own 
heavenly  joys,  but  the  highest  possible  as  regards  the 
given  glory  and  place.  Thio  is  the  necessary  conse- 
quence of  the  consciousness  of  a  near  and  blessed 
relationship.  Whatever  the  glory  of  the  One  we  are 
in  relationship  with,  it  is  what  He  is  for  oneself,  one's 


THE  REVELATION.  497 

own  nearness  to  Him,  that  comes  to  the  mind  when 
the  glory  is  declared.  Were  a  general  to  march  in 
triumph  into  a  town,  the  feeling  of  a  child  or  wife 
would  be,  "  That  is  my  father,"  "  that  is  my  husband." 
Here  the  feeling,  though  of  this  character,  is  more 
unselfish.  "  To  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us 
from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood."  It  is  His  love  to  us 
which  is  celebrated,  still  with  the  personal  feeling 
"  us."  The  saints  know  what  He  has  done  for  them, 
and  further  what  He  has  made  them.  His  love  is 
perfect.  King  and  Priest  are  His  highest  characters 
here:  nearest  to  God  in  power  downwards,  and  in 
approaching  Him  upwards.  He  has  made  us  kings 
and  priests  to  God  and  His  Father :  to  Him  be  glory ! 
Such  is  the  saint's  thought  when  He  is  spoken  of. 
He  loved  us,  has  cleansed  us,  and  given  us  a  place 
with  Himself.  This  flows  out  the  instant  He  is 
named.  It  is  the  answer  of  heart  when  He  is  an- 
nounced, before  any  communication  takes  place.  His 
having  done  this  is  not  announced;  it  is  the  saints' 
own  consciousness.* 

As  to  others,  all  must  be  told.  The  next  point,  the 
first  announced,  is  His  appearing  to  the  world.  No 
direct  communication  to  the  assembly  for  its  own  sake 
— the  book  is  not  that.  Here  the  assembly  has  that 
in  its  own  consciousness  only,  as  we  have  seen. 
Behold !  He  cometh  with  clouds ;  every  eye  shall  se© 
Him,  the  Jews  too  who  pierced  Him,  and  all  kindreds 
of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  Him.  His  appearing 
is  in  judgment. 

We  then  find,  what  is  so  remarkable  in  John,  the 
mixing  up  in  expression  God  and  Christ  Verse  8 
cannot  be  said  to  be  one  or  the  other.     It  is  Christ; 

*  We  shall  find  the  same  thing  at  the  close  when  the 
prophecy  is  ended.  Here  what  He  has  been  to  the  saints 
and  has  done:  there  what  He  is  for  the  future.  See  chapter 
xxii.  17. 

vol,.  v%  I.  b:^ 


498  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

but  it  is  Christ  Jehovah,  Almighty,  the  Lord ;  who  is, 
and  who  was,  and  who  is  to  come ;  the  first  and  the 
last.  (Compare  chap.  xxii.  12,  13.) 

Thus,  we  have  the  saints  of  these  days ;  Christ's 
appearing  to  judgment;  He  is  God,  the  first  and  the 
last.  Alpha  and  Omega;  the  complete  circle  of  position 
from  John's  day  to  the  end.  The  practical  position 
which  John  takes  with  all  the  saints,  is  "  the  kingdom 
and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  belongs  to  the 
kingdom,  but  must  wait  while  Christ  waits,  expecting 
till  His  enemies  be  made  His  footstool.  The  generic 
name  given  to  testimony  applies  to  all  his  ministry  as 
well  as  to  the  prophecy — the  word  of  God  and  the 
testimony  of  Jesus :  only  one  might  have  thought  that 
prophecy  was  not  this  last,  as  it  was  not  to  the  as- 
sembly about  itself  from  its  Head;  but  the  Spirit  of 
prophecy  is  the  testimony  of  Jesus. 

Such  is  the  introduction  to  this  book.  We  now 
enter  on  its  contents.  John  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the 
Lord's  day.  It  is  his  place  and  privilege  however 
then,  as  a  Christian,  which  is  spoken  of,  not  the  pro- 
phetic period  into  which  he  entered.  In  the  day  of 
resurrection — his  own  place — the  day  on  which  Chris- 
tians meet,  the  apostle,  removed  from  the  society  of 
Christians,  still  enjoyed  the  special  elevating  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  though  alone;  and  is  thus  used  of 
God,  allowed  to  be  banished  for  the  purpose,  for  what 
He  could  not,  in  an  ordinary  way,  have  communicated 
to  the  assembly  for  its  edification.  The  persecuting 
emperor  little  thought  what  he  was  giving  to  us  when 
he  banished  the  apostle ;  no  more  than  Augustus,  in 
his  political  plans  as  to  the  census  of  the  empire,  knew 
he  was  sending  a  poor  carpenter  to  Bethlehem,  with 
his  espoused  wife,  that  Christ  might  be  born  there  ;  or 
the  Jews  and  Pilate's  soldiers,  that  they  were  sending 
the  thief  to  heaven,  when  they  broke  his  legs  in  heart- 
less respect  for  their  own  superstitions  or  ordinances. 


THE  REVELATION.  499 

God's  ways  are  behind  the  scenes ;  but  He  moves  all 
the  scenes  which  He  is  behind.  We  have  to  learn 
this,  and  let  Him  work,  and  not  think  much  of  man's 
busy  movements  :  they  will  accomplish  God's.  The 
rest  of  them  all  perish  and  disappear.  We  have  only 
peacefully  to  do  His  will. 

The  same  voice  that  afterwards  called  John  up  to 
heaven,  he  now  hears  behind  him  on  earth — the  voice 
of  the  Son  of  man.  It  summons  his  attention  with 
power ;  and  turning  to  see  the  voice,  as  Moses  towards 
the  bush,  he  sees,  not  the  image  of  God's  presence  in 
Israel,  but  the  vessels  of  God's  light  in  the  earth,  and 
a  complete  summary  of  it  all,  and,  in  the  midst  of 
them,  Christ  as  Son  of  man.  We  find,  thus,  in  the 
Revelation,  God's  whole  history  of  the  world,  or  of 
what  is  of  Him  in  it,  from  the  first  decay  of  the 
assembly  to  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth.  But  it 
was  impossible  for  God  to  set  aside  the  present  ex- 
pectation of  Christ,  or  to  justify  the  assembly  in  its 
careless  but  sinful  thought,  My  Lord  delayeth  His 
coming.  Hence,  as  always,  this  history,  and  especially 
that  of  the  assembly,  is  given  in  a  way  which  leaves 
time  out  altogether.  The  moral  progress  of  the  as- 
sembly is  given  in  pictures  of  the  state  of  the  existing 
assemblies  selected  for  that  purpose,  beginning  with  its 
first  decline,  and  ending  with  its  entire  rejection. 
Being  taken  up  as  assemblies,  the  general  principle  of 
responsibility  is  in  view,  and  the  assembly  viewed, 
not  as  the  infallibly  blessed  body  of  Christ,  but  such 
as  that  it  may  be  rejected  and  set  aside  on  earth ;  for 
a  local  assembly  and  the  external  visible  assembly 
clearly  can. 

These  assemblies  are  seen  as  distinct  light-bearers ; 
that  is,  in  their  place  of  service,  or  rather  position  of 
witness  in  the  world.  They  are  viewed  in  their  own 
proper  character  as  of  God ;  as  set  by  Him  in  the 
world,  they  are  of  gold.     He  may  take  them  away 


500  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

because  they  give  a  dim,  or  no  true  light  or  witness 
for  God ;  but  the  thing  taken  away  was  founded  in 
divine  righteousness,  and  founded  originally  by  a 
divine  hand. 

But  the  Spirit  first  occupies  itself  with  the  cha- 
racter of  Him  who  stood  amongst  them.  First,  we 
get  His  actual  position,  before  stating  what  He  was. 
He  stood  as  Son  of  man.  We  have  not  Him  here  as 
Head  of  the  one  body,  nor  even  as  heavenly  Interces- 
sor; nor  have  we  the  Christ,  of  course  (that  is,  the 
Jewish  character  of  the  Lord).  It  will  be  found  that 
these  are  just  the  characters  of  Christ  omitted  also  in 
the  first  chapter  of  John's  Gospel.  John  sees  Him  in 
the  wide  character  in  which  He  is  set  over  all  the 
works  of  God's  hand,  and  Heir  of  all  promises  and 
purposes  of  God  to  man  according  to  divine  righteous- 
ness. He  is  not  the  Son  of  man  in  service.  His 
garment  is  down  to  His  feet,  and  He  has  the  girdle 
of  divine  righteousness  about  His  loins.  This  is  His 
character. 

We  have  then  His  qualities  or  attributes.  First, 
He  is  the  Ancient  of  days.  In  Daniel  the  same  truth 
comes  out.  The  Son  of  man  is  brought  to  the  Ancient 
of  days;  but,  farther  on  in  the  chapter,  it  is  the 
Ancient  of  days  who  comes.  The  Son  of  man  is 
Jehovah.  This  characterises  all  the  testimony.  The 
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  shews  Him  :*  but, 
when  He  comes,  we  find  that  He  is  King  of  kings  and 
Lord  of  lords.  But  in  this  glory  He  has  the  attributes 
of  judgment — eyes  of  fire — that  which  pierces  into 
everything,  and  fire  is  ever  the  sign  of  judgment. 
This  was  its  piercing,  searching  character :  His  feet,  the 
firmness  with  which  sin  was  met ;  for  brass  is  right- 
eousness, viewed,  not  as  intrinsically  in  God  to  be 
approached,  but  as  dealing  with  man,  in  his  responsi- 

=i^  1  Timothv  vi.  15. 


THE  REVELATION.  501 

bility  as  man.  The  mercy-seat  was  gold,  the  altar  and 
laver  brass ;  but  there  it  was  as  an  altar,  that  is,  deal- 
ing with  sin  for  man,  a  sacrifice,  though  fire  was  there, 
but  here  the  burning  furnace  of  judgment.  The  voice 
was  the  sign  of  power  and  majesty. 

Next,  we  have  official  supremacy.  He  held  all  that 
was  subordinate  authority  in  light  and  order,  here 
spoken  of  as  regards  the  assembly,  in  His  right  hand, 
in  His  power.  He  had  the  power  of  judgment  by  the 
word,  and  supreme  authority — the  sun — in  the  fulness 
of  its  highest  character.  We  have  His  personal  glory 
as  Jehovah ;  His  qualities  as  divine  Judge ;  and  His 
supreme  official  position. 

But,  He  was  not  less  the  Redeemer,  the  gracious 
securer  in  blessing  of  them  that  were  His.  John  (as 
ever  in  prophetic  vision  of  Jehovah,  for  it  is  not  the 
Spirit  of  adoption  here)  falls  at  His  feet  as  one  dead. 
So  Daniel ;  so  in  spirit  Isaiah  (chap,  vi.)  ;  but  His 
power  sustains  the  saint,  does  not  destroy  him.  He 
lays  His  right  hand  on  John  himself,  declares  Himself 
the  first  and  the  last,  Jehovah  Himself,  but  withal  the 
same  that  died  in  love  and  has  complete  power  over 
death  and  hades ;  the  deliverer  from  it,  not  the  sub- 
jecter  to  it.  He  has  risen  out  of  death  and  hades,  and 
has  the  keys — full  power  over  them — divine  power  or 
support;  and  He  who  died  and  rose  again,  and  lives 
for  ever  even  as  man,  does  so,  not  simply  in  the  power 
of  divine  life  in  man,  but  of  victory  over  all  that  man 
was  subject  to  by  sin  and  infirmity. 

This  is  the  position  He  here  takes  with  John  His 
servant,  and  with  the  assemblies  respectively.  We 
shall  see  that  the  state  of  the  latter  assemblies  brings 
out  other  characters  known  only  to  the  opened  eye  of 
faith.  These  were  what  John  had  seen,  and  which  he 
was  to  write.  Then  as  regards  prophetic  facts,  he  was 
to  write  the  things  that  were,  the  state  of  these 
various  assemblies  as  the  setting  forth  historically  of 

I. 


602  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  assembly's  various  state — a  history ;  and  the  things 
which  should  be  after  them  (that  is,  when  the  as- 
sembly's history  had  closed  on  earth).  The  whole 
assembly  therefore,  is  thus,  to  the  Spirit,  present  time 
— the  "things  that  are."  The  future  was  what  came 
after  it,  God's  dealings  with  the  world.  This,  while  it 
left  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  or  preparatory  prophetic 
events  in  immediate  expectation,  left,  if  there  was 
delay  (and  there  was  to  be),  the  period  undefined,  and 
the  expectation,  though  prolonged,  still  a  present  one. 
We  may  remark  that  we  have  the  personal  glory  of 
Christ  here,  the  position  as  to  the  assemblies  accom- 
panying it.  He  is  not  personally  revealed  as  Son  of 
man,  that  is,  as  taking  the  Son  of  man's  place :  only 
He  who  is  Ancient  of  days  is  so  seen  as  to  make  us 
understand  that  it  was  one  who  had  that  place — was 
Son  of  man.  Subsequently,  in  the  Apocalypse,  it  is 
not  His  intrinsic  personal  character,  but  some  relative 
character  or  place  He  takes.  Only  we  have  something 
analogous  to  this,  when  the  account  of  future  things 
comes  in.  As  regards  the  world.  He  is  seen  as  the 
Lamb,  one  whom  the  world  has  rejected,  but  who  has 
redemption  right  over  it.  There  He  is  seen  with  the 
seven  horns  and  seven  eyes — His  power  over  the 
world,  as  with  the  seven  stars  here  as  Son  of  man. 
These  are  the  things  John  had  seen. 

We  now  pass  to  "  the  things  that  are."  The  stars 
are  in  Christ's  hand ;  He  speaks  of  them  first ;  He 
walks  in  the  midst  of  the  assemblies.  The  latter  are 
light-bearers,  the  assemblies  or  assembly  as  set  in  a 
given  position,  and  viewed  as  such  before  God ;  not 
what  the  people  became,  but  what  the  assembly  is  in 
His  sight ;  just  as  Israel  was  His  people  whatever  the 
Israelites  became.  The  stars  are  that  which  is  held 
by  Christ  to  give  light  and  have  authority,  what  He 
holds  responsible  to  this  end  before  Him.  It  is,  in  a 
certain  sense,  all  composing  the  assembly  therefore, 


THE  REVELATION.  503 

and  so  it  is  often  said  in  the  addresses  to  the  assem- 
blies ;  but  more  especially  those  who  stand  in  respon- 
sibility through  their  connection  with  Himself,  the 
stars  in  His  hand.  They  should  shine,  and  influence, 
and  represent  Him,  each  in  its  place  during  the  night. 
That  the  clergy  gradually  took  this  place,  and  in  this 
sense  are  responsible  in  it,  is  quite  true ;  but  that  is 
their  affair  to  answer  for  themselves  before  the  Lord. 
The  Spirit  does  not  so  take  it  here.  They  assume  it 
as  honour ;  they  have  it  as  responsibility.  If  ever  they 
were  called  '''angels,"  it  was  evidently  just  this  as- 
sumption, and  taken  from  this  place.  Again,  it  cannot 
be  doubted  that  leaders,  elders,  or  others,  were  in  a 
special  place  of  responsibility,  supposing  them  to  be 
rightly  such.  In  Acts  xx.  they  are  so  treated;  but 
the  Spirit  does  not  so  own  them  here.  Christ  does 
not  address  Himself  to  elders,  nor  to  the  modern 
notion  of  a  bishop,  which  did  not  indeed  exist  then. 
Nor  is  a  diocese*  thought  of  in  these  addresses.  You 
have  not  the  authorities  (elders)  spoken  of  in  scripture, 
of  which  there  were  always  several ;  and  this  passage 
of  scripture  cannot  be  applied  to  human  arrangements 
as  now  existing. 

What  then  is  the  angel  ?  It  is  not  a  symbol,  pro- 
perly speaking.  The  star  is  the  symbol,  and  it  is  here 
seen  in  Christ's  hand.  It  is  (as  angel  is  always  used 
where  it  is  not  actually  a  heavenly  or  earthly  mes- 
senger) the  mystical  representative  of  one  not  actually 
seen.  It  is  so  used  of  Jehovah,  so  used  of  a  child,  so 
spoken  of  Peter.  Elders  may  have  practically  been 
specially  responsible  from  their  position ;  but  the 
angel  represents  the  assembly,  and  especially  those  to 
whom,  from  nearness  to  Christ  and  communion  with 

*  Except  in  the  new  world,  those  called  bishops  are  always 
bishops  of  a  city,  shewing  historically  that  dioceses  are  a  sub- 
sequent arrangement.  Angels  were  not  chief  officers  of  the 
synagogue. 

I. 


564  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Him,  or  responsibility  for  it  through  the  operation  of 
His  Spirit  in  them  for  His  service,  He  looks  for  the 
state  of  His  assembly  in  His  sight.  No  doubt  the 
whole  assembly  is  responsible,  and  therefore  the 
candlestick  is  removed  when  unfaithfulness  is  brought 
home  to  it ;  but  Christ  is  in  immediate  communication 
with  these  in  respect  of  it — a  solemn  thought  for  all 
who  have  the  good  of  the  assembly  at  heart. 

The  way  in  which  the  angels  and  the  assemblies  are 
identified,  and  any  distinction  in  the  degree  or  manner 
of  it,  requires  a  little  more  detailed  attention.  That 
the  assemblies  are  addressed  in  their  general  responsi- 
bility, in  the  addresses  to  the  angels,  is  evident.  For 
it  is  said,  "  What  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches."  It 
is  not  a  private  communication  to  an  authority  for  his 
direction,  as  to  a  Titus  or  a  Timothy,  but  said  to  the 
assemblies ;  that  is,  the  angel  represents  their  respon- 
sibility. So  we  find  distinct  parts  of  them  noticed. 
"  The  devil  shall  cast  some  of  you  into  prison ;"  "  fear 
none  of  those  things  which  thou  shalt  suffer :"  "  but  I 
have  a  few  things  against  thee,  thou  hast  there:" 
"  My  faithful  martyr  who  was  slain  among  you :" 
"  But  unto  you  I  say,  the  rest  in  Thyatira  "  (so  it  is  to 
be  read).  Yet  the  angel  and  assembly  or  candlestick 
are  distinguished :  "  I  will  remove  thy  candlestick 
out  of  its  place."  "Thou  sufferest  that  woman 
Jezebel." 

But  this  separation  between  the  angel  and  the 
assembly  does  not  take  place  in  the  last  three  assem- 
blies. The  angel  is  addressed  throughout.  As  to  them 
too  it  is  only  said,  Christ  has  the  seven  stars,  not  that 
He  holds  them  in  His  right  hand.  In  Smyrna  and 
Philadelphia  there  is  no  judgment ;  they  were  tried,  as 
faithful,  and  encouraged.  As  to  judgments,  or  rather 
warning  threats : — in  the  case  of  Ephesus,  which 
presents  the  general  fact  of  the  assembly's  first  de- 
cline, the  warning  is  given  that  the  candlestick  would 


THE  REVELATION.  oOo 

be  taken  away  unless  they  repented :  that  the  as- 
sembly did  not,  we  know  from  scripture  and  fact,  and 
these  assemblies  looked  at  as  a  successive  history.  In 
Pergamos  and  Thyatira  the  offenders  are  those  specifi- 
cally judged  ;  in  the  case  of  Thyatira  fearful  judgments 
on  Jezebel  and  those  connected  with  her :  she  had  had 
time  to  repent  and  had  not ;  but  here  the  change  of 
everything  is  looked  for  at  the  Lord's  coming.  All 
this  shews  the  angels  to  be  the  representatives  of  the 
assemblies,  but  morally  such ;  Christ's  Avarning  to  be 
addressed  to  them  (as  we  can  easily  understand  to  be 
the  case  in  any  who  had  the  interest  of  the  assembly 
at  heart),  whom  Christ  trusted  with  this ;  but  to  be  so 
far  identified  with  the  assemblies  that  it  concerned  all 
who  composed  then},  while  particular  judgments  were 
denounced  on  guilty  parties. 

We  may  now  enter  on  the  series  of  particular 
assemblies ;  but  briefly,  in  connection  with  the  whole 
structure  of  the  book,  rather  than  entering  into  the 
instructive  details,  which  I  have  done  elsewhere  in  a 
series  of  lectures. 

The  first  great  fact  is,  that  the  assembly  in  this 
world  is  subject  to  judgment,  and  to  have  its  whole 
existence  and  place  before  God  as  light-bearer  in  the 
world  set  aside ;  secondly,  that  God  will  do  this  if  it 
departs  from  its  first  spiritual  energy.  This  is  an 
immense  principle.  He  has  set  the  assembly  to  be  a 
true  witness  of  what  He  has  manifested  in  Jesus ;  of 
what  He  is  when  Jesus  is  gone  on  high.  If  it  be  not 
this,  it  is  a  false  witness,  and  it  will  be  set  aside.  God 
may  have  patience,  and  has  blessedly  so.  He  may 
propose  to  her  to  return  to  her  first  love,  and  does; 
but,  if  this  do  not  take  place,  the  candlestick  is  re- 
moved, the  assembly  ceases  to  be  God's  light-bearer  in 
the  world.  The  first  estate  must  be  maintained,  or 
God's  glory  and  the  truth  are  falsified  ;  and  the  crea- 
ture must  be  set  aside.      But  no  mere  unsustained 

IL 


506  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

creature  does  this,  none  as  such.  Hence  all  fails  and 
is  judged,  save  as  in,  or  upheld  by,  the  Son  of  God,  the 
second  Man.  Ephesus  had  gone  on  well  in  maintain- 
ing consistency,  but  that  forgetfulness  of  self  and 
thinking  only  of  Christ,  which  are  the  firstfruits  of 
grace,  were  gone.  As  heretofore  remarked,  there  were 
works  of  labour  and  patience ;  but  the  faith,  hope,  and 
love  had  in  their  true  energy  disappeared.  They  had 
rejected  the  pretension  of  false  teachers,  and  laboured 
and  not  fainted.  All  that  can  be  said  of  them  is  said 
to  shew  Christ's  love,  and  that  He  is  not  forgetful  of 
them,  or  of  the  good  manifested  in  them.  Still  they 
had  left  their  first  love ;  and  this  unless  repented  of 
and  the  first  works  done,  involved  the  taking  away  of 
the  candlestick. 

Another  important  principle  is  found  here,  that 
when  the  assembly  had  departed  from  faithfulness, 
when  collectively  it  had  ceased  to  be  the  expression  of 
the  love  in  which  God  has  visited  the  world,  God 
throws  back  individuals  on  the  word  of  God  for 
themselves :  "  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  w^hat 
the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches."  The  assembly  is 
judged,  and  thus  cannot  be  the  security  for  faith  ;  the 
individual  is  called  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  says.  The 
warning  of  taking  away  the  candlestick  here  is 
specially  worthy  of  notice,  because  there  was  a  great 
deal  the  Lord  highly  approved  of — encouraged  them 
by  shewing  He  did ;  but,  for  all  that,  if  first  love  was 
departed  from,  the  candlestick  would  be  removed. 

The  character  of  Christ  and  promises  are  general, 
as  the  assembly  is  characteristic  of  the  whole  principle 
on  which  the  assembly  stands.  Christ  has  the  stars 
in  His  right  hand  and  walks  amidst  the  candlesticks. 
It  is  not  a  special  character  applicable  to  a  special 
state,  but  the  whole  bearing  of  His  position  in  the 
midst  of  the  assemblies.  The  assembly,  viewed  as 
having  left  its  first  love,  is  never  promised  anything. 


THE  REVELATION.  507 

It  cannot  direct  a  believer  when  it  comes  under  re- 
proof and  judgment  itself.  The  promise  is  then  to  the 
individual  overcomer :  a  very  important  principle. 
The  promise  given  to  him  that  overcomes  is  the 
general  one — is  the  contrast  to  Adam's  ruin,  but  in  a 
higher  and  better  way  than  that  in  which  he  enjoyed 
the  good  which  he  lost.  He  that  overcomes  shall  eat 
of  the  tree  of  life.  But  this  is  not  the  tree  of  life  in 
man's  paradise  in  this  world,  but  the  paradise  of  God 
Himself.  We  must  remark,  too,  that  it  is  not  as  the 
first  Adam  now,  individually  keeping  one's  first  estate, 
but  overcoming.  And  what  is  before  us  to  overcome 
in  is,  not  only  the  world  and  its  hostilities  (though 
that  may  be),  but  within  the  sphere  of  the  assembly 
itself.  It  is  the  call  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  says  to 
the  assemblies  which  gives  occasion  to  the  speaking  of 
overcoming.  This,  in  respect  of  the  claim  of  the 
assembly  to  be  heard,  is  an  immensely  important  truth. 
The  message  is  addressed  to  the  assembly,  not  by  it  to 
individuals,  and  she  is  warned  of  her  delinquency,  and 
the  individual  saint  is  called  to  overcome. 

The  word  to  Smyrna  is  short.  Whatever  the  malice 
and  power  of  Satan,  at  the  utmost,  if  permitted,  he  has 
but  the  power  of  death.  Christ  is  First  and  Last, 
beyond  as  before  death,  God  Himself ;  but  more  than 
that,  has  met  and  gone  through  its  power.  The  saints 
were  not  to  fear.  Satan  would  work,  be  allowed  to 
sift,  to  imprison.  Let  the  saints  only  be  faithful  to 
the  extreme  point  of  his  power;  all  beyond  w^as  be- 
yond him,  was  Christ's;  and  the  faithful  one  would 
receive  from  Him  the  crown  of  life.  Tribulation, 
poverty,  the  contempt  of  those  who  pretended  to  have 
the  legitimate  hereditary  claim  to  be  God's  people — 
always  the  persecutors,  be  they  Jews  or  Christians — 
was  the  portion  of  the  assembly  here  ;  and  God  suf- 
fered it.  It  was  really  mercy  to  the  declining  assembly. 
Their  hope  was  beyond  it  all  when  Christ  gave  the 


508  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

crown  of  life.  This  made  the  assembly,  sliding  into 
the  world,  or  about  to  do  it  insensibly  through  decline 
of  its  first  love,  sensible  that  the  world  was  in  Satan's 
hands — was  not  the  rest  of  saints.  But,  if  the  Lord 
permitted.  He  limited,  the  tribulation.  All  was  in 
His  hands.  Not  only  was  there  the  crown  for  the 
sufferers,  but  whoever  overcame,  his  portion  was 
secure:  the  death  of  judgment,  the  second  death, 
would  not  hurt  him. 

We  now  need  a  closer  judgment.  Christ  appears  as 
the  One  having  the  two-edged  sword  of  the  word 
proceeding  out  of  His  mouth.  It  will  be  remarked 
here,  that,  in  Smyrna  and  Pergamos,  a  special  cha- 
racter of  Christ  applies  to  a  special  state.  There  is  no 
general  result  for  the  assembly.  In  Ephesus  we  have 
Christ's  position  as  Judge  in  the  midst  of  the  candle- 
sticks, and  the  assembly  threatened  with  removal 
from  its  place  of  witness  upon  earth.  In  Thyatira 
He  takes  His  place  as  Son  of  God,  Son  over  His  own 
house,  and,  as  things  are  (as  to  the  assembly)  got  to  the 
worst,  is  revealed  in  all-piercing  and  immutable  judg- 
ment, and  the  whole  blessing  of  the  new  state  is 
promised  to  the  overcomer.  In  Pergamos  we  have 
faithfulness  found  in  its  previous  path,  Christ's  name 
and  faith  held  fast  in  spite  of  persecution.  It  differs 
from  Philadelphia,  that  His  word  is  not  said  to  be 
lield  fast  as  that  of  Christ's  patience  (that  the  as- 
sembly, in  its  Pergamos  state,  did  not  do),  but  it  did 
hold  fast  the  confession  of  Christ  in  the  midst  of 
persecution.  But  another  kind  of  evil  came  in — 
seduction  to  fall  in  with  the  world's  ways  by  evil 
teaching  within.  The  doctrine  of  Balaam  was  there. 
Idolatry  flowed  in.  There  were  also  sects  within,  which 
taught "  pretended  sanctity  but  evil  practice.  These 
the  Lord  would  judge. 

The  general  truth  of  removing  the  candlestick  had 
no  place  here,  neither  as  a  general  truth,  when  the 


THE   REVELATION.  509 

assembly  could  be  called  on  to  keep  its  first  love,  nor 
as  fiery  judgment,  because  it  was  gone  wholly  astray ; 
but  there  were  corrupters,  and  Christ's  servants  led 
into  idolatry  and  evil.  Individual  approbation  by 
Christ,  communion  with  Himself  in  future  blessing 
(in  spirit  then),  as  the  once  humbled  and  rejected  One 
(which  the  assembly  was  ceasing  to  be),  a  name  given 
by  Christ,  and  so  of  tenderness  on  His  part,  a  link 
known  only  to  him  who  had  it.  In  a  word,  individual 
association  and  individual  blessing  of  secret  delight — 
this  was  the  promise  to  the  overcomer  when  corrup- 
tion was  advancing,  not  yet  dominant  and  unhindered 
in  the  assembly. 

In  Thyatira  the  assembly  reaches  to  the  close. 
There  was  found,  in  what  Christ  owned  in  this  state 
of  things,  increasing  devotedness.  But  Jezebel  was 
allowed  ;  and  both  connection  with  the  world,  idolatry, 
and  children  begotten  to  it  in  the  assembly  itself.  All 
would  be  judged,  great  tribulation  fall  on  Jezebel,  and 
her  children  be  killed.  Christ  searched  the  heart  and 
reins,  and  applied  judgment  in  unchangeable  right- 
eousness. The  faithful  ones  of  this  epoch,  the  "  you  " 
that  Christ  specially  addresses,  are  but  a  "rest,"  a 
remnant,  but  specially  and  growingly  devoted.  It  is, 
we  may  remark  here,  what  the  assemblies  are  towards 
Christ,  which  is  especially  in  view.  What  Jezebel  did 
towards  the  faithful  ones  is  not  noted.  The  Lord's 
coming  is  the  time  looked  to ;  and  the  whole  millennial 
blessing  is  promised  to  him  that  overcomes ;  both  the 
reiefn  with  Christ,  and  Christ  the  Mornino-  Star  Him- 
self.  "He  that  hath  an  ear"  is  now  put  after  the 
overcoming  ;  not  said  in  connection  with  the  assembly, 
but  with  those  who  overcome  in  it.  The  state  is  the 
state  characterised  by  this.  Thyatira  may  go  on  to 
the  end,  but  does  not  characterise  the  witness  of  God 
to  the  end  ;  other  states  must  be  brought  in  to  do  that. 
It  is,  I  have  no  doubt,  the  Popery  of  the  middle  ages, 

II. 


610  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

say  to  the  Reformation ;  Romanism  itself  goes  on  to 
the  end.  The  judgment  on  Jezebel  is  final.  The 
Lord  had  given  her  space  to  repent,  and  she  had  not 
repented.  It  would  be  a  forced  association  with  those 
whom  she  had  once  seduced  to  the  ruin  of  them  all. 
The  whole  character  here  is  piercing  judgment  accord- 
ing to  God's  own  nature  and  requirements  ;  special 
trial  and  judgment,  yet  the  blessing  not  special,  but 
the  portion  of  the  saints  at  large  in  that  which 
they  have  with  Christ ;  as  the  departure  and  judg- 
ment were  complete — adultery,  not  merely  failure  in 
first  love. 

We  have  seen  the  close  at  the  Lord's  coming  con- 
templated in  Thyatira.  Sardis  begins  a  new  collateral 
phase  of  the  assembly's  history.  Save  the  having  the 
seven  stars,  none  of  the  ecclesiastical  characters  of 
Christ,  none  of  those  noticed  in  Him  as  walking  in 
the  midst  of  the  assemblies,  are  noticed.  Still  the 
assembly  is  noticed  as  such.  It  is  still  the  history  of 
the  assembly.  But,  the  Lord's  coming  having  been 
noticed,  all  characteristics  of  Christ  refer  to  what  He 
will  have  in  the  kingdom.  Still  He  has  yet  the  seven 
stars — supreme  authority  over  the  assembly.  It  is 
nothing  peculiar  to  this  assembly.  He  has  it  over, 
and  as  to,  all.  It  is  in  this  character  He  has  to  do 
with  Sardis.  He  has  the  seven  spirits,  the  fulness  of 
the  perfection  in  which  He  will  govern  the  earth. 
Thus  He  is  competent  to  bless  in  the  assembly,  though 
there  is  no  regular  ecclesiastical  connection.  He  has 
power  over  all,  and  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit;  both  in 
perfection.  Whatever  the  assembly  is,  He  is  all  this. 
This  is  a  great  comfort.  The  assembly  cannot  fail  in 
the  place  of  witness  through  want  of  fulness  of  grace 
in  Him.     Nor  can  He  fail  him  who  has  ears  to  hear. 

But  the  state  of  the  assembly  shewed  that  it  was 
far  from  availing  itself  of  it.  It  had  indeed  a  name 
to  live ;  it  was  superior  in  its  pretensions  to  the  evil 


THE   REVELATION.  611 

of  Thyatira ;  nor  were  there  Jezebels  and  corruption. 
But  there  was  practically  death.  There  was  no  com- 
pleteness in  her  works  before  God.  It  was  not  evil 
here,  but  lack  of  spiritual  energy.  But  this  did  leave 
individuals  to  defile  their  garments  in  the  world.  She 
was  called  to  remember,  not  her  first  works,  but  what 
she  had  received  and  heard,  the  truth  committed  to 
her,  the  gospel  and  word  of  God ;  if  not,  she  would  be 
treated  as  the  world.  The  Lord  would  come  as  a 
thief ;  for  the  Lord's  coming  is  now  always  in  view. 

There  is  no  threat  of  removing  the  candlestick  :  that 
was  settled.  Judgment,  setting  aside  the  assembly, 
was  fixed.  But  this  body  would  be  treated  as  the 
world,  not  ecclesiastically  as  a  corrupt  assembly. 
(Compare  1  Thess.  v.)  However,  some  had  preserved 
their  integrity,  and  would  be  owned ;  and  they  would 
walk  with  Christ  as  those  that  had  done  righteous- 
ness. This  was  the  promise  too.  They  had  confessed 
His  name  practically  before  men,  before  the  world, 
and  theirs  would  be  confessed  before  God  when  the 
nominal  assembly  was  treated  as  the  world.  They 
were  real  Christians  in  the  midst  of  a  worldly  profes- 
sion, and  their  names  would  not  be  struck  out  of  the 
register,  then  ill-kept  on  earth,  but  infallibly  rectified 
by  heavenly  judgment.  It  has  been  remarked  that, 
simultaneously  with  bringing  in  the  Lord's  coming, 
the  ear  to  hear  comes  after  the  distinguishing  the 
overcomers.  Such  a  remnant  only  is  looked  for.  I 
cannot  doubt  that  we  have  Protestantism  here. 

The  assembly  of  Philadelphia  has  a  peculiarly  in- 
teresting character.  Nothing  is  said  of  its  works,  but 
that  Christ  knows  them.  But  what  is  interesting  in 
it  is  that  it  is  peculiarly  associated  with  Christ  Him- 
self. Christ,  as  in  all  these  last  assemblies,  is  not  seen 
in  the  characters  in  which  He  walked  in  the  midst  of 
the  assemblies,  but  in  such  as  faith  peculiarly  recog- 
nises when  ecclesiastical  organisation  has  become  the 

III. 


512  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

hot- bed  of  corruption.  Here  it  is  His  personal  cha- 
racter, what  He  is  intrinsically,  holy  and  true,  what 
the  word  displays  and  requires,  and  what  the  word  of 
God  is  in  itself — moral  character  and  faithfulness. 
Indeed  this  last  word  includes  all :  faithfulness  to  God 
within  and  without,  according  to  what  is  revealed,  and 
faithful  to  make  good  all  He  has  declared. 

Christ  is  known  as  the  Holy  One.  Then  outward 
ecclesiastical  associations  or  pretensions  will  not  do. 
There  must  be  what  suits  His  nature,  and  faithful 
consistency  with  that  word  which  He  will  certainly 
make  good.  With  this  He  has  the  administration; 
and  opens  and  no  man  shuts,  and  shuts  and  no  man 
opens.  See  what  His  path  was  on  earth :  only  then 
gracioualy  dependent,  as  we  are.  He  was  holy  and  true, 
to  man's  view  had  a  little  strength,  kept  the  word, 
lived  by  every  word  that  proceeded  out  of  God's  lips, 
waited  patiently  for  the  Lord,  and  to  Him  the  porter 
opened.  He  lived  in  the  last  days  of  a  dispensation, 
the  holy  and  true  One,  rejected,  and,  to  human  eye, 
failing  in  success  with  those  who  said  they  were  Jews, 
but  were  the  synagogue  of  Satan.  So  the  saints  here : 
they  walk  in  a  place  like  His ;  they  keep  His  word, 
have  a  little  strength,  are  not  marked  by  a  Pauline 
energy  of  the  Spirit,  but  do  not  deny  His  name. 
This  is  the  character  and  motive  of  all  their  conduct. 
It  is  openly  confessed,  the  word  kept,  the  Name  not 
denied.  It  seems  little ;  but  in  universal  decline, 
much  pretension  and  ecclesiastical  claim,  and  many 
falling  away  to  man's  reasonings,  keeping  the  word  of 
Him  that  is  holy  and  true,  and  not  denying  His  name 
is  everything. 

And  this  element  is  noticed.  Christ,  the  holy  and 
true  One,  is  waiting.  Here  on  earth  He  waited 
patiently  for  Jehovah.  It  is  the  character  of  perfect 
faith.  Faith  has  a  double  character — energy  which 
overcomes,  and  patience  which  waits   for   God  and 


THE  REVELATION.  613 

trusts  Him.  (See  the  first  in  Heb.  xi.  23-34 :  the  latter 
in  vers.  8-22.)  It  is  the  latter  which  is  found  here  j 
the  word  of  patience  kept. 

But  as  regards  the  former  substantive  qualities, 
keeping  the  word,  and  not  denying  Christ's  name 
(though  with  a  little  strength)  in  presence  of  ecclesias- 
tical pretension  to  a  successional  God-established  re- 
ligion, promises  were  given.  Christ  would  force  these 
pretentious  claimants  to  divine  succession  to  come  and 
own  that  He  had  loved  those  who  kept  His  word. 
An  open  door  was  given  at  present,  and  no  man  could 
shut  it ;  just  as  the  porter  had  opened  to  Him,  so  that 
scribes  and  Pharisees  and  priests  could  not  hinder  it. 
In  the  future  they  would  have  to  own  themselves 
humbled,  and  that  those  who  followed  the  word  of  the 
holy  and  true  One  were  those  He  had  loved.  Mean- 
while His  approbation  was  sufficient.  This  was  the 
test  of  faith — to  be  satisfied  with  His  approbation, 
content  with  the  authority  of  His  word. 

But  there  was  a  promise  also  as  to  the  Lord's 
judgments  in  the  earth.  Christ  is  waiting  till  His 
enemies  be  made  His  footstool.  We  must  wait  for 
it  to  see  the  world  set  right.  We  have  to  go  on 
where  the  god  of  this  world  has  his  way,  though 
under  divine  limitation.  The  thought  that  good  is 
to  have  its  rights  in  this  world  is  to  forget  the  cross 
and  Christ.  We  cannot  have  our  rights  till  He  has, 
for  we  have  none  but  His.  Judgment  (since  Pilate 
liad  it,  and  Christ  was  the  righteous  One  before  him) 
has  not  yet  returned  to  righteousness.  Till  then 
Christ  waits,  though  at  the  right  hand  of  God ;  and 
we  wait.  It  is  not  persecution  and  martyrdom,  as  in 
Smyrna.  It  is  as  hard  a  task  perhaps,  or,  at  any 
rate,  our  task  now — patience  and  contentedness  with 
Christ's  approbation,  keeping  His  word,  not  denying 
His  name. 

But  then  there  were  other  and  blessed  encourage- 

VOL.  V.  III.  L  L 


514  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

merits.  There  was  an  hour  of  temptation  coming 
upon  all  the  world  to  try  those  who  belonged  to 
earth,  who  dwelt  there  as  belonging  to  it.  Some 
might  be  spared,  victorious  in  the  trial;  but  those 
who  kept  the  word  of  Christ's  patience  would  be  kept 
from  it.  On  the  whole  world  it  would  come;  and 
where  were  they  ? — Out  of  the  world.  They  had  not 
belonged  to  it  when  in  it.  They  had  been  waiting  for 
Christ  to  take  His  power — waiting  His  time  to  have 
the  world.  They  belonged  to  heaven,  to  Him  who 
was  there ;  and  they  would  be  taken  to  be  with  Him 
when  the  world  was  to  be  in  the  time  of  terrible  trial. 
There  was  a  special  time  before  He  took  His  power ; 
and  not  only  would  they  reign  with  Him  in  result,  but 
they  would  be  kept  from  that  hour,  and  had  the 
assurance  of  it  in  the  time  of  their  trial.  And  hence 
the  Lord  points  them  to  His  coming  as  their  hope ;  not 
as  warning  that  the  unrepentant  would  be  treated  as 
the  world  when  He  appeared.  He  came  quickly,  and 
they  were  to  look  for  the  cro^vn  then,  holding  fast 
what  they  had,  feeble  but  spiritually  associated  with 
Him  as  they  were,  lest  any  should  take  it. 

We  have  now  the  general  promise  in  heavenly 
places  marked  by  special  association  with  Christ ;  and 
they  are  publicly  owned  in  that  in  which  they  seemed 
on  earth  to  have  nothing.  Others  had  the  pretension 
to  be  the  people  of  God,  the  city  of  God — to  have 
divine  religious  title ;  these  were  only  consistent  with 
His  word,  and  they  waited  for  Christ.  Now,  when 
Christ  takes  His  power,  when  things  are  real,  accord- 
ing to  Him  in  power,  they  have  this  place  according 
to  God.  It  was  the  cross  and  contempt  below ;  it  is 
die  display  of  God's  name  and  heavenly  city  above. 

Let  us  examine  the  promise  to  the  overcomers  here. 
He  who  had  but  a  little  strength  is  a  pillar  in  the 
temple  of  the  God  in  whom  and  with  whom  he  is 
blessed.     He  was  held  perhaps  for  outside  the  ecclesi- 


THE   REVELATION.  515 

astical  unity  and  order  ;  he  is  a  pillar  in  it  in  heaven, 
and  wil]  go  no  more  out.  On  him  who  was  hardly- 
owned  to  have  a  part  in  grace  has  the  name  of  his 
rejected  Saviour's  God  been  stamped  publicly  in  glory. 
He  who  was  hardly  accounted  to  belong  to  the  holy 
city  has  its  heavenly  name  written  on  him  too,  and 
Christ's  new  name — the  name  not  known  to  prophets 
and  Jews  according  to  the  flesh,  but  which  He  has 
taken  as  dead  to  this  world  (where  the  false  assembly 
settles  down)  and  risen  into  heavenly  glory.  The 
careful  association  with  Christ  is  striking  here,  and 
gives  its  character  to  the  promise.  "  The  temple  of 
m^/  God,"  says  Christ ;  "  the  name  of  my  God  ;"  "  of 
the  city  of  nty  God,"  "  my  new  name."  Associated  in 
Christ's  own  patience,  Christ  confers  upon  him  what 
fully  associates  him  in  His  own  blessing  with  God. 
This  is  of  peculiar  blessing,  and  full  of  encouragement 
for  us. 

Laodicea  follows.  Lukewarmness  characterises  the 
last  state  of  profession  in  the  assembly.  It  is  nau- 
seous to  Christ ;  He  will  spue  it  out  of  His  mouth.  It 
was  not  mere  want  of  power,  it  was  want  of  heart — 
the  worst  of  all  ills.  This  threat  is  peremptory,  not 
conditional.  It  brought  irremediable  rejection.  With 
this  want  of  heart  for  Christ  and  His  service,  there 
was  much  pretension  to  the  possession  of  resources 
and  competency  in  themselves ;  "  I  am  rich,"  whereas 
they  had  nothing  of  Christ.  It  is  the  professing 
assembly  accounting  itself  rich  without  having  Christ 
as  the  riches  of  the  soul  by  faith.  Therefore  He 
counsels  them  to  buy  of  Him  true  and  approved 
righteousness,  clothing  for  their  moral  nakedness,  and 
what  gave  spiritual  sight ;  for  they  were,  as  respects 
what  Christ  is  and  gives  before  God,  poor,  naked,  and 
miserable,  and  specially  so.  This  is  Christ's  judgment 
of  their  pretended  acquisitions  according  to  man. 
However,  as  long  as  the  assembly  subsists,  Christ  con- 

UI. 


516  THE  BOOKS  OF   THE   BIBLE. 

tinues  to  deal  in  grace,  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks, 
presses  reception  of  Himself  in  the  closest  way  on  the 
conscience.  If  any  one,  still  in  what  He  was  going 
to  spue  out,  heard  His  voice  and  opened,  He  would 
give  him  admission  to  be  with  Him,  and  a  part  in  the 
kingdom. 

There  is  no  coming  here ;  nor  was  there  for  the 
judgment  of  Jezebel.  That  was  practically  Babylon; 
and  she  is  judged  before  Christ  comes.  This  is  spued 
out  of  Christ's  mouth,  cast  off  as  worthless  to  Him ; 
but  the  general  body  is  judged  as  the  world.  The 
Lord's  coming  is  in  Thyatira  for  the  saints,  and  in 
Philadelphia  too.  That  is  its  aspect  as  to  the  as- 
sembly, and  that  only.  Sardis  is  reduced,  if  unrepen- 
tant, to  the  condition  of  the  world,  and  judged  as 
such.  When  the  state  of  Laodicea  arrives,  the  as- 
sembly is  disowned  and  rejected  of  Christ  in  that 
character:  but  for  that  His  coming  is  not  to  be  spoken 
of.  Although  Thyatira  goes  down  to  the  end  and 
closes  ecclesiastically  the  assembly's  history,  yet  only 
in  the  first  three  is  the  assembly  at  large  treated  as 
the  subject  of  repentance.  In  Thyatira  space  had 
been  given  Jezebel  to  repent,  and  she  did  not:  and 
the  scene  is  to  close  and  be  replaced  by  the  kingdom. 
In  this  respect  the  last  four  assemblies  go  together. 
There  is  no  prospect  of  repentance  of  the  whole 
assembly,  or  restoration.  Sardis  is  called  to  hold  fast 
and  repent,  and  remember  what  she  had  received  ;  but, 
if  she  does  not  watch,  is  to  be  treated  as  the  world. 
Hence,  as  we  have  seen,  the  call  to  hear  is  addressed 
to  overcomers,  after  the  promise. 

The  character  of  Christ  in  connection  with  this 
assembly  must  not  be  passed  over.  It  brings  out  the 
passage  from  the  various  condition  of  the  assembly  to 
His  authority  above  and  beyond  it  over  the  world. 
Christ  personally  takes  up  what  the  assembly  has 
ceased  to  be.     He  is  the  Amen,  the  fulfilment   and 


Tfite  RfiVfiLATION.  517 

verifier  of  all  the  promises,  the  real  witness  and 
revealer  of  God  and  of  truth,  when  the  assembly  is 
not ;  and  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God — Head 
over  all  things,  and  the  glory  and  witness  of  what  it 
is  as  from  God — as  the  new  creation.  The  assembly 
ought  to  have  displayed  the  power  of  the  new  creation 
by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  as  if  any  man  is  in  Christ,  it  is  a 
new  creation,  where  all  things  are  of  God.  We,  as  its 
tirstfruits,  are  created  again  in  Him.  The  assembly 
has  thus  the  things  which  remain.  (2  Cor.  iii.)  But 
she  has  been  an  unfaithful  witness  of  it.  Does  she 
possess  a  part  in  it  ?  It  is  because  Christ  does,  and 
He  is  the  true  beginning  of  it  as  really  displaj^ed. 
The  responsible  witness  of  it  by  the  Holy  Ghost  hav- 
ing failed,  Christ  now  takes  it  up,  coming  in  for  its 
effectual  display. 

But  the  series  of  preparatory  events  in  the  world 
must  first  be  gone  into.  And  it  is  to  be  remarked, 
that  there  is  no  mention  here  of  the  fact  of  the  Lord's 
coming  in  reference  to  the  assembly.  It  is  promised 
that  He  will  come  quickly ;  and  the  assembly  is 
threatened  with  being  spued  out  of  His  mouth.  But 
the  fact  of  His  coming  for  His  own,  or  the  assembly's 
rapture  at  any  time,  is  not  stated.  This  falls  in  fully 
with  what  we  have  seen  of  John's  ministry  * — his 
being  occupied  with  the  manifestation  of  the  Lord  on 
earth,  and  scarce  touching  (and  only  when  needed  on 
leaving  the  disciples)  on  heavenly  promises.  In  John 
xiv.  and  xvii.  hs  does  it  exceptionally.  Here  it  is  left 
out.  Even  in  chapter  xii.,  which  remarkably  contiruis 
what  I  say,  the  rapture  is  only  seen  as  identified  with 
the  catching  up  of  the  man-child,  Christ  Himself. 
Hence  we  have  no  specific  relative  epoch  noted  for 


^=  His  character  too  was  for  judgment  amonor  the  aasemblies 
and  the  assembly  on  earth ;  not  His  own  bride,  but  the  outward 
body  here  on  earth. 

IIL 


518  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  taking  away  the  saints  here,  save  that  they  are 
taken  before  the  war  in  heaven  which  leads  to  the 
last  three  years  and  a  half.  But  on  the  other  hand 
the  saints  belonging  to  the  assembly,  or  before,  are 
always  seen  above  when  the  epistles  to  the  assemblies 
are  ended.  They  are  waiting  for  judgment  to  be 
given  to  them  for  the  avenging  of  their  blood ;  but 
they  are  never  seen  on  earth. 

But  we  have  to  consider  where  the  fourth  chapter 
commences  God's  ways.  It  does  not  follow  neces- 
sarily that  the  assembly  has  been  spued  out  of  Christ's 
mouth.  It  had  been  threatened  ;  but  the  judgment  on 
Sardis,  or  even  on  Thyatira,  was  not  yet  come.  But 
it  is  after  Christ  has  ceased  to  deal  with  the  profess- 
ing assembly  as  such,  looking  to  it  as  His  light-bearer 
before  the  world.  What  it  may  call  itself  still  is  not 
stated ;  He  is  not  dealing  with  it.  An  open  apostasy 
will  come.  Its  date  is  not  revealed ;  nor  is  it  revealed 
as  to  the  rapture.  But  I  gather  from  2  Thessalonians 
ii.,  that  the  rapture  will  be  before  the  apostasy. 
What  we  have  stated  then  is,  that  it  is  after  all  deal- 
ing with  the  assemblies  by  Christ  is  closed  that  the 
subsequent  dealings  with  the  world  in  the  Revelation 
begin.  The  assemblies  are  "the  things  that  are;" 
what  follows,  "  the  things  after  these."  Chrst  is  not 
now  seen  walking  in  their  midst;  He  is  the  Lamb  in 
the  midst  of  the  throne.  John  is  not  occupied  with 
seeing  Him  there,  or  sending  messages  to  the  assem- 
blies, but  is  called  up  to  heaven  where  all  the  ways  of 
God  are  now  carried  on,  and  that  towards  the  world, 
not  the  assembly.  We  have  the  throne  too,  not  the 
long-robed  priest.  The  kings  and  priests  we  read 
of  in  chapter  i.  are  now  on  high.  Others  may  follow 
them  ;  but  they  are  in  heavenly  places,  seated  on 
thrones,  or  worshipping,  or  presenting  their  censers 
full  of  incense.  On  the  other  hand  the  Lord  is  not 
come  to  judge  the  world,  but  about  to  receive   the 


TfiE  HEVELATIOK  ol9 

inhentance.  The  saints  then,  who  will  be  caught  up 
to  meet  Christ,  are  seen  only  on  high  here  ;  they 
belong  to  heaven,  and  are  no  longer  dealt  with  on 
earth,  but  have  their  own  place  in  heaven. 

The  connection  between  the  two  parts  of  the 
Apocalypse  is  this : — Christ,  who  was  judging  in  the 
midst  of  the  professing  church,  is  now  seen  on  high, 
opening  the  book  of  this  world's  judgment,  of  whict 
He  is  about  to  take  the  inheritance  publicly.  From 
this  scene  of  judgment  the  saints  are  far.  The 
apostle's  occupation  with  the  assembly  now  ceases — • 
an  important  point,  for  the  Holy  Spirit  must  be 
occupied  with  it  as  long  as  the  saints  are  in  it  on 
earth ; — and  he  is  taken  up  to  heaven,  and  there  he 
sees  God  in  covenant  with  creation,  on  a  throne  of 
government,  with  a  rainbow  round  about  it.  The 
living  creatures  celebrate  Him  as  the  Creator,  the  One 
for  whom  all  things  were  created.  The  throne  was 
not  a  throne  of  grace,  but  the  signs  of  power  and 
judgment  broke  forth  from  it ;  but  around  it  those 
who  represent  the  saints  received  at  Christ's  coming, 
the  kings  and  priests,  are  sitting  on  thrones  in  a  circle 
round  the  throne.  No  altar  of  sacrifice  is  in  view,  as 
if  it  were  a  time  of  approach  ;  the  brazen  laver  has 
glass  instead  of  water.  It  is  a  fixed  accomplished 
holiness,  not  cleansing  of  feet.  The  elders  are  crowned, 
the  number  twenty-four  recalling  the  courses  of  the 
priests.  The  seven  Spirits  of  God  are  there  in  the 
temple,  not  Christ's  to  wield  for  the  assembly,  or  sent 
out  into  the  world,  but  the  perfections  in  attribute 
which  characterise  the  actions  of  God  in  the  world. 
This  it  is  bears  light  now  into  the  world. 

Besides  these,  four  living  creatures  are  there  in  the 
circle  of  the  throne  itself  and  around  the  throne. 
They  may  be  viewed  as  forming  the  throne,  or  apart 
from  it,  though  connected  with  it  as  a  centre.  They 
have  some  of  the  characters  of  the  cherubim,  some  of 

IV. 


626  THE  BOOKS   OF  tHE  fitfitfi. 

the  seraphim,  but  somewhat  different  from  both.  They 
were  full  of  eyes,  before  and  behind,  to  see  all  things 
according  to  God,  and  within ;  having  also  six  wings ; 
perfect  in  inward  perception,  but  given  perception, 
and  in  the  celerity  of  their  motions.  They  embraced 
also  the  four  species  of  creation  in  the  ordered  earth : 
man,  cattle,  beast  of  the  field,  fowl  of  the  air :  these 
symbolising  the  powers  or  attributes  of  God,  them- 
selves worshipped  by  the  heathen,  here  only  the 
instruments  of  the  throne.  Him  who  sat  on  it  the 
heathen  knew  not.  The  intelligence,  firmness,  power, 
rapidity  of  execution  which  belong  to  God  were 
typified  as  elsewhere  by  them.  They  are  symbols. 
Divers  agents  may  be  the  instruments  of  their  activity. 
But  though  there  was  the  general  analogy  of  the 
cherubim,  judicial  and  governmental  power,  these  had 
a  peculiar  character. 

The  cherubim  in  the  temple  had  two  wings,  which 
formed  the  throne ;  they  looked  on  the  covenant,  and 
at  the  same  time,  as  of  pure  gold,  were  characterised 
by  the  divine  righteousness  of  the  throne  to  be 
approached.  In  Ezekiel  they  were  the  support  of  the 
firmament  above  which  the  God  of  Israel  was :  it  was 
a  throne  of  executive  judgment.  They  were  like 
burnished  brass,  and  like  fire — a  symbol  we  have 
considered  already.  They  had  four  wings :  two  to  fly 
with,  two  to  cover  themselves.  From  Ezekiel  x.  it 
appears  they  were  full  of  eyes  ("it  is  not  said  within") 
it  was  to  govern  what  was  outside,  according  to  God, 
not  divine  intelligence  within.  In  Isaiah  vi.  the 
seraphim  (or  burners)  have  six  wings  as  here ;  they  are 
above  the  throne,  and  cry  as  here.  Holy,  holy,  holy ! 
They,  with  a  burning  coal,  cleansed  the  prophet's  lips ; 
they  were  above  the  throne. 

The  symbols  used  here  become  clearer  through 
these  cases.  The  living  creatures  are  in  and  around 
the  throne ;  for  it  is  a  throne  of  executory  judgment, 


The  REVELAtioiT.  521 

witli  the  attributes  of  cherubim  united  to  it.  But  it 
is  not,  as  in  Israel,  mere  earthly  providential  judgment, 
a  whirlwind  out  of  the  north.  There  is  before  us  the 
government  of  all  the  earth,  and  executory  judgment 
according  to  the  holiness  of  God's  nature.*  There  is 
not  only  full  perception  of  all,  but  intrinsic  perception 
morally.  It  is  no  seat  of  gold  to  be  approached,  as  in 
the  tabernacle.  The  intrinsic  holiness  of  God  is 
applied  to  judgment.  He  is  making  good  His  nature 
and  character  in  all  creation.  Providence  would  be 
no  longer  a  riddle.  It  was  not  complex  attributes 
unsolved,  so  to  speak,  though  applied  in  special 
circumstances ;  each  act  would  have  its  character. 

Here  too  remark,  it  is  not,  as  in  the  first  chapter, 
the  God  who  is,  though  embracing  past  and  future, 
God  in  Himself ;  but  the  God  of  ages,  "  who  was,  and 
is,  and  is  to  come."  Still  He  has  all  Old  Testament 
names :  Jehovah,  Elohim,  Shaddai.  His  attributes  now 
celebrate  His  full  name,  as  the  Holy  One  who  lives 
for  ever  and  ever — has  no  passing  power  or  being, 
like  man  at  his  best  estate,  vanity.  And  the  saints 
here  fall  down  before  the  throne,  bow  themselves 
before  His  place  in  glory,  and  worship  Him  in  His 
endless  being,  and  lay  down  their  given  glory  before 
His  supreme  and  proper  glory,  ascribing  all  glory  to 
Him  alone,  as  alone  worthy  of  it ;  but  here,  according 
to  the  nature  of  the  celebration  of  it,  the  Creator  for 
whom  all  things  are.  In  all  changes  these  remained 
true. 

It  will  be  remarked  here,  that  the  living  creatures 
only  celebrate  and  declare ;  the  elders  woiship  with 
understanding.     All  through  the  Revelation  the  elders 


*  For  the  judgment  at  the  end,  though  governmental,  closing 
earth's  history,  was  not  merely  so  (cherubic),  but  according  to 
God's  holiness  and  nature  (seraphic),  particularly  as  in  Isaiah 
vi.,  a  known  God  in  Israel. 

IV. 


522  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLfi. 

give  their  reason  for  worshipping.  There  is  spiritual 
intelligence  in  them. 

Further,  remark,  that  when  thunderings  and  light- 
nings and  voices,  the  signs  of  terror  in  judgment,  go 
forth  from  the  throne,  the  throned  elders  remain 
unmoved ;  they  are  on  thrones  around  when  the 
throne  of  judgment  is  introduced.  This  is  their  place 
before  God  in  respect  of  judgment.  Whenever  He 
takes  judgment  in  hand  this  is  their  position.  They 
are  part  of  the  glory — assessors  of  the  throne  from 
which  its  terror  goes  forth.  When  He  that  sits  on  it 
is  celebrated,  they  are  all  activity,  own  all  glory  to  be 
His,  are  prostrate  on  their  faces,  and  cast  their  crowns 
before  Him,  more  blessed  in  owning  His  glory,  than  in 
possessing  their  own. 

We  do  not  find  the  Father  here;  it  is  Jehovah. 
And  indeed  should  we  ask  in  whom  He  is  personally 
displayed,  it  would  be,  as  always,  in  the  Son ;  but  it 
is  in  itself  simply  the  Jehovah  of  the  Old  Testament 
here. 

In  the  next  chapter  we  find  the  Lamb.  A  book 
was  in  the  right  hand  of  Him  who  sat  on  the  throne. 
It  was  counsels,  wielded  by  His  power.  Who  could 
open  them  and  bring  them  forth  to  execution  ?  Who 
had  the  title  to  do  so  ?  None  in  heaven  or  earth  but 
One.  The  elders  explained  to  the  prophet  who 
mourned  that  the  ways  of  God  should  be  shut  up,  that 
the  mighty  One  of  Judah,  the  true  source  of  all  pro- 
mises to  David,  had  prevailed  to  open  it  and  loose  the 
seals.  This  was  the  Lamb,  the  rejected  Messiah.  He 
was  more  than  this,  as  the  chapter  goes  on  to  shew ; 
but  He  is  this.  The  rejected  Messiah  was  in  the 
midst  of  the  divine  throne  ;  and  within  all  the  displays 
of  providence  and  grace — the  living  creatures  and 
elders — stood  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain.  He  had 
the  fulness  of  power  over  the  earth — seven  horns — as 
of  God,  and  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  for  government, 


THE  REVELATION.  52§ 

according  to  God's  perfection,  of  all  the  earth.  When 
He  has  taken  the  book,  the  living  creatures  and  elders 
fall  down  before  Him  with  golden  censers  full  of  the 
prayers  of  the  saints.     They  are  priests  here. 

Now  a  new  song  is  sung  to  celebrate  the  Lamb. 
What  seemed  His  dishonour  and  rejection  on  earth 
was  the  ground  of  His  worthiness  to  take  the  book. 
He  who  at  all  suffering  and  cost  to  Himself  had 
glorified  all  that  God  was,  was  able  and  worthy  to 
unfold  what  made  it  good  in  the  way  of  government. 
It  was  not  the  government  of  Israel,  but  of  all  the 
earth ;  not  merely  earthly  chastisements  according  to 
God's  revelation  of  Himself  in  Israel,  but  the  display 
in  power  of  all  God  was  in  the  whole  earth.  He  who 
had  glorified  all  He  was,  and  redeemed,  by  the  gospel 
of  what  He  was  through  His  death,  out  of  all  the 
earth,  was  the  fit  One  to  bring  it  forth  in  power.  He 
does  not  yet  come  forth ;  but  His  work  is  the  worthy 
instrument,  the  divine  motive,  for  the  display  of  it  all. 
He  can  unlock  the  seals  of  God's  ways  and  mysteries. 
I  read  the  passage  thus: — "Thou  wast  slain,  and  hast 
redeemed  to  God,  by  thy  blood,  out  of  every  kindred, 
&c.,  and  hast  made  them  unto  our  God  kings  and 
priests,  and  they  shall  reign  over  the  earth."  Thus  it 
is  not  any  particular  class,  but  the. value  of  the  act 
which  is  the  motive  of  praise,  and  all  being  confided 
to  Him. 

Here  the  angels  come  in  to  praise,  not  in  the  fourth 
chapter.  I  can  hardly  doubt  that  a  change  in  admin- 
istrative order  takes  place  here.  Until  the  Lamb  took 
the  book,  they  were  the  administrative  powder  ;  they 
were  the  instruments  through  w^iich  what  the  four 
living  creatures  symbolised  was  exercised  in  the  earth. 
"  But  unto  the  angels  hath  he  not  put  into  subjection 
the  world  to  come,  w^hereof  we  speak."  Hence,  as 
soon  as  the  Lamb  appears  and  takes  the  book,  as  soon 
as  the  idea  of  redemption  is  brought  in,  the  living 

V. 


524  THE  fiOOltS  OP  TfiE  BlfiLE. 

creatures  and  elders  are  brought  together,  and  the 
angels  take  their  own  place  apart.  Like  the  living 
creatures  before,  they  give  no  reason  for  their  praise. 
As  the  heads  of  creation  as  to  their  nature,  they  cele- 
brate with  all  creatures  the  title  to  glory  of  the  Lamb 
and  His  own  worthiness,  ascribing  praise  to  Him  that 
sits  on  the  throne  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever. 
The  four  living  creatures,  that  is,  all  the  exercise  of 
God's  power  in  creation  and  providence,  join  their 
Amen,  and  the  elders  worship  God  in  the  excellency 
of  His  being.  But  the  living  creatures  and  elders  are 
joined  (verse  8)  in  falling  down  before  the  Lamb.  I 
do  not  think  they  are  meant  to  be  distinguished  in 
the  latter  part  of  the  verse,*  but  merge  in  the  elders, 
symbolising  different  service  but  not  now  two  classes. 
Verse  9  is  the  general  fact ;  not  "  they  sung,"  but 
"  they  sing."  This  takes  place  in  heaven  ;  but  those 
named  are  in  the  mind  in  a  general  way.  Thus  the 
source  of  what  follows,  the  throne,  and  the  persons 
engaged  in  heaven  before  God  in  all  that  passes,  are 
displayed :  whence  the  judgment  flows,  who  surround 
the  throne  of  God  above,  and  who  is  in  it,  have  been 
brought  before  us ;  the  heavenly  scene,  and  choir,  and 
assistants. 

What  is  to  follow  on  earth  now  begins,  when  the 
seals  are  opened.  It  will  be  remarked  here,  that 
John,  standing  in  the  ruin  of  the  assembly,  gives 
prophetically  all  that  passes  from  that  failure  till 
Christ  comes  in  chapter  xix.  There  is  no  ascension, 
no  rapture,  save  so  far  as  chapter  xii.  gives  both 
together. 

The  first  seals  are  simple  ;  nor  have  I  anything  to 
offer  very  new  upon  them :  first,  imperial  conquests, 
then  wars,  then  famine,  then  pestilence,  carrying  with 

'■^'  That  is,  ix'^vut  does  not  apply  to  elders  only. 


THE   REVELATION.  525 

it  what  Ezekiel  calls  God's  four  sore  plagues  (sword, 
famine,  pestilence,  and  the  beasts  of  the  earth).  They 
speak  of  the  providential  course  of  God's  dealings, 
and  hence  the  four  beasts  call  attention  to  it ;  but 
they  have  God's  voice  in  them,  the  voice  of  the 
Almighty:  that,  the  ear  of  him  who  has  the  Spirit 
hears.  These  complete  providential  plagues,  as  spoken 
of  in  scripture.  Then  direct  judgments  follow  ;  but 
these  are  what  we  may  call  preparatory  measures. 

I  have  to  notice  that  in  the  full  plagues  of  verse  8 
the  whole  Roman  earth  is  not  included.  It  is  a  fourth, 
not  a  third.  The  plagues  too,  note,  are  limited  in 
extent  of  sphere,  not  universal. 

The  saints  are  those  whom  God  is  really  thinking 
of,  and  they  come  in  remembrance  before  other  scenes 
are  brought  out.  Those  who  had  been  martyred  for 
the  word  of  God  and  their  testimony  demand  how 
long  before  they  were  avenged  ;  for  we  have  ever  to  do 
here  with  a  God  of  judgment.  Their  being  under  the 
altar  means  simply  that  they  had  offered  their  bodies, 
as  sacrifices  for  the  truth,  to  God.  The  white  robes 
are  the  witness  of  their  righteousness — God's  de- 
clared approval  of  them ;  but  the  time  for  their  being 
avenged  was  not  yet.  I  do  not  think  giving  white 
robes  is  resurrection.  The  first  resurrection  is  sove- 
reign grace,  giving  us  the  same  place  with  Christ 
("  for  ever  with  the  Lord  "),  consequent  on  His  work 
and  His  being  our  righteousness,  which  is  alike  to  all 
of  us.  White  robes  thus  conferred  are  the  recognition 
of  the  righteousness  (S/Katwjuara)*  of  the  saints — hence 
are  seen  in  chapter  xix.  at  His  appearing.  "  They 
shall  walk  with  me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy."  I 
am   not  denying  that  we   are    made   clean,  and    our 


^=  It  is  very  possible  that  the  plural  "righteousnesses"  is  a 
Hebraism  for  righteousness.  It  is  a  common  case  iu  moral 
things      At  any  rate  it  is  of  the  saints. 

VI. 


626  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

robes  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  But,  even 
where  this  is  said  in  chapter  vii.,  I  think  it  refers 
especially  to  the  way  they  have  been  associated  by 
faith  with  the  suiferino-  position  of  Christ.  Here 
white  robes  are  given  them — their  service  owned  ;  but, 
for  avenging,  they  must  wait  till  a  new  scene  of 
persecution  had  brought  them  companions  who  had  to 
be  honoured  and  avenged  like  them.  Still  this  marks 
progress,  and  finds  its  cause  in  the  dealing  of  God  to 
bring  about  this  new  state  of  things,  which  issues  in 
final  judgment  and  setting  aside  of  evil.  Here  the 
judgments  are  providential. 

The  next  thing  to  the  claim  for  avenging  is  the 
breaking  up  of  the  whole  system  of  earthly  govern- 
ment, and  the  terror  of  all  on  earth.  How  clearly  we 
see  here  that  we  are  in  a  scene  of  judgment,  and  that 
God  is  a  God  of  judgment !  The  desires  of  the  saints 
are  like  the  desires  of  the  Psalms.  We  are  not  with 
children  before  the  Father,  with  grace,  with  the 
Gospel,  and  the  assembly;  but  with  Jehovah,  where 
Gnr^  ic!  a  God  of  judgment,  and  by  Him  actions  are 
weighed.  We  are  on  Old  Testament  ground,  that  is, 
piopiiecy,  not  grace  to  the  wicked,  though  judgment 
brings  in  blessing. 

The  opening  of  the  sixth  seal  brings  an  earthquake, 
that  is,  a  violent  convulsion  of  the  whole  structure  of 
society.  All  the  governing  powers  are  therein  visited ; 
and,  seeing  all  subverted,  small  and  great  think  (with 
bad  consciences  as  they  have)  that  the  day  of  the 
Lamb's  wrath  is  come.  But  it  is  not,  though  prepara- 
tory judgments  with  a  view  to  His  kingdom  are  there. 

But  God  thinks  too  of  His  saints  on  earth  (where, 
we  must  remember,  the  assembly  is  never  now  seen) 
before  the  scenes  which  follow,  whether  judgments  on 
the  Roman  earth  or  the  special  workings  of  evil,  to 
secure  and  seal  them  for  that  day. 

First,  the  perfect  number  of  the  remnant  of  Israel 


THE  REVELATION.  62? 

is  sealed,  before  the  providential  instruments  of  God's 
judgments  are  allowed  to  act ;  144,000=12  x  12  x  1000. 
They  are  secured  for  blessing  according  to  God's  pur- 
poses and  set  apart  by  Him ;  not  yet  seen  in  their 
blessings,  but  secured  for  them.  Afterwards  the  vast 
multitude  from  among  the  Gentiles  is  seen.  We  must 
remark  here,  there  is  no  previous  prophetic  announce- 
ment of  the  blessing  of  the  spared  ones  in  the  great 
tribulation  (not  the  three  years  and-a-half  of  Matthew 
xxiv. — this  refers  to  Jews — but  that  mentioned  in  the 
epistle  to  the  church  at  Philadelphia).  Hence  this  is 
fully  given  to  us  here,  and  we  are  distinctly  told 
who  they  are.  A  multitude  of  Gentiles  is  seen  stand- 
ing not  as  around  the  throne,  but  before  it  and  before 
the  Lamb,  their  righteousness  owned  and  themselves 
victorious.  They  ascribe  salvation  to  God  thus  re- 
vealed, that  is,  to  God  on  the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb. 
They  belong  to  these  earthly  scenes,  not  to  the 
assembly.  This  is  answered  by  the  angels  who  are 
around  the  throne,  the  elders,  and  the  living  creatures 
— all  together  composing  the  heavenly  part  of  the 
scene  already  connected  with  the  throne ;  the  angels 
surrounding  the  others,  which  form  the  centre  and 
immediate  circle  of  the  throne,  the  white-robed  multi- 
tude before  it.  The  angels  give  their  Amen,  and 
pronounce  the  praise  of  their  God  too. 

Al]  this  belonged  to  the  white-robed  multitude  and 
the  angels ;  only  the  former  speak  of  the  Lamb,  who 
was  also  their  salvation.  The  angels  add  their  Amen 
to  this;  but  praise  their  God.  They  had  ascribed 
glory  and  blessing  to  the  Lamb  before ;  but,  naturally, 
salvation  to  the  Lamb  was  not  their  own  part  of  the 
song.  But  the  four  living  creatures  and  the  elders  do 
not  worship  here,  because  their  own  relationships  were 
different,  and  these  are  not  what  are  spoken  of  here. 
They  are  found,  as  far  as  the  book  goes,  in  chapters  iv. 
arid  v.,  where  they  are  oji  thrones  around,  and  cast 


628  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

their  crowns  before  the  throne,  and  worship  Him  that 
liveth  for  ever  and  ever.  They  give  the  motives  of 
worship  according  to  the  relationships  they  are  in: 
that  of  the  angels  is  with  their  God  ;  of  the  white- 
robed  multitude,  with  the  God  of  the  throne  and  the 
Lamb  as  havincj  the  title  to  the  gov^ernment  and 
deliverance  of  the  earth  as  a  present  thing.  That  the 
Lamb  was  the  Son,  yea,  the  God  who  created  the 
angels,  is  not  the  question  here,  but  of  each  speak- 
ing in  his  own  relationship,  so  as  to  bring  these 
relationships  out. 

We  have  thus  the  heavenly  hosts,  the  glorified 
saints,  and  the  white-robed  multitude,  each  in  a  diffe- 
rent relationship,  but  the  first  and  the  last  thrown  in 
the  main  together — the  glorified  saints  forming  a  class 
apart.  They  do  not  worship  here.  But  one  of  the 
elders,  who  have  always  the  intelligence  of  God, 
explains  to  the  prophet  who  the  white-robed  multi- 
tude are.  It  formed  no  part  of  the  prophetic  revela- 
tion as  yet,  and  it  was  not  the  assembly's  own  place. 
"Sir,  thou  knowest,"  says  the  prophet.  They  had 
come  out  of  the  great  tribulation,  faithful  in  it,  their 
robes  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  They  were 
not  millennial  saints,  that  is,  born  in  that  time,  and 
subject  by  birth  to  the  responsibility  of  that  condition 
(which  grace  had  to  meet).  They  were  cleansed  and 
owned  to  be  so,  having  the  consciousness  of  it  and 
victory  when  the  others  began ;  so  that  they,  as 
already  cleansed  and  owned,  are  always  before  the 
throne  a  special  class,  and  serve  Him  day  and  night  in 
His  temple. 

This  at  once  distinguishes  them  from  the  heavenly 
worshippers;  there  is  no  temple  there;  the  Lord  God 
Ahnighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple.  He  that  sits 
on  the  throne  tabernacles  over  these,  as  once  over  the 
tabernacle.  They  are  not  only  as  Israel  in  the  courts, 
or  the  nations  in  the  world :  they  have  a  priest's  phu-e 


THE  REVELATION.  529 

in  the  world's  temple.  The  millennial  multitudes  are 
worshippers ;  these  priests.  As  Anna,  the  daughter 
of  Phanuel,  ever  in  the  temple  itself,  they  have 
always  access  to  the  throne.  But  they  had  blessings 
under  the  Lamb  also,  to  whom  they  alike  ascribe  their 
salvation — the  good  Shepherd  cast  out,  and  who  had 
passed  through  tribulation  Himself,  also  so  great, 
would  feed  them  ;  they  would  not  hunger  any  more 
or  thirst  any  more,  as  they  had  often  done;  nor 
should  persecution  or  tribulation  reach  them.  The 
Lamb,  as  known  in  this  transitional  time,  but  exalted 
in  the  throne,  would  feed  them  and  lead  them  to 
living  fountains  of  water.  It  is  not,  as  to  us,  the  pro- 
mise of  a  well  of  water,  springing  up  into  everlasting 
life,  and  flowing  out  as  a  river;  but  they  would  be 
fed,  refreshed,  and  perfectly  cared  for  by  the  Lamb's 
grace  whom  they  had  followed;  and  God  Himself 
would  wipe  all  tears  from  their  eyes.  They  would 
have  the  consolations  of  God,  worth  all  the  sorrows 
they  had  passed  through.  But  their  blessings  are 
consolations,  not  proper  heavenly  joy.  They  are  thus 
a  class  apart,  distinct  from  the  elders  or  heavenly 
saints,  and  distinct  from  millennial  saints  who  will 
never  see  tribulation,  having  a  known  position  fixed  in 
grace  before  God.  It  is  a  new  revelation  as  to  those 
passing  through  the  great  tribulation.  The  144,000  of 
chapter  xiv.  are  a  similar  class  from  among  the  Jews, 
coining  out  of  their  special  tribulation. 

Again,  divine  interest  in  the  saints,  brought  out 
into  action  by  the  effectual  intercession  of  the  great 
High  Priest,  brings  down  judgments  on  the  world. 
For  those  under  the  altar  there  was  no  intercession; 
they  were  perfected,  having  been  rejected  and  slain 
like  Christ.  There  are  saints  upon  the  earth  who  yet 
need  this  intercession,  so  that  their  cry  in  their  in- 
firmity should  be  heard  and  answered.  The  smoke  of 
the  incense  came  up  with  the  prayers  of  the  saints. 
YQU  V,  Vm.  MM 


630  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

The  great  Mediator  took  of  the  fire  off  the  altar,  put  it 
into  the  censer,  and  cast  it  on  the  earth.  The  interces- 
sion turned  into  judgments  in  the  answer,  and  the  signs 
of  God's  power  were  manifested,  and  subversion  of  order 
on  earth  followed — voices,  thunderings,  lightnings  (as 
when  the  throne  was  set),  and  an  earthquake. 

Then  follow  specific  judgments,  on  the  signal  being 
given  from  above.  They  fell  on  the  Roman  earth, 
the  third  part  of  the  earth.  (See  chap.  xii.  4.)  First, 
judgment  from  heaven,  hail  and  fire ;  and  violence  or 
destruction  of  men ;  on  earth  blood :  the  effect  was  the 
destruction  of  the  great  ones  in  the  Roman  earth,  and 
of  all  general  prosperity.  Next,  a  great  power,  as  the 
judgment  of  God,  was  cast  into  the  mass  of  peoples — 
still,  I  apprehend,  in  the  Roman  earth ;  for  destruc- 
tion of  men,  and  all  that  belonged  to  their  subsistence 
and  commerce  followed  in  those  limits.  Next,  one 
that  should  have  been  a  special  source  of  light  and 
order  in  government  fell  from  his  place,  and  corrupted 
the  moral  sources  of  popular  motives  and  feelings — 
what  governs  and  sways  the  people  so  as  to  characte- 
rise them.  They  became  bitter,  and  men  died  of  it. 
The  last  of  these  four  plagues  falls  on  the  governing 
powers,  and  puts  them  out  in  their  order,  as  from  God : 
all  in  the  limits  of  the  Roman  earth.  This  closed  the 
general  judgments,  subverting  and  producing  disaster 
and  confusion  in  the  Roman  earth,  where  the  power 
of  evil,  as  against  the  saints,  was. 

Woe  (specially  on  those  who  had  their  settled  place 
on  earth,  in  contrast  with  the  heavenly  calling,  and 
who  were  unawakened  and  unmoved  by  the  judgments 
on  the  earth,  but  clung  to  it  in  spite  of  all  as  their 
home,)  is  then  announced.  Threefold  woe  !  The  term 
"dwellers  on,"  or  "inhabiters  of,"  the  earth,  has  not 
yet  been  used,  save  in  the  promise  to  Philadelphia, 
and  the  claims  of  the  souls  under  the  altar :  for  both 
of  these  were  in  contrast  with  such.     After  all  these 


THE  REVELATION.  531 

dealings  of  God,  they  are  a  distinct  and  manifested 
class,  and  spoken  of,  in  what  passes  on  the  earth,  as 
such.  Against  this  perversely  unbelieving  class  the 
earthly  judgments  of  God  are  now  directed :  the  first, 
against  the  Jews  ;  the  second,  against  the  inhabitants 
of  the  Roman  earth ;  the  last,  universal. 

The  fifth  angel  sounds  (chap,  ix.) ;  and  one  who 
should  have  been  by  position  the  instrument  of  light 
and  governmental  order  over  the  earth  was  seen  as 
having  lost  his  place ;  and  the  power  to  let  loose  the 
full  darkening  infiuence  of  Satan  was  given  him.  He 
opened  the  bottomless  pit — the  place  where  evil  is 
shut  up  and  chained ;  not  where  it  is  punished,  that  is, 
the  lake  of  fire.  Supreme  authority,  and  all  heavenly 
light  over  the  earth,  and  healthful  influence  of  order, 
were  darkened  and  made  to  cease  by  the  evil  Satanic 
influence  which  was  let  loose.  Nor  was  this  all : 
direct  instruments  of  Satanic  power  came  out  of  this 
evil  influence  in  numbers;  crowds  of  moral  locusts 
with  the  sting  of  false  doctrine  in  their  tail.  But  it 
was  not  to  destroy  temporal  prosperity  on  the  earth, 
but  to  torment  the  ungodly  Jews ;  not  to  kill,  but  to 
harass  and  vex  them.  This  was  to  continue  five 
months ;  for  it  is  not  the  final  judgment.  The  tor- 
ment was  worse  than  death — pain  and  anguish  of 
heart.  But  they  had  the  semblance  of  military  im- 
perial power,  crowned,  and  with  masculine  energy,  to 
those  that  met  them  ;  but  they  were,  if  seen  behind 
and  the  secret  disclosed,  subject  and  weak :  their  faces 
were  as  the  faces  of  men,  their  hair  as  the  hair  of 
women.  But  they  were  armed  in  a  steeled  conscience. 
They  were  the  direct  instruments  of  the  power  of 
Satan,  and  under  his  orders.  The  angel  of  the  bottom- 
less pit — he  who  rules  the  depths  of  Satan's  wiles,  as 
the  ruler  of  the  power  of  darkness — led  them.  We 
are  too  unbelieving  as  to  the  direct  influence  of  Satan 
in  darkening  men's  minds  when  permitted,  when  men 

IX. 


632  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

are  given  up  to  his  darkening  influence.  Cruel  haras- 
sing torments,  worse  than  death,  with  dai-kening  of 
their  minds,  become  the  portion  of  the  once  beloved 
people.     One  woe  was  past. 

The  sixth  angel  sounds.  The  woe  which  follows 
is  much  more  human  and  providential.  It  is  directed 
against  the  inhabitants  of  the  Latin  Empire.  The 
instruments  of  it  are  let  loose  from  beyond  Euphrates 
— a  countless  crowd  of  horsemen.  But  they  were  not 
simply  such.  Their  consciences  and  their  words,  both 
were  in  the  power  of  Satan,  but  in  judgment  from 
God.  But  it  now  killed  men.  Their  mouths  belched 
forth  the  power  of  Satan,  and  their  influence  in 
doctrine  was  Satanic :  with  both  they  did  hurt.  I  do 
not  believe  this  death  here  is  mere  temporal  death 
(there  may  be  such),  but,  I  suspect,  making  apostates. 
The  rest,  who  did  not  thus  fall,  did  not  repent  of  their 
idolatry  and  misdeeds. 

These  were  preliminary  woes  on  the  body  of  Jews 
and  christianised  Gentiles,  not  the  direct  antagonism 
of  the  power  of  evil  with  God.  This  is  now  unfolded, 
but  first,  in  the  little  open  book,  put  in  its  place  in 
the  general  history.  (Chap,  x.)  The  book  is  open  as 
part  of  well-known  prophecy,  and  now  brought  to  a 
direct  issue  on  known  ground;  not  the  unrevealed 
and  more  unmanifest  ways  of  God  introducing  the 
final  issue.  Christ  comes  down  and  afiirms  His  right 
to  all  below ;  puts  His  rig] it  foot  on  the  sea,  the  left 
on  the  earth,  and  utters  the  voice  of  His  might,  to 
which  the  voice  of  the  Almighty  in  power  answers. 
But  its  revelations  were  sealed  up  ;  but  Christ  swears 
by  Him  who  lives  for  ever  and  ever  that  there  should 
be  no  more  delay.  All  things  are  drawing  to  a  final 
issue.  In  the  sounding  of  the  seventh  trumpet  the 
mystery  of  God  would  be  closed — His  direct  power 
come.  The  prophet  is  to  recommence  his  prophecy  as 
to  nations  and  tongues,  and  languages. 


THE  REVELATION.  533 

We  are  here  at  once  in  the  centre  of  prophetic 
subjects — Jerusalem,  the  temple,  the  altar,  and  wor- 
shippers. (Chap,  xi.)  The  worshippers  and  the  altar 
are  recognised  and  accepted  of  God — those  worship- 
ping in  the  secret  of  God  within.  The  general  pro- 
fession of  Judaism  is  rejected  and  disowned.  It  is 
given  up  to  be  trodden  down  under  the  Gentiles,  and 
that  for  the  half- week  of  sorrow.  Those  who  held 
the  place  of  priests  were  owned.  Real  worshippers, 
according  to  God's  mind,  were  there  and  owned;  and 
God  gave  also  an  adequate  testimony — two  witnesses 
— what  was  required  under  the  law ;  and  they  con- 
tinue day  by  day  constantly  to  give  witness  the 
whole  period,  or  half- week.  The  witnesses  were  in 
sorrow  and  reproach,  but  with  power;  as  Elias  and 
Moses  were  when  the  people  were  in  apostasy  and 
captivity.  It  was  not  the  re-establishment  of  Israel 
with  royalty  and  priesthood,  as  it  would  be  afterwards 
— the  candlestick  of  Zechariah  with  the  two  olive- 
trees — but  the  sufficient  witness  to  it.  Nor  could  they 
be  touched  while  the  half-week  of  their  prophecy 
lasted ;  their  word  brought  death  on  their  adversaries. 
We  have  priesthood  and  prophecy  in  the  remnant,  not 
of  course  royalty,  but  a  testimony  to  it  practically : 
suffering  marked  its  absence,  yet  none  could  touch 
them  till  their  time  were  come.  In  this  they  were  like 
Christ  in  His  humiliation  in  the  midst  of  Israel ;  only 
He  did  not  slay  His  enemies.  In  the  Psalms  He  marks 
it  out  as  the  remnant's  portion.  Complete  humilia- 
tion and  the  full  answer  of  God  to  their  prophetic 
word  marked  their  state.  But  when  they  had  finished 
their  testimony,  the  case  is  different.  They  had  to  do 
with  the  beast  out  of  the  bottomless  pit.  They  stood 
before  the  God  of  the  earth — not  preachers  of  heavenly 
gospel,  but  witnesses  of  God's  title  to  the  earth — of 
His  love  to  His  people  in  connection  with  it.  They 
bore  witness   to   God's   claim  when  hostile  Gentiles 

XI. 


THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

were  in  possession.  The  beast,  now  their  hour  is 
come,  slays  them,  and  their  bodies  are  cast  into  the 
highways  of  the  city.  Those  of  the  nations  rejoice 
over  them  and  make  merry.  The  dwellers  upon  earth, 
who  would  have  the  earth  theirs  and  ease  upon  it, 
were  delighted:  for  the  witnesses  of  the  God  of  the 
earth  tormented  them ;  but  in  three  days  and  a  half, 
quickened  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  they 
ascended  to  heaven  in  a  cloud,  not  as  Christ  did, 
apart,  but  in  the  sight  of  their  enemies.  A  tenth  of 
the  great  city  of  the  world  fell  at  the  same  time  in 
the  convulsion  that  took  place  on  the  earth ;  and  the 
remnant  are  affrighted,  and  give  glory  to  the  God  of 
heaven.  But  God  was  dealing  already  as  the  God  of 
the  earth.     The  second  woe  was  now  past. 

Thus  we  get  the  close  of  the  half  week  indicated ; 
the  seventh  trumpet  was  quickly  to  sound,  which  was 
to  finish  the  mystery  of  God.  It  sounds;  and  there 
were  great  voices  in  heaven  declaring  that  the  worldly 
kingdom  of  their  Lord  (Jehovah)  and  of  His  anointed 
(Christ)  was  come — the  greatest  woe  and  terror  of  all 
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  Satan's  woe  had  been 
specially  on  Jews  ;  man's  woe,  specially  on  the  men  of 
the  Latin  Empire ;  this  is  God's  woe  when  the  nations 
are  angry,  and  God's  wrath  is  come,  and  full  reckon- 
inor  and  final  deliverance  come.  We  have  aorain  the 
elders  here  announcing  the  reason  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving.  Voices  in  heaven  announce  the  fact  of 
the  reign  of  Jehovah  and  of  His  Christ  according  to 
Psalm  ii.,  and  that  He  (for,  as  ever,  John  unites  both 
in  one  thought)  should  reign  for  ever  and  ever ;  and 
so  it  will  be.  But  both  the  earthly  and  eternal  king- 
dom are  celebrated.  Only  in  the  eternal  kingdom  the 
distinction  of  the  worldly  kingdom  and  of  Christ's 
subordination  is  omitted.  In  the  thanksgiving  of  the 
elders,  Jehovah  Elohim  Shaddai  is  also  celebrated  ;  as 
the  great  King  who  takes  to  Him  His  power  and 


THE  REVELATION,  535 

reigns ;  for  it  is  God's  kingdom.  We  have  two  parts 
in  their  statement :  the  nations  angry — this  brings  in 
the  time  of  God's  wrath ;  and  the  time  of  the  dead  to 
be  judged.  This  is  the  first  half:  man's  wrath,  and 
God's  judgment.  Then  He  gives  reward  to  prophets, 
saints,  and  all  that  fear  His  name,  and  sets  aside  from 
the  earth  those  who  corrupted  it.  This  is  blessing. 
The  first  part  is  general,  the  time  of  wrath  and  judg- 
ment; the  second  is  reward  and  deliverance  of  the 
saints  on  earth.  This  closes  entirely  the  main  sym- 
bolic history.  The  last  trumpet  has  sounded,  and  the 
mystery  of  God  is  closed. 

In  what  follows  we  have  details :  the  beast,  and  the 
connection  of  the  assembly  and  Jews  with  it ;  Babylon ; 
and  then  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb;  judgments  of 
beast  and  false  prophet ;  binding  of  Satan  ;  two  resur- 
rections, and  final  judgment;  and  the  description  of 
the  heavenly  city.  But  this  new  prophecy  begins 
(chap.  xi.  19),  as  to  earthly  prophetic  dealing,  with 
special  reference  to  the  Jews.  The  temple  of  God  is 
opened  in  heaven,  the  ark  of  His  covenant,  which 
refers  to  Israel  is  seen  there.  But  judgment  cha- 
racterises it  now ;  judgments  of  all  kinds,  those  com- 
ing down  from  above,  and  subversion  and  disaster 
below.* 

Chapter  xii.  gives  us  a  brief  but  all-important 
summary  of  the  whole  course  of  events,  viewed,  not 
in  their  instruments  on  earth  or  the  judgment  of 
these,  but  the  divine  view  of  all  the  principles  at 
work,  the  state  of  things  as  revealed  of  God.  The 
first  symbolical  person,  subject  of  the  prophecy  and 
result  of  all  God's  ways  in  it,  is  a  woman  clothed  with 
the  sun,  having  a  crown  of  twelve  stars,  and  the  moon 

*  Where  the  throne  is  set  for  judgment,  it  is  characterised 
only  by  what  proceeds  directly  from  God.  There  are  no  earth- 
quakes and  hail ;  here  there  are. 

XI.,  XIL 


536  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

under  her  feet.  It  is  Israel,  or  Jerusalem  as  its  centre* 
as  in  the  purpose  of  God  (compare  Is.  ix.  6,  and  Ps- 
Ixxxvii.  6).  She  is  clothed  with  supreme  authority, 
invested  with  the  glory  of  perfect  administration  in 
man,  and  all  the  original  reflected  glory  of  this  under 
the  old  covenant,  under  her  feet.  She  was  travailing 
in  childbirth,  distressed,  and  in  pain  to  be  delivered  :  on 
the  other  hand  Satan's  power  in  the  form  of  the  Roman 
Empire,  complete  in  forms  of  power,  seven  heads,  but 
incomplete  in  administrative  supremacy — ten,  not 
twelve  horns.  But  Satan,  as  the  open  infidel  enemy 
of  God  and  God's  power  in  Christ,  sought  to  devour 
the  child  as  soon  as  born,  who  was  to  have  the  rule 
of  the  earth  from  God.  But  the  child,  Christ,  and  the 
assembly  with  Christ,  is  caught  away  to  God  and  His 
throne— does  not  receive  the  power  yet,  but  is  placed 
in  the  very  source  of  it  from  which  it  flows.  It  is  not 
t^e  rapture  as  regards  joy ;  for  it  goes  back  to  Christ 
Himself,  but  the  placing  Him  and  the  assembly  in  and 
with  Him,  in  the  seat  from  which  power  flows  for  the 
establishment  of  the  kingdom.  There  is  no  time  for 
this :  Christ  and  the  assembly  are  all  one.  But  the 
woman— the  Jews,  after  this  fly  into  the  wilderness, 
where  God  has  prepared  a  place  for  them,  for  the 
half-week. 

The  assembly,  or  heavenly  saints,  (as  Christ,  note,) 
go  up  to  heaven  to  be  out  of  the  way.  The  Jews,  or 
earthly  ones,  are  protected  by  providential  care  upon 
earth.  This  gives  the  whole  state  of  things,  and 
those  in  view  in  this  scene,  and  their  respective  places. 
She  that  is  to  have  glory  and  hold  power  in  the  earth 
is  cast  out.  The  child  that  is  to  have  power,  in  and 
from  heaven,  is  previously  taken  up  there.  This  makes 
the  position  very  clear. 

The  historical  course  of  events  is  now  pursued,  the 
child  being  supposed  to  be  already  caught  up.  There 
is  war  in  heaven;  and  the  devil  and  his  angels  are 


THE  REVELATION.  537 

cast  out,  and  have  no  more  place  there.  This  brings 
out  yet  more  clearly  the  distinction  of  the  heavenly 
saints  and  the  Jewish  remnant.  The  heavenly  ones 
had  overcome  the  accuser  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
and  the  word  of  their  testimony ;  the  woman's  seed 
have  the  commandments  of  God  and  the  testimony 
of  Jesus  Christ,  that  is,  the  Spirit  of  prophecy. 
What  they  have  of  God  in  the  word  is  according  to 
the  Old  Testament. 

But,  to  follow  up  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter,  a 
loud  voice  proclaims  in  heaven  that  the  kingdom  of 
our  God  and  the  power  of  His  Christ  is  come — the 
testimony  still  of  the  second  Psalm ;  only  as  yet  it 
was  only  proclaimed  from  heaven,  where  the  power  of 
the  kingdom  was  already  made  good  by  the  casting 
down  of  Satan.  Satan's  anti-priestly  power  v^as  over 
for  ever.  King  and  prophet  he  might  yet  put  on ; 
but  his  heavenly  place  was  past.  The  saints  of  the 
heavenlies  had  overcome  him  by  that  which  made 
their  conscience  and  their  title  to  heaven  good — the 
blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  w^ord  of  their  mouth, 
God's  sword  by  the  Spirit — and  gave  up  their  lives  to 
the  death.  The  heavens  and  the  dwellers  there  could 
now  rejoice ;  but  it  w^as  woe  to  the  inhabiters  of  earth 
and  sea;  for  the  devil  had  come  down,  knowing  he 
had  but  a  little  time  left.  I  think  verse  11  implies 
that  there  are  saints  killed  after  the  rapture,  who  yet 
belong  to  heaven.  If  there  were  such  killed  because 
of  their  faithfulness,  were  they  not  taken  up,  they 
would  lose  earth  and  heaven,  though  more  devoted 
than  those  who  had  earth.  We  see  them  moreover  in 
chapter  xx.  in  the  first  resurrection.  The  souls  under 
the  altar  also  had  to  wait  for  others — their  brethren 
who  had  to  be  killed,  as  they  were  ;  and  we  are  to 
note  here  that  those  celebrated  as  happy  are  the  slain 
ones,  none  others.  Yet  it  is  before  the  last  three 
years  and  a  half. 

xn. 


538  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

So  that  we  have  these  three  parties  in  view:  the 
voice  of  those  in  heaven ;  (our)  their  brethren  who  had 
overcome ;  and  those  who  would  be  in  the  three  years 
and  a  half  of  Satan's  rage,  which  had  not  yet  begun. 
Now,  if  the  man-child  in  heaven  be,  as  we  have  con- 
sidered it,  Christ  and  the  raptured  saints,  the  voice 
would  be  that  of  those  already  there,*  and  all  self- 
evident  :  the  raptured  saints  associated  with  Him 
celebrate  the  castino-  down  of  the  accuser  and  the 
deliverance  of  those  who  belons^ed  to  heaven,  callinor 
them  "our  brethren" — the  brethren  whose  conflict 
with  the  accuser  was  over,  as  he  was  now  cast  down, 
but  who  had  had  to  resist  him  as  a  heavenly  potentate, 
an  anti-priest,  all  which  part  is  mystery  for  John — and 
those  who  now  would  be  in  trial,  when  he  would  act 
with  rage  on  earth,  as  king  and  prophet.  For  the 
dragon,  cast  to  the  earth  and  unable  to  accuse  in 
heaven  or  oppose  saints  having  a  heavenly  calling 
(and  the  priesthood  refers  to  such,  not  to  union), 
persecutes  the  Jews,  and  seeks  to  destroy  their  testi- 
mony; but  God  gave,  not  power  of  resistance — the 
Lord  must  come  to  deliver — but  power  to  flee  and 
escape  and  find  refuge  where  she  was  nourished  the 
whole  half-week  out  of  the  serpent's  reach.  He  seeks 
to  pursue ;  wings  he  has  none :  but  he  uses  a  river,  the 
movements  of  people  under  the  influence  of  special 
motive  and  guidance,  to  overwhelm  the  woman.  But 
the  earth,  this  organised  system  in  which  men  live, 
swallowed  the  waters  up.  This  influence  was  in  vain 
— was  not  met  by  an  army,  a  counter-power,  but  was 
nulliiied.  There  was  such  a  disposition  or  course  of 
the  earth  as  neutralised  the  effort  wholly.  So  God 
ordered  in  His  providence ;  and  the  dragon  turned  to 
persecute  individually  the  faithful  remnant  of  the 
seed — the  Jews  who  held  fast  by  the  word. 

*  I  do  not  continue  to  put  the  voice  as  Christ's.  The  appli- 
cation to  Him  is  too  questionable. 


THE  REVELATION.  639 

In  chapter  xiii.  we  have  the  clear  and  full  develop- 
ment of  Satan's  instruments  of  evil.  They  are  tvpo — 
the  ten-horned  and  the  two-horned  beasts.  To  the 
first  the  dragon,  who  swept  with  his  tail  a  third  part 
of  the  stars  to  earth,  Satan  under  the  form  of  the 
Roman  Empire,  gave  his  throne  and  much  authority.* 
The  second  not  only  wielded  the  first  power  adminis- 
tratively before  him,  but  was  the  active  power  of  evil 
to  lead  men  to  recognise  the  first,  and  therein  the 
dragon.  The  beast  is  the  original  Roman  Empire,  but 
largely  modified  and  in  a  new  character.  It  has  per- 
fect completeness  in  its  forms  of  government  or  heads, 
but  is  composed  of  ten  kingdoms,  indicating  also,  I 
doubt  not,  imperfect  administrative  completeness.  It 
has  not  twelve  horns  ;  it  is  incomplete.  Seven  would 
be  completeness  of  a  higher  kind.  The  Lamb  had 
seven  horns ;  the  woman,  twelve  stars  on  her  head. 
One  is  perfectness  in  itself;  the  other  administratively 
in  man.  Seven  is  the  highest  prime  number  (you 
cannot  make  it) ;  twelve,  the  most  perfectly  divisible, 
composed  of  the  same  elements,  but  multiplied,  not 
added  as  a  simple  number.  So  four  is  finite  perfec- 
tion, as  is  a  square  and  still  more  a  cube,  perfectly  the 
same  all  ways  but  finite.  But  the  beast  had  names  of 
blasphemy.  It  was  the  open  enemy  of  God  and  His 
Christ.  It  absorbed  the  previous  empires  and  re- 
presented them.  The  dragon,  Satan's  direct  power 
in  the  form  of  the  heathen  Roman  Empire,  gave  his 
throne  and  power  to  this  new  beast.  It  was  not  of 
God.  God  owned  no  power  on  the  earth  now  the 
assembly  was  gone,  till  He  took  His  own.  The  earth 
was  at  war  with  Him. 

One  of  the  beast's  "heads  (I  doubt  not  the  Imperial) 
was   seen   as   wounded   to   death,   but   healed.     The 

*  We  are  not  to  be  surprised,  therefore,  if  the  beast  at  the  end 
had  only  local  empire,  though  originally  God  had  given  universal 
empire  to  the  beasts :  how  widely  exercised  we  know. 
XIIL 


640  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

Imperial  head  was  restored  and  the  world  was  in 
admiration;  and  they  worship  the  dragon  as  giv- 
ing the  beast  his  power.  Nothing  in  their  eyes  equals 
the  beast ;  but  God  is  wholly  thrown  off  in  the  earth. 
The  beast  is  given  to  have  the  greatest  pretensions  in 
his  language  and  outrage  against  God.  He  blasphemed 
God,  His  name  and  dwelling-place,  and  the  heavenly 
saints — all  Christianity,  and  the  God  of  it.  The  dragon 
had  been  cast  out  from  heaven;  the  raptured  saints 
had  been  received  there.  He  blasphemed,  but  could 
only  blaspheme  them. 

As  regards  those  who  dwelt  on  earth  (for  the  divi- 
sion was  not  merely  a  spiritual  one  now),  all  wor- 
shipped the  beast,  save  the  elect — those  who  had  been 
written  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  in  the 
Lamb's  book  of  life.  Human  resistance  by  force  was 
not  the  path  of  obedience.  Here  the  patience  and 
faith  of  the  saints  were  shewn.  He  who  took  the 
sword  would  perish  by  it ;  it  is  never  Christ's  way, 
but  unresisting  patience  ;  but  the  beast  who  did  would 
perish.  This  then  was  the  imperial  power,  a  blas- 
phemous power  set  up  by  Satan,  with  the  place  of  the 
old  Roman  Empire,  which  represented  all  four,  modified 
in  form,  but  the  imperial  head  restored. 

But  there  was  a  second  beast ;  it  rose  not  out  of  the 
mass  of  peoples  (the  sea)  to  be  an  empire,  but  out  of 
the  already  formed  organisation  with  which  God  had 
to  say  as  such.  It  had  the  form  of  Messiah's  kingdom 
on  earth,  two  horns  like  a  lamb ;  but  it  was  the  direct 
power  of  Satan.  He  who  with  a  divinely  taught  ear 
heard  it  speak  heard  the  voice  of  Satan  at  once.  All 
the  power  of  the  first  beast  it  exercises  before  it ;  is, 
with  its  power,  its  minister,  and  makes  the  earth  and 
the  dwellers  on  it  worship  it  (that  is,  the  Roman 
Empire  restored  to  its  head).  It  is  Antichrist,  the 
false  Christ  of  Satan,  who  subjects  the  earth  to  the 
Satanic  Roman  Empire.     He  does  great  wonders,  so 


THE  REVELATION.  641 

as  to  give  men  as  good  proof  of  the  beast's  title  before 
men,  as  Elijah  did  of  Jehovah's.  Compare  2  Thessa- 
lonians  ii.,  where  the  man  of  sin  gives  the  same  proofs, 
if  lying  ones,  that  Jesus  did  of  being  the  Christ.  He 
deceives  the  dwellers  on  earth  by  his  miracles,  mak- 
ing them  set  up  an  image  to  him.  This  image  he 
gives  breath  to ;  so  that  it  speaks  and  causes  those  to 
be  killed  who  do  not  worship  it.  All  likewise  were 
obliged  to  take  the  stamp  and  the  mark  of  the  beast's 
service  in  their  work,  or  open  profession,  and  no  man 
was  allowed  to  traffic  who  had  not  the  name  of  the 
beast  as  a  mark. 

Such  is  the  power  which  has  the  character  of 
Messiah's  kingdom  in  its  form,  is  animated  with  the 
fullest  energy  of  Satan,  and,  recognising  the  public 
power  which  Satan  had  set  up  in  the  world,  will  have 
every  one  bow  to  it,  none  to  traffic  without  acknow- 
ledging it.  And  all  will,  save  the  elect.  The  anti- 
priestly  power  of  Satan  in  the  heavens  is  over ;  royalty 
and  prophecy  as  yet  remain  to  him,  in  opposition  to 
Christ  who  has  not  yet  appeared.  These  he  assumes ; 
but  he  does  not  and  cannot  set  aside  the  power  of  the 
Gentiles — that  remains  for  Christ  to  do — but  sets  it 
up  as  his  delegate  ;  and,  as  the  apostate  Jews  of  old, 
so  now  that  people,  save  the  elect  remnant,  as  his 
instruments  bow  to  it  and  minister  to  it.  Thus  you 
have  all  Satan's  power  exercised.  But,  in  setting  up 
his  Messiah,  he  is  obliged  to  deceive ;  and  advances  by 
his  miracles  of  deceit  what  he  cannot  set  aside — the 
Gentile  power;  and  subjects  the  Jews  to  idolatry  and 
to  the  Gentiles  ;  and  all  the  Gentiles  themselves  dwell- 
ing on  the  earth  to  the  depository  of  Satan's  authority 
— the  first  beast. 

This  is  a  singular  state  of  things,  far  from  Jewish 
feelings  and  modern  Gentile  hopes;  but  the  unclean 
spirit  of  idolatry  is  to  return  to  his  house.  Signs,  not 
t-ruth,  will  govern  the  superstitious   mind   of  man: 


642  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

they  will  be  given  up  to  believe  a  lie.  Here,  though 
he  takes  the  character  of  Christ  in  his  kingdom,  it  is 
chiefly  his  action  on  the  Gentiles  which  is  spoken  of; 
the  Jews  are  mixed  up  with  them,  as  we  see  in  Isaiah 
Ixvi.,  and  Daniel.  It  is  a  liberal  time,  but  one  of  most 
complete  tyranny  as  regards  all  who  do  not  bow  to 
Satan's  power  and  the  ordinances  established  by  him. 
What  characterises  it  is  the  absence  of  truth. 

As  regards  the  number  of  the  beast,  I  have  no  doubt 
that  it  will  be  very  simple  to  the  godly,  when  the 
beast  is  there,  and  the  time  of  spiritually  judging  it 
comes,  and  that  name  will  practically  guide  those  who 
have  to  do  with  him.  Till  then,  the  speculations  of  men 
are  not  of  much  value ;  Irenseus's  old  one  of  Aaruvog 
is  as  good  as  any. 

In  chapter  xiv.  we  have  the  dealings  of  God  with 
the  evil,  only  first  owning  and  setting  apart  the 
remnant.  The  remnant  belongs  entirely  to  the  re- 
newed earth :  they  are  seen  on  that  which  is  the 
centre  of  dominion  and  glory  in  it — Mount  Zion, 
where  the  Lamb  shall  reign.  They  had  His  and  His 
Father's  name  on  their  foreheads ;  that  is,  by  their 
open  confession  of  God  and  the  Lamb  they  had  been 
witnesses  of  it,  and  suffered  as  Christ  had  suffered  in 
His  life  in  owning  God  His  Father :  only  they  had  not 
su tiered  death.  It  was  a  new  beginning,  not  the 
assembly,  not  heavenly,  but  the  blessing  of  a  delivered 
earth  in  its  firstfruits  in  those  who  had  suffered  for 
the  testimony  to  it.  Heaven  celebrates  it  with  a 
voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  of  thunder,  but  with 
joy.  This  voice  was  the  voice  of  harps.  A  new  song 
is  sung  before  the  throne  and  beasts  and  elders. 
Here  the  fact  is  the  important  thing.  There  had  been 
a  song  in  and  of  heaven,  in  chapter  v.,  in  connection 
with  redemption ;  but  those  who  were  redeemed  there 
were  made  kings  and  priests.  Here  it  was  redemp- 
tion in  connection  with  earthly  blessings,  not  with 


THE  REVELATION.  543 

the  kingdom  and  priesthood  on  high ;  and  it  is  sung 
before  the  heavenly  company  and  throne.  Heaven 
however  is  directly  connected  with  the  song.  It  was 
connected  with  triumph  over  the  power  of  evil  by 
patient  endurance  of  suffering. 

What  specially  characterised  them  was  purity  from 
the  contamination  that  surrounded  them.  This  pass- 
ing through  sorrow  and  overcoming  connects  them 
directly  with  the  heavenly  conquerors.  It  was  not 
the  new  song  of  heavenly  redemption;  still  it  was 
victory  when  down  at  the  gates  of  death,  though  not 
actually  in  it.  It  was  "  as  it  were  a  new  song."  This 
none  could  learn  but  those  who  had  shared  the 
earthly  sufferings  of  the  Lamb,  and  would  now  be  His 
companions  in  His  earthly  royalty;  they  had  followed 
Him,  they  would  follow  Him  whithersoever  He  went. 
They  are  the  firstfruits  of  the  new  scene.  They  had 
not  corrupted  themselves  where  all  did.  They  were 
not  of  those  who  loved  or  made  a  lie,  or  gave  in  to  it. 
Corruption  and  falsehood  they  had  been  kept  free 
from,  openly  confessing  the  truth.  They  had  not  the 
heavenly  place,  but  they  are  without  faulfc,  and  they 
share  the  Lamb's  earthly  place  and  glory,  accompany- 
ino-  Him  whithersoever  He  ooes,  in  the  manifestation 
of  that  glory.  All  that  led  to  these  privileges  had  no 
place  when  once  the  kingdom  was  set  up.  It  was 
then  too  late  to  shew  faithfulness  in  this  way.  There 
is  a  connection  with  the  heavenly  saints  which  is  not 
in  chapter  vii.  The  white -robed  multitude  stood 
before  the  throne  and  the  Lamb.  They  are  before  the 
throne  of  God,  they  worship  in  His  temple,  and  the 
Lamb  comforts  them.  Here  there  is  special  associa- 
tion with  the  Lamb  on  earth,  in  their  path  and  in 
their  consequent  place.  It  is  the  remnant  of  the 
Psalms  (especially  i.-xli.)  But,  though  on  earth  with 
the  King,  they  are  redeemed  from  auiong  men  before 
Christ  comes  to  earth ;  and  the  song  they  learn  tQ 
^V. 


544  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

sing  is  sung  before  the  elders  and  living  creatures. 
They  are  not  with  them,  but  they  sing  the  song  sung 
before  them ;  that  is,  the  Gentile  multitude  are  ad- 
mitted to  special  privileges  before  God  and  the  Lamb ; 
the  Jewish  remnant  are  associated  with  the  Lamb  on 
earth,  and,  in  a  certain  sense,  with  heaven. 

The  progress  of  God's  ways  follows — warning  to 
the  earth  to  leave  idolatry ;  for  the  hour  of  God's 
judgment  was  come.  The  everlasting  gospel  is  the 
testimony  of  Christ's  power,  from  paradise  onward,  as 
in  contrast  with  the  special  announcement  of  the  as- 
sembly, and  glad  tidings  connected  with  it.  Babylon 
is  announced  to  be  fallen;  threats  and  warnings  to 
any  that  should  own  the  beast ;  but  the  time  is  now 
come  when  dying  in  the  Lord  was  to  cease ;  only  their 
blessedness  remained  henceforth.  Dj^ing  and  tribula- 
tion were  over.  They  are  looked  at  as  one  whole 
body ;  and  while  any  remained  yet  to  die,  they  were 
diers  in  the  Lord,  not  rested  and  blessed.  Now  their 
rest  is  come,  and  their  reward. 

Christ  then  reaps  the  earth — separating,  gathering, 
and  judgment;  and  treads  the  winepress,  exercises 
unmingled  vengeance  on  the  wicked.  Hence  in  this 
last  judgment  it  is  the  angel  who  had  the  power  over 
fire  who  calls  for  it;  it  was  full  divine  judgment. 
This  judgment  was  not  within  the  limits  of  Babylon 
— was  not  in  the  sphere  in  which  man  had  formed 
and  ordered  his  organisation  in  opposition  to  God. 
This  closes  the  whole  scene  of  that  which  the  history 
had  begun  by  the  catching  up  of  the  Man-child  to 
heaven.     He  has  returned  in  vengeance. 

An  interesting  question  here  arises — What  is  the 
vine  of  the  earth  ?  It  is  that  which  is  the  fruit- 
bearing  organisation,  or  what  should  be  so  (that  is  the 
idea  of  it),  in  professed  connection  with  God,  as  His 
planting  in  the  earth.  Israel  was  the  vine  bj'ought 
out  of  Egypt.    Christ  on  earth  was  the  true  vine. 


THE  REVELATION.  545 

It  is  not  connection  witli  Him  in  heaven.  There  we 
are  looked  at  as  perfect,  not  to  bear  fruit  and  be 
pruned.  But  analogously  it  went  on  after  He  had 
ascended  on  high,  and  professing  Christians  are  the 
branches.  But  here  it  is  the  vine  of  the  earth,  that 
which  has  its  character  and  growth  therein,  but  with 
the  pretension  to  take  the  religious  place  by  succes- 
sion on  the  earth.  The  true  saints  are  gone  on  high, 
or  are  a  persecuted  individual  remnant.  I  have  no 
doubt  the  Jews  will  be  the  centre  of  that  system 
then,  but  they  will  be  mixed  up  with  Gentiles,  have 
turned  to  idolatry,  and  have  seven  spirits  worse 
than  that ;  and  the  apostate  Gentiles  will  be  fully  as- 
sociated with  it  all.  (See  Isaiah  xxxiv.,  Ixiii.,  Ixv.,  Ixvi.) 

Chapter  xv.  is  a  new  vision.  It  unrolls  before  the 
prophet  another  scene,  the  last  plagues  or  judgments 
of  God,  and  specially  that  of  Babylon,  before  Christ 
comes.  The  main  object  of  the  vision  was  the  seven 
angels,  having  the  seven  last  plagues ;  but,  as  ever, 
the  saints  who  have  to  do  with  this  scene  are  seen  in 
security  before  the  judgments  begin.  They  have  beep 
purified,  but  have  come  through  the  fire  of  tribulation 
too.  They  stand  on  a  sea  mingled  with  fire.  They 
have  belonged  to  the  time  when  the  beast  and  his 
image  were  in  power,  but  they  had  got  the  victory 
over  it.  They  seemed  perhaps  to  have  succumbed — it 
was  real  victory. 

Their  song  is  very  peculiar.  The  song  of  Moses  is 
triumph  over  the  power  of  evil  by  God's  judgments. 
The  song  of  the  Lamb  is  the  exaltation  of  the  re- 
jected Messiah,  of  the  suffering  One,  like  whom  they 
had  suffered ;  for  it  is  the  slain  remnant  amidst 
unfaithful  and  apostate  Israel  whom  we  find  here. 
The  song  celebrates  God  and  the  Lamb,  but  by  vic- 
torious s-ufferers  who  belong  to  heaven.  What 
they  celebrate  are  tlie  works  of  Jehovali  Elohim 
Shaddai  (the  God  of  the  Old  Testament),  but  who  now 
VOL.   v.  XV.  N-N 


546  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

has  manifested  Himself  in  judgment,  known  by  His 
works  that  are  public  for  the  people.  He  shewed 
His  ways  unto  Moses,  His  works  unto  the  children  of 
Israel.  His  works  are  celebrated  now.  They  are  the 
works  of  Jehovah  Elohim  Shaddai,  the  Judge  of  all 
the  earth.  But  His  ways  are  celebrated  too.  There 
was  intelligence  of  them,  as  far  at  least  as  righteous 
judgment  went.  These  ways  in  judgment  were  just 
and  true.  Israel  would  understand  deliverance,  and 
how  it  came ;  but  Moses  knew  God's  ways.  But  this 
is  all.  It  is  not  merely  celebration  of  qualities  and 
attributes,  as  the  angels  do,  nor  the  full  knowledge  of 
God's  work  in  salvation  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 
It  is  not  the  heart  going  up  in  the  sense  of  its  own 
relationship,  but  a  celebration  of  the  glory  of  the 
Lord,  who  would  now  be  worshipped  by  the  nations, 
for  His  judgments  were  manifested.  It  was  intelli- 
gence when  judgments  were  manifested,  not  when  all 
was  yet  to  be  learned  within  the  veil. 

This  celebration  of  what  was  just  bursting  forth 
being  made,  the  temple  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testi- 
niony  in  heaven  was  opened,  not  merely  the  temple 
with  the  ark  of  the  covenant  seen.  That  secured  the 
result  for  faith,  when  evil  was  raging  in  power  on 
earth;  the  ark  of  God's  covenant  secured  Israel.  It 
was  a  testimony  opened  out,  not  a  covenant  which 
secured  in  the  hour  of  evil,  but  a  testimony  which 
made  good  what  the  ark  of  the  covenant  secured ;  for 
the  temple  was  opened,  and  the  messengers  of  judg- 
ment came  forth — God's  judgment  for  the  restoration 
and  blessing  of  Israel,  by  the  judgment  of  the  Gen- 
tiles and  all  who  corrupted  the  earth.  Cleanness  in 
God's  sight,  and  divine  righteousness,  characterised  and 
animated  this  judgment — clean  linen  pure  and  white, 
and  golden  girdles  :  I  apprehend  the  former,  in  answer 
to  corruption  in  what  should  have  had  this — Babylon. 
(Compare  chap.  xix.  8.)     That  is,  it  was  a  judgment 


THE    REVELATION.  547 

which  required  it,  and  was  according  to  it,  and  also  to 
divine  righteousness.  It  is  not  brass  burning  in  the 
fire — simply  execution  of  judgment  in  dealing  with 
men,  though  that  took  place — but  God  making  good 
His  own  nature  and  character  against  corruption,  the 
essential  character  of  the  eternal  God,  which  the 
assembly  ought  to  have  displayed ;  whereas  Babylon 
was  entirely  the  contrary,  and  the  beast  too.  The 
seven  angels  judge  all  according  to  these  characters  of 
God,  because  it  was  really  the  avenging  of  what  God 
was,  as  fully  revealed  to  the  assembly ;  but  the  white 
linen  refers,  I  doubt  not,  specially  to  Babylon,  though 
the  men  wdth  the  mark  of  the  beast  would  come  under 
the  judgment.  One  of  the  four  living  creatures  gives 
the  vials ;  for  it  is  the  judicial  power  of  God  in  crea- 
tion, not  yet  the  Lamb,  God's  glory  in  judgment  filled 
the  temple ;  and  no  man  could  have  to  say  to  Him  in 
worship,  or  approaching  Him,  while  these  plagues  were 
executing.    It  was  the  full  display  of  God  in  judgment. 

The  first  four  plagues  have  the  same  objects  as  the 
judgments  of  the  first  four  trumpets — the  whole  circle 
of  symbolic  nature,  but  here  directly  as  regards  men — 
earth,  sea,  rivers,  and  sun ;  the  ordered  prophetic 
sphere  of  God's  dealings,  the  masses  of  peoples  as 
such  viewed  as  unorganised,  the  moral  principles 
which  give  an  impulse  to  their  movements,  and  sove- 
reign authority.  But  it  is  not  a  third  here  (that  is, 
the  Roman  earth),  but  in  general 

The  first  vial  of  wrath  brought  the  utmost  distress 
and  shameful  misery  on  all  who  had  taken  the  mark 
of  the  beast. 

The  second  brought  the  power  of  moral  death  on 
the  mass  of  peoples ;  all  who  were  among  them  within 
the  limits  of  the  prophetic  earth,  died — I  apprehend, 
gave  up  mere  outward  profession.  We  have  here  an 
example  of  the  use  of  symbols  which  it  is  well  to  note. 
All  tlie  vials  are  poured  out  on  the  earth,  that  is,  are 

XV,,   XVI 


548  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

applied  to  the  sphere  of  already  formed  relationship 
with  God.  But  in  this  there  might  be  a  special  rela- 
tionship in  which  men  had  to  do  with  God  in  this 
world — were  inhabiters  of  earth,  or  the  mass  of  people 
within  that  sphere. 

The  third  vial  was  poured  out  on  all  the  sources  of 
popular  influence  and  action ;  and  they  became  posi- 
tively deathful.  It  seems  to  me,  that  the  deadly 
influence  in  alienation  from  God,  within  the  sphere  of 
prophecy,  is  strongly  marked  here.  Death  is  used 
generally  as  the  expression  of  the  power  of  Satan. 

Then  the  supreme  authority  is  made  frightfully  op- 
pressive. This  gave  the  first  four  of  direct  judgment 
according  to  the  usual  division. 

The  fifth  vial  strikes  the  throne  of  the  beast,  the  seat 
and  stability  of  his  authority,  which  Satan  had  given 
him ;  and  his  kingdom  became  full  of  darkness.  All  was 
confusion  and  wretchedness,  and  no  resource :  they 
gnawed  their  tongues  with  anguish  and  blasphemed 
God. 

The  sixth  angel  pours  out  his  vial  on  Euphrates — 
destroys,  I  apprehend,  the  securing  boundary  of  the 
Western  prophetic  powers — not  the  seat  of  its  power, 
but  broke  its  frontier,  that  the  way  of  the  kings  of 
the  East  might  be  prepared.  I  look  at  this  simply  as 
the  bringing  in  of  the  powers  of  Asia  into  the  conflict 
for  the  universal  conflagration  of  powers.  The  sixth 
vial  sends  forth  three  unclean  spirits,  the  sum  of  all 
evil  influences:  that  of  Satan's  direct  power  as  an- 
tagonistic of  Christ;  that  of  the  power  of  the  last 
empire,  the  beast;  and  that  of  the  second  beast  of 
chapter  xiii.  henceforth  known  as  the  false  prophet, 
Satan's  influence  as  the  Antichrist,  an  idolatrous 
w^onder-working  power ;  and  the  kings  of  the  world 
Avere  gathered  together  to  the  battle  of  the  great  day 
of  God  Almighty.    The  allusion  is  to  Judges  v.  19.  20. 

At  the  seventh  vial  there  is  a  general  break-up  and 


THE   REVELATION.  549 

subversion,  and  Babylon  comes  into  judgment.  And 
the  hail  of  God,  the  judgment  of  God,  came  on  men 
from  heaven.  (Compare  Is.  xxxii.,  xxxiii.)  All  separate 
independent  interests  and  established  powers  dis- 
appeared. This  was  over  the  earth — God's  judgment 
by  providence  and  instruments — but  the  Lamb  was 
not  come  yet.  The  details  of  Babylon's  judgments  are 
reserved  for  the  following  chapters. 

The  characters  of  Babylon  are  first  portrayed. 
Like  the  beast,  she  is  only  one  thing  in  the  judgment, 
but  morally  she  is  more  important  than  all  the  rest. 
The  general  character  is  the  great  active  idolatress 
that  has  gained  influence  over  the  mass  of  the 
nations ;  next,  that  the  kings  of  the  earth  have  lived 
in  guilty  intimacy  with  her,  seeking  her  favours,  while 
those  that  dwell  on  the  earth  have  lost  their  senses 
through  her  pernicious  and  inebriating  influence.  This 
is  the  general  idea  first  given,  a  character  plain  enough 
to  mark  the  Roman  or  Papal  system. 

But  more  details  follow.  There  was  a  woman,  a 
religious  system,  sitting  on  an  imperial  beast  full  of 
names  of  blasphemy,  having  the  form  which  marked 
it  Roman.  The  woman  was  gorgeously  and  imperially 
arrayed,  had  every  human  glory  and  ornament  on  her, 
and  a  rich  cup  of  prostituting  yet  gross  idolatries  in 
her  hand.  "Abominations"  are  simply  idols;  "filthi- 
ness  of  her  fornication,"  all  the  horrible  corruption 
that  accompanies  it.  Her  cup  was  full  of  them.  She 
was  in  the  desert ;  no  springs  of  God  were  there.  It 
was  not,  so  to  speak,  God's  land,  no  heavenly  country. 
To  spiritual  understanding  she  bore  on  her  forehead 
her  character  (yet  one  known  only  when  spiritually 
known),  of  the  great  city  of  corruption,  source  of  all 
seduction  to  men  and  of  all  idolatry  in  the  earth  :  such 
was  Popery.  But  this  was  not  all.  All  the  blood  of 
the  saints  was  found  in  her :  she  was  the  persecuting 
murderess  of  those  God  delighted  in,  and  who  bore 

xvii. 


650  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

witness  to  Jesus.*     The  prophet  was  astonished — for 
it  was  what  the  church  had  come  to. 

The  angel  then  describes  the  beast  on  wliich  she 
rode.  It  had  been,  ceased  to  exist,  and  then  it  comes 
up  again  from  direct  diabolical  sources — comes  up  out 
of  the  abyss.  The  renewed  Roman  Empire,  which  had 
disappeared,  is  blasphemous  and  diabolical  in  nature, 
and  in  this  character  goes  to  destruction :  yet  all  but 
the  elect  on  the  earth  will  be  in  admiration  of  it  when 
they  see  the  beast  that  was,  is  not,  and  shall  be 
present.  Of  itself  this  marks  the  Roman  or  Latin 
Empire,  only  that  it  will  reappear  more  formally. 
But  Rome  is  more  distinctly  marked.  It  is  the  city 
of  the  seven  hills.  Nor  was  this  even  all.  It  was  the 
existing  authority  in  the  time  of  the  prophecy :  five  of 
its  governing  powers  had  fallen ;  one  was  there ;  there 
was  then  one  yet  to  come  for  a  short  space,  and  then 
the  beast  out  of  the  abyss,  the  last  diabolical  state  of 
the  empire,  would  appear,  and  it  would  be  destroyed. 
The  last  however  is  not  a  new  form ;  it  is  one  of  the 
seven,  though  an  eighth.  My  impression  is,  that  the 
first  Napoleon  and  his  brief  empire  is  the  seventh,  and 
we  have  now  to  wait  for  the  development  of  the  last. 
The  beast,  though  imperial,  has  ten  horns,  ten  distinct 
kingdoms.  They  have  their  power,  and  for  the  same 
period,  with  the  beast.  But  they  all  give  their  power 
to  the  beast,  and  make  war  against  Christ,  the  rejected 
One  on  earth ;  but  He  shall  overcome  them.  For, 
despised  as  He  may  be,  supreme  authority  is  His,  and 


*  It  is  important  to  remark  that  formal  religion,  wbicli  rests 
on  ancient  claims  as  established,  and  which  is  left  behind  as  to 
the  truth  by  others  who  have  received  it,  is  the  regular  habitual 
instigator  of  persecution,  though  others  may  be  the  persecutors. 
So  it  was  with  the  Jews,  so  in  the  universal  history  of  the  world. 
It  always  becomes  false  as  regards  truth,  though  it  may  retain 
some  and  important  truths.  The  truths  which  test  the  heart 
and  its  obedience  are  not  there. 


THE  REVELATION.  551) 

there  are  others  coming  with  Him,  not  merely  angels 
but  called  ones,  His  saints. 

Details  are  then  added.  The  waters  are  explained 
as  peoples,  multitudes,  nations,  and  tongues — masses 
of  populations  in  their  diverse  divisions.  Next  the 
ten  horns,  the  kingdoms  which  are  associated  with 
the  beast,  and  the  beast  (for  so  it  is  to  be  read)  hate 
the  whore  and  eat  her  flesh  and  burn  her  with  fire 
(first,  take  all  her  substance  and  fatness,  and  then 
destroy  her) ;  for  they  are  to  give  their  kingdom  to 
the  blasphemous  beast  until  God's  words  are  fulfilled. 
And  then  we  are  expressly  told  that  the  woman  (not 
"  the  whore  " — the  last  is  her  corrupt  idolatrous  charac- 
ter— but  the  "woman"),  who  as  riding  the  beast  was  to 
be  such,  is  Rome.    All  this  chapter  (xvii.)  is  description. 

Chapter  xviii.  announces  the  judgment.  The  one 
difficulty  here  is  verse  4,  coming  where  it  is  ;  but,  as 
every  difficulty  in  scripture,  it  leads  into  further  light. 
The  destruction  of  Babylon  is  simple  enough.  She 
falls  by  God's  judgment  just  before  Christ  comes  to 
judge  the  earth;  and,  first  perhaps  losing  her  power 
and  influence,  is  destroyed  by  the  horns  and  beast. 
The  comparison  of  chapter  xiv.  8,  and  the  place  it 
holds,  chap.  xvi.  19,  xviii.  8,  and  the  beginning  of 
xix.,  make  this  plain.  Chapter  xviii.  is  a  warning 
from  heaven,  not  the  angel  of  judgment  of  the  earth. 
It  is  not  consequent  on  events,  but  supposes  spiritual 
apprehension  of  heaven's  mind.  This  is  the  case 
when  it  is  simply  a  voice  from  heaven.  This  call  then 
was  a  spiritual  call,  not  a  manifest  judgment.  It  may 
be  more  urgent  and  direct  just  before  judgment,  and  I 
doubt  not  will  be:  as  the  call  is  in  Hebrews  to  come 
out  of  the  camp  because  Jerusalem's  day  was  at  hand. 
Hence  I  believe  this  applies  whenever  we  see  the 
system  to  be  Babylon,  and  the  sense  of  her  iniquities 
is  pressed  upon  the  conscience. 

The  chapter  then  goes  on  to  the  actual  execution  of 

XVIIT. 


552  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

judgment  according  to  chapter  xvii.  16.  The  horns, 
or  kingdoms  connected  with  the  beast,  have  destroyed 
her.  The  kings  mourn  over  her;  so  do  those  that 
have  sought  profit  and  ease  and  commerce  in  the 
earth.  The  royal  and  commercial  system  is  shattered 
to  pieces  by  the  upset  of  the  system.  What  cha- 
racterises her,  that  for  which  she  is  judged,  is  idolatry, 
corruption,  worldliness,  and  persecution.  She  is 
judged  and  destroyed,  and  the  prosperity  of  the  worldly 
is  smitten  by  her  fall,  and  the  hopes  of  the  kings  who 
had  commerce  with  her.  The  blood  of  all  saints  was 
found  in  her,  as  in  Jerusalem  in  her  day.  Persecution 
comes  from  religion  connected  with  worldly  advantage. 
But  what  a  picture  we  have  here  of  the  world,  the 
relations  of  the  kings  and  of  the  saints  to  Babylon ! 

Chapter  xix.  2  clearly  shews  the  aspect  in  which  she 
is  judged — the  great  whore  who  corrupted ;  and  God 
avenges  the  blood  of  His  servants.  This  judgment  of 
Rome  is  the  great  joy  of  heaven.  Hallelujah  and 
salvation  are  sung.  The  elders  and  four  living  crea- 
tures fall  down  and  worship,  and  the  voice  of  the 
multitude  proclaims  the  bringing  in  of  the  marriage  of 
the  Lamb,  when  the  false  woman  is  set  aside.  Till 
then,  though  espoused,  the  assembly  was  not  thus 
actually  united  in  the  heavenly  marriage  of  the  Lamb. 
Still  there  was  no  greater  event  could  be  than  a  judg- 
ment of  Rome.  No  doubt  the  beast  had  to  be  destroyed 
Power,  when  God  gave  it  scope,  would  soon  do  that 
But  here  the  old  corruptress  and  persecutor  was  set 
aside  for  ever.  Heaven  is  full  of  joy.  There  is  no 
celebration  of  joy  like  this  in  the  Revelation. 

The  rest  of  the  book  is  simple  and  clear  enough, 
for  the  mystery  of  God  is  closed.  I  do  not  myself 
attach  any  importance  to  the  distinction,  as  a  class,  of 
those  called  to  partake  of  the  joy  of  that  day.  It 
means,  I  believe,  just  that,  according  to  the  parable  of 
the  marriage  of  the  king's  son,  the  guests  are  those 


THE    REVELATION.  553 

who  have  share  in  the  marriage  joy.  But  several 
points  have  to  be  noticed :  God  in  power  has  come  in 
to  set  up  His  reign. 

The  true  though  not  yet  the  open  seat  of  the  power 
of  evil  has  been  judged  and  destroyed.  Two  characters 
of  evil,  falsehood  or  deceitful  corruption  and  violence, 
have  existed  since  Satan  himself  began  his  career; 
false  in  himself,  he  was  a  murderer  to  others.  The 
mystery  of  iniquity  contained  both,  though  hiding  the 
latter  and  using  others  for  it.  Still  she  was  charac- 
terised by  corruption  and  what  was  false.  Direct 
violence  was  in  the  hands  of  the  beast.  The  destruc- 
tion of  that  would,  no  doubt,  relieve  the  earth  of 
oppression ;  but  for  heaven  and  all  that  was  heavenly- 
minded,  the  destruction  of  this  Christ-dishonouring, 
soul-enslaving,  and  soul-debasing  corruption,  was  joy 
and  gladness,  and  the  witness  that  divine  power  had 
come  in.  It  had  set  aside  the  worst  evil,  the  corrupt- 
ing what  was  God's,  under  pretence  of  being  what 
Christ  had  purchased  for  Himself,  the  one  precious 
object  of  His  especial  love.  They  sing  "  Hallelujah  ! 
for  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent  reigneth  !" 

This  was  to  make  way  for  the  introduction  of  what 
was  His  own — the  manifest  power  of  His  Christ. 
But,  before  that,  the  assembly  must  have  her  place  of 
association  with  Him  in  that — must  have  Himself: 
the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come.  Till  the  evil 
woman  had  been  set  aside,  this  could  not  be.  This  is 
the  character  of  heavenly  joy  and  redemption  by 
which  we  are  brought  into  it.  Man  on  earth  is  first 
good,  then  yielding  to  temptation.  Redemption  sup- 
poses first  evil,  and  even  slavery  to  it,  but  then 
deliverance  from  it  and  our  being  set  beyond  it,  God 
having  taken  to  Him  His  power.  The  assembly  is 
presented  to  Christ  without  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any 
such  thing,  cleansed  and  white,  suited  to  Christ.  The 
apostle  was  disposed,  in  sight  of  all  this  blessedness, 

XIX. 


554  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE    BIBLE. 

to  fall  down  and  worship  him  who  had  revealed  it. 
His  mind  was  thrown  into  devotion  by  these  scenes. 
Its  immediate  object  was  the  heavenly  messenger,  and 
he  turns  to  bow  to  him,  but  is  forbidden.  He  was  a 
fellow-servant,  and  the  same  to  all  who  had  the  testi- 
mony of  Jesus;  for  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  we  are 
told,  is  the  testimony  of  Jesus.  The  testimony  not  to 
worsliip  intermediate  beings  is  the  last  warning  left 
to  a  declining  assembly,  as,  so  to  speak,  one  of  the  first 
(in  Colossians). 

We  now  arrive  at  the  great  announcement  of  the 
coming  of  Christ  in  power.  Heaven,  which  had  been 
opened  on  Jesus  and  to  Stephen,  now  opens  for  Jesus 
as  King  of  kinoes  and  Lord  of  lords.  Holy  and  true 
PTo  had  been  known  by  faith,  and  the  faithful  and 
true  Witness.  The  last  He  is  now ;  not  as  witness,  but 
in  judgment,  save  as  judgment  itself  is  the  witness  of 
His  faithfulness  and  truth.  The  characters  in  which 
He  appears  are  plain  but  all-important.  It  is  first. in 
general  judgment  but  in  the  form  of  war,  not  what  we 
may  call  sessional  judgment,  but  overcoming  power. 
Sessional  judgment  is  in  chapter  xx.  from  verse  4. 
His  eyes  have  the  piercingness  of  divine  judgment. 
He  had  many  crowns,  witness  of  His  various  and 
universal  dominion.  But,  though  thus  revealed  as 
man,  He  had  a  glory  none  could  penetrate  into  ;*  of 

*  So  it  was  as  to  His  Person  and  service.  No  one  knew  the 
Son  but  the  Father.  It  was  the  secret  of  His  rejection.  He 
was  that,  and  so  necessarily  such  in  the  world.  But  the  world 
under  Satan's  influence  would  not  have  that.  In  His  humilia- 
tion His  divine  glory  was  maintained  in  the  unsounded  depths 
of  His  Person.  Now  He  is  revealed  in  glory;  but  there  ever 
remained  what  none  could  search  or  penetrate  into — His  own 
Person  and  nature.  His  revealed  name  was  the  Word  of  God. 
As  revealing  God  in  grace  or  power  so  as  to  make  Him  known, 
we  know  Him.  But  His  Person  as  Son  always  remains  un- 
searchable. His  name  is  written,  so  that  we  know  it  is  un- 
knowable— not  unknown  but  unknowable.  But  He  made  good 
now  the  character  and  requirements  of  God  in  respect  of  men — 


THE   REVELATION.  ODD 

which  He  had  the  conscious  power,  but  which  was  not 
revealed.  He  was  the  avenger — His  garment  was 
dipped  in  blood.  All  characterised  Him,  we  may  note 
here,  according  to  that  in  which  He  is  manifested  by 
the  judgment  itself.  It  was  the  Revealer,  the  Word 
of  God — His  eternal  character — what  He  was  before 
creation-;  now  making  it  good  in  judgment. 

The  armies  in  heaven  had  not  garments  dipped  in 
blood.  They  were  triumphant ;  they  followed  Him  in 
His  triumph,  pure  and  perfect,  His  chosen,  called, 
and  faithful  ones.  The  vengeance  of  Idumea  was  not 
their  part,  thougli  they  share  His  victory  over  the 
beast.  The  vengeance  in  Edoin  had  a  more  earthly 
character,  and  is  connected  more  with  Judah.  The 
Assyrian  is  there  (see  Ps.  Ixxxiii.),  not  the  beast.  The 
beast  and  the  false  prophet  are  destroyed  by  Him 
as  coming  from  heaven.  He  smites  the  nations  with 
the  rod  of  His  mouth.  He  rules  them  with  a  rod  of 
iron :  this  the  saints  will  have  with  Him.  (Chap.  ii. 
26,  27.)  He  treads  the  wine-press  too.*  This  is  the 
part  that  is  more  earthly,  as  Isaiah  Ixiii.  shews.  So- 
He  that  sits  on  the  cloud  thrusts  in  His  sickle  on  the 
earth.  It  was  an  angel  who  cast  the  grapes  into  the 
wine-press,  and  the  wine-press  was  troddenf — it  is  not 
said,  as  by  one  sitting  on  the  cloud.  The  character  of 
the  judgment  of  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet  is 
heavenly — it   is   the  Word   of   God,  the   Lord   from 

what  they  ought  to  be  with  God,  and  what  God  was  to  them  in; 
their  natural  relationship,  revealed  in  respect  of  their  responsi- 
bility.   Judgment  refers  to  these,  and  to  ourselves. 

■•'  This  too  He  does  alone ;  not  that  the  saints  may  not  be 
with  Him  as  His  cortege,  so  to  speak,  but  the  execution  of 
judgment  is  His.  In  Isaiah  it  is  only  said  that  of  the  people 
none  were  with  Him.  In  sessional  judgment,  judgment  is  given 
to  them. 

+  I  have  already  stated  that  the  harvest  is  discriminative- 
judgment:  there  is  wheat  for  the  garner.  The  wine-press  ia- 
vengeance,  righteous  vengeance. 

XIX. 


656  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

heaven;  the  wine-press  is  earthly.  He  is  pubHcly, 
officially,  and  intrinsically  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of 
lords.  The  beast  and  the  false  prophet  are  cast  alive 
into  the  lake  of  fire:  this  was  a  present  final  judg- 
ment— the  rest  were  judicially  slain.  The  final  judg- 
ment of  these  deceived  ones  is  not  said  to  take  place 
here.  Satan  is  not  yet  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,  but 
into  the  bottomless  pit,  where  the  legion  of  devils 
besought  the  Lord  they  might  not  be  sent.  He  is 
bound  there  so  as  not  to  deceive  the  nations  for  a 
thousand  years.  There  will  be  no  seduction  by  Satan 
during  the  thousand  years. 

We  now  come,  evil  power  having  been  set  aside,  to 
the  exercise  of  judicial  authority  in  peace ;  and  this  is 
-conferred  on  the  saints.  The  prophet  does  not  merely 
see  the  thrones  as  set  in  Daniel  vii.,  but  sitters  on  them 
too.  Besides  all  to  whom  judgment  is  given  in  general, 
two  special  classes  are  mentioned,  because  they  might 
seem  to  be  too  late,  or  to  have  lost  their  part :  those 
beheaded  (after  the  assembly  was  gone,  for  it  is  the 
Revelation-period  we  have  to  do  with)  for  the  witness 
of  Jesus;  and  those  who  had  not  worshipped  the 
beast.  (Compare  chap.  vi.  9-11 ;  xiii.  15.)  These,  as 
well  as  previously  departed  saints,  had  their  part  in 
hving  and  reigning  with  Christ  a  thousand  years. 
But  those  who  were  not  Christ's,  the  rest  of  the  dead, 
did  not  live  again  till  the  thousand  years  were  over.* 
These  were  finally  delivered  from  the  second  death. 
The  first  death  they  had  undergone,  the  natural  wages 
■  of  sin,  but  in  faithfulness;  in  the  second  death,  the 
final  judgment  against  sin,  they  would  have  no  part. 
It  could  have  no  power  over  them.     On  the  contrary, 

*  It  may  be  noted  here  that,  according  to  the  true  reading, 
the  living  and  reigning  is  certainly  resurrection.  "  The  rest  of 
the  dead  lived  not  until,"  &c. ;  so  that  it  is  clearly  used  here  for 
resurrection,  as  the  following  words  confirm :  "  This  is  the  first 
:resurrection." 


THE   REVELATION.  557 

they  had  special  relationship  with  God  and  Christ, 
they  were  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ,  and  would 
reign  with  Him  a  thousand  years.  They  also  are 
priests  and  kings.  Note  how  God  and  Christ  are^ 
here  united  in  one  thought,  as  continually  in  the 
writings  of  John.  Thus  the  beast  and  the  faW 
prophet  are  in  the  lake  of  fire,  their  armies  slain,  and 
Satan  bound  in  the  abyss,  and  the  risen  saints  are 
priests  to  God  and  Christ,  reigning  with  Christ  a^ 
thousand  years.  The  details  and  effects,  mark,  are 
not  given  here.  The  object  is  to  give  the  place  of  the- 
saints,  and  especially  of  the  sufferers,  during  the  time 
of  this  book.  The  rest  come  in  as  a  general  fact, 
there  were  sitters  on  thrones  of  judgment ;  but  the 
faithful  of  the  prophecy  are  specially  mentioned. 

When  the  thousand  years  are  finished,  Satan  is  let- 
loose  again.  He  comes  up  on  the  earth,  but  he  never 
gets  up  to  heaven  again.  But  the  nations  are  tested; 
by  his  temptation.  Not  even  having  seen  Christ  and 
enjoyed  the  fruits  of  His  glory — no  mere  means  can 
secure  the  heart  of  man,  if  it  is  fco  be  depended  upon  ;- 
and  men  fall,  in  number  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  into 
Satan's  hands  as  soon  as  tempted ;  enjoying  blessing,, 
where  unfaithfulness  would  have  been  present  loss 
(perhaps  cutting  off)  and  there  was  nothing  to  tempt 
them,  but  unfaithful  as  soon  as  they  are  tempted,  a& 
soon  as  the  heart  is  tried.  It  was  the  last  and  needed 
trial  of  man  ;  needed  because  they  could  not  have 
finally  enjoyed  God  with  natural  hearts,  and  the 
natural  heart  had  not  been  tested  where  present  bless- 
ing was  on  the  side  of  owning  a  present,  visible,, 
glorious  Christ.  The  deceived  multitude,  not  limited 
now  to  a  third  of  the  earth  or  a  special  prophetic: 
district  but  taking  in  the  breadth  of  the  earth,  went. 
up  against  the  camp  of  the  saints,  and  surrounded  it 
and  the  beloved  city,  Jerusalem.  It  is  remarkable- 
here,  there  is  no  special  presence  of  Christ  amongsi 

XX. 


558  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

them.  They  are  left  apparently  to  be  surrounded  by 
their  enemies.  The  Lord  has  allowed  all  this  testing 
separation  of  personal  faithfulness.  Had  He  appeared, 
of  course  these  hostile  crowds  could  not  have  come  up, 
nor  would  the  thorough  trial  of  the  heart  have  proved 
the  faithfulness  of  the  saints,  who  would  not  follow 
the  seductions  of  Satan.  They  are  pressed  upon  and 
surrounded  by  the  enemy,  but  faithful.  Once  this 
separation  and  full  testing  had  been  accomplished, 
God's  judgment  fell  on  them  from  heaven,  and  des- 
troyed them.  The  devil  was  then  cast  into  the  lake 
of  fire,  where  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet  were 
already,  where  they  are  tormented  for  ever  and  ever. 

This  closed  the  exercise  of  wrath,  of  the  destruction 
of  hostile  power — a  wondrous  scene — that  God  should 
have  enemies  in  this  world !  Now  judicial  power,  as 
such,  seated  in  its  own  right,  comes  in.  It  may  be 
remarked,  that  the  exercise  of  this  on  the  quick,  forms 
no  part  of  the  contents  of  this  book.  The  hostile 
power  of  the  beast  was  destroyed  by  Him  who  judges 
and  makes  war,  the  heavenly  saints  having  been 
taken  to  glory.  The  crowds  of  apostates  at  the  end 
of  the  thousand  years  are  destroyed  by  fire  from 
heaven.  But  the  judgment  of  Matthew  xxv.  is  not 
found  here,  unless  there  be  a  possible  connection  with 
the  judgment  of  chapter  xx.  4. 

There  now  comes  the  judgment  of  the  dead.  There 
is  no  coming  here.  A  great  white  throne  is  set ;  judg- 
ment is  carried  on  according  to  the  purity  of  God's 
nature.  It  was  no  dealing  with  the  earth,  or  the 
power  of  evil,  but  with  souls.  Heaven  and  earth — all 
mere  scenes  of  judgment — disappear.  The  secrets  of 
men's  hearts  are  judged  by  Him  who  knows  them  all. 
Heaven  and  earth  flee  away  before  the  face  of  Him 
that  sat  on  the  throne,  and  the  dead,  small  and  great, 
stand  before  the  throne.  Judgment  was  according  to 
works,  as  it  was  written  in  the  books  of  record.     Still 


THE  REVELATION.  559 

another  element  was  brought  into  view.  Sovereign 
grace  alone  had  saved  according  to  the  purpose  of 
God.*  There  was  a  book  of  life.  Whosoever  was 
not  written  there  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  But 
it  was  the  finally  closing  and  separating  scene  for  the 
whole  race  of  men  and  this  world.  And  though  they 
were  judged  every  man  according  to  his  works,  yet 
sovereign  grace  only  had  delivered  any ;  and  whoever 
was  not  found  in  grace's  book  was  cast  into  the  lake 
of  fire.  The  sea  gave  up  the  dead  in  it ;  death  and 
hades,  the  dead  in  them.  And  death  and  hades  were 
put  an  end  to  for  ever  by  the  divine  judgment.  The 
heaven  and  earth  passed  away,  but  they  were  to  be 
revived ;  but  death  and  hades  never.  There  was  for 
them  only  divine  destruction  and  judgment.  They  are 
looked  at  as  the  power  of  Satan.  He  has  the  power 
of  death  and  the  gates  of  hades ;  and  hence  these  are 
for  ever  destroyed  judicially.  They  will  never  have 
power  again.  They  are  personified;  but  of  course 
there  is  no  question  of  tormenting  them  or  of  punish- 
ment: when  the  devil  himself  is  cast  in,  there  is.  But 
death  was  not  then  destroyed;  for  the  wicked  dead 
had  not  been  raised  for  judgment.  Now  they  had  ; 
and  the  last  enemy  is  destroyed.  The  force  of  the 
image,  I  doubt  not,  is  that  all  the  dead  now  judged 
(the  whole  contents  of  hades,  in  whom  the  power  of 
death  had  been)  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,  so  that 
death  and  hades,  which  had  no  existence  but  in  their 
state,   were   entirely  and  judicially   ended   by   their 

"*"  Thus  purpose  and  man's  responsibility  are  never  confounded, 
but,  from  the  two  trees  of  the  garden  on,  are  in  juxtaposition ; 
life  brought  into  connection  with  responsibility  in  the  law, 
responsibility  being  put  first,  and  thus  proof  given  that  man 
cannot  stand  before  God;  but  the  question  is  solved  only  in 
Christ,  who  bore  our  sins,  died  for  us  to  sin,  and  is  life.  Coun- 
sels and  promise  of  life  in  Christ  come  first,  then  responsibility 
in  the  creature  on  earth,  then  grace  making  good  counsels,  in 
righteousness,  through  the  cross. 

XX. 


560  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE    BIBLE. 

being  cast  in.  The  saints  had  long  before  passed  oufc 
of  them;  but  they  subsisted  in  the  wicked.  Now 
these  were,  consequent  on  the  judgment  of  the  whit^ 
throne,  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire — the  second  death. 
The  limit  and  measure  of  escape  was  the  book  of  life. 

But  there  was  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  ;  but 
no  more  sea — no  separation,  nor  part  of  the  world  not 
brought  into  an  ordered  earth  before  God.  Here  we 
do  not  find  any  mediatorial  kingdom.  The  Lamb  is 
not  in  the  scene.  God  is  all  in  all.  No  sorrow  or 
crying  more,  no  earthly  people  of  God  distinct  from 
the  iiihabiters  of  the  earth.  These  are  God's  people,, 
and  God  is  with  them  Himself,  but  withal  His  taber- 
nacle is  with  them.  This  is  the  holy  city,  the  New 
Jerusalem.  The  assembly  has  her  own  character,  is 
the  habitation  of  God  in  a  special  way,  when  the 
unchanging  state  comes,  and  all  is  made  new.  God  is 
tlie  end,  as  the  beginning.  Him  that  is  athirst  now 
God  will  refresh  with  the  fountain  of  the  water  of 
life — the  overcomer  shall  inherit  all  things.  The 
world  for  the  Christian  is  now  a  great  Rephidim. 
This  is  the  twofold  portion  of  the  final  blessedness :  he 
shall  have  God  for  his  God,  and  be  His  son.  Those 
who  feared  this  path — did  not  overcome  the  world 
and  Satan  but  had  walked  in  iniquity — would  have 
their  part  in  the  lake  of  fire.  This  closes  the  history 
of  God's  ways. 

What  follows  is  the  description  of  the  heavenly 
city,  as  before  we  had  that  of  Babylon.  Its  heavenly 
character  and  millennial  connection  with  the  earth  is 
revealed.  One  of  the  seven  angels,  as  in  the  case  of 
Babylon,  comes  to  shew  the  prophet  the  bride,  the 
Lamb's  wife.  The  result  of  judgment  on  the  earth  is 
the  introduction  of  better  and  higher  blessings.  The 
prophet  is  taken,  like  Moses,  to  see  the  scene  of  pro- 
mise, and  sees  New  Jerusalem  descending  out  of 
heaven  from  God.    This  was  its  double  character  from 


THE  REVELATION.  561 

God,  divine  in  its  origin,  and  also  heavenly.  (Compare 
2  Cor.  V.  1.)  It  might  be  of  God  and  earthly.  It 
might  be  heavenly  and  angelic.  It  was  neither:  it 
was  divine  in  origin  and  heavenly  in  nature  and 
character.  It  was  clothed  with  divine  glory :  it  must 
be  as  founded  on  Christ's  work.  It  was  transparent 
jasper,  jasper  being  used  as  a  symbol  of  divine  glory. 
(Chap.  iv.  3.)  It  is  secure,  having  a  wall  great  and 
high.  It  has  twelve  gates.  Angels  are  become  the 
willing  doorkeepers  of  the  great  city,  the  fruit  of 
Christ's  redemption-work  in  glory.  This  marked  the 
possession  too,  by  man  thus  brought  in  the  assembly 
to  glory,  of  the  highest  place  in  the  creation,  and  pro- 
vidential order  of  God,  of  which  angels  had  previously 
been  the  administrators.  The  twelve  gates  are  full 
of  human  perfectness  of  governmental  administrative 
power.  The  gate  was  the  place  of  judgment.  Twelve, 
we  have  often  seen,  denotes  perfection  and  governmental 
power.  The  character  of  it  is  noted  by  the  names  of 
the  twelve  tribes.  God  had  so  governed  these.  They 
were  not  the  foundation  ;  but  this  character  of  power 
was  found  there.  There  were  twelve  foundations,  but 
these  were  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.  They 
were,  in  their  work,  the  foundation  of  the  heavenly 
city.  Thus  the  creative  and  providential  display  of 
power,  the  governmental  (Jehovah),  and  the  assembly 
once  founded  at  Jerusalem,  are  all  brought  together 
in  the  heavenly  city,  the  organised  seat  of  heavenly 
power.  It  is  not  presented  as  the  bride,  though  it  be 
the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  It  is  not  in  the  Pauline 
character  of  nearness  of  blessing  to  Christ.  It  is  the 
assembly  as  founded  at  Jerusalem  under  the  twelve — 
the  organised  seat  of  heavenly  power,  the  new  and 
now  heavenly  capital  of  God's  government.  They 
had  suffered  and  served  the  Lamb  in  the  earthly,  and 
under  Him  founded  the  heavenly.  It  is  alike  vast 
and  perfect,  and  all  measured  and  owned  of  God.     It 

VOL.  V.  XXI.  00 


562  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

is  not  now  a  remnant  measured ;  it  is  the  city.  It 
has  not  divine  perfectness  (that  could  not  be),  but  it 
has  divinely  given  perfectness.  It  is  a  cube,  equal  on 
every  side,  finite  perfection.  So  the  wall  (they  are 
merely  symbols)  was  perfect,  12  x  12.  The  wall  which 
secured  it  was  the  divine  glory.  As  it  is  written  of 
the  earthly  Jerusalem,  "  Salvation  hath  God  appointed 
for  walls  and  bulwarks." 

The  city  was  formed,  in  its  nature,  in  divine  right- 
eousness and  holiness — gold  transparent  as  glass.  That 
which  was  now  by  the  word  wrought  in  and  applied 
to  men  below,  was  the  very  nature  of  the  whole  place. 
(Compare  Eph.  iv.  24.)  The  precious  stones,  or  varied 
display  of  God's  nature,  who  is  light,  in  connection 
with  the  creature  (seen  in  creation,  Ezekiel  xxviii. ;  in 
grace  in  the  high  priest's  breast-plate),  now  shone  in 
permanent  glory,  and  adorned  the  foundations  of  the 
city.  The  gates  had  the  moral  beauty,  which  attracted 
Christ  in  the  assembly  and  in  a  glorious  way.  That 
on  which  men  walked,  instead  of  bringing  danger  of 
defilement,  was  itself  righteous  and  holy;  the  streets, 
all  that  men  came  in  contact  with,  were  righteousness 
and  holiness — gold  transparent  as  glass. 

There  was  no  concealment  of  God's  glory  in  that 
which  awed  by  its  display — no  temple  where  men, 
approached  but  where  they  could  not  draw  nigh, 
where  God  was  hidden.  The  Lord  God  Almighty  and 
the  Lamb  were  its  temple.  They  were  approached  in 
their  own  nature  and  glory,  surrounded  only  by  that 
fully  displayed. 

Nor  was  there  need  of  created  light  here  ;  the  glory 
of  the  divine  nature  lighted  all,  and  the  Lamb  was  the 
light-bearer  in  it. 

Note  here,  we  have  not  the  Father  as  the  temple. 
It  is  the  revealed  dispensational  Euler,  the  true  God, 
and  the  Lamb  who  has  made  good  His  glory.  This 
was  the  character  of  the  city. 


THE  REVELATION.  563 

The  vision  goes  on  to  shew  its  relationship  to  those 
on  the  earth,  and  its  inhabitants:  a  seeming  incon- 
sistency, but  no  real  one ;  for  the  city  is  viewed  as  the 
estate  of  the  bride.   Where  the  inhabitants  are  spoken 
of,  it  is  the  individual  blessing.     The  nations,  spared 
in  the  judgments  on  earth,  walk  in  the  light  of  it ;  the 
world  does,  in  a  measure,  in  that  of  the  assembly  now. 
Then  the  glory  will  be  perfect.     The  city  enjoys  the 
direct  light  within;  the  world  transmitted  light  of 
glory.      To   it   the   kings   of   the    earth   bring    their 
honour  and  glory.     They  own  the  heavens  and  the 
heavenly  kingdom  to  be  the  source  of  all,  and  bring 
there  the  homage  of  their  power.     Night,  there  is  not 
there,  and  its  gates  are  ever  op^,n ;  no  defence  agamst 
evil    is    needed,    though    divine    security   leaves    no 
approach  to  evil.     The  kings  themselves  bring  their 
willing  homage  to  it.     But  the  glory  and  honour  of 
the  Gentiles  is  brought  to  it  too.     Heaven  is  seen  as 
the  source  of  all  the  glory  and  honour  of  this  world. 
Hence  these  are  now  true.     Nothing  defiling  enters 
there,    nor    what    introduces    idols    and    falsehood. 
Neither   man's  evil  nor  Satan's  deceit  can  exist  or 
produce  any  corruption  there.     How  often,  when  any- 
thing good  is  set  up  now,  the  considerate  heart  knows 
that  evil  will  enter,  and  Satan  deceive  and  corrupt ! 
There  we  have  the  certainty  that  this  can  never  be. 
It  was  not  merely  the  absence  of  evil,  but  the  impos- 
sibility of  its  entrance,  which  characterised  the  holy 
city.     There  was   that  which,  having   its   source   m 
perfect  grace,  involves  all  blessed  affections  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Lamb  in  those  within  the  city.     Those 
only  whose  names  were  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life 
found  place  in  the  city. 

The  connection  of  the  holy  city  with  the  earth, 
though  not  on  it,  is  everywhere  seen.  The  river  of 
God  refreshed  the  city,  and  the  tree  of  life,  whose  fruits 
ever  ripe  were  food  for  the  celestial  inhabitants  of  it. 

XXII. 


564  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

bore  in  its  wings  healing  for  the  nations.  Only  the 
glorified  ever  ate  the  fruit  of  constant  growth ;  but 
what  was  manifested  and  displayed  without,  as  the 
leaves  of  a  tree,  was  blessing  to  those  on  earth.  We 
see  grace  characterising  the  assembly  in  glory.  The 
nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  the  earthly 
Jerusalem  shall  utterly  perish — it  preserves  its  earthly 
royal  character;  the  assembly  its  own:  the  leaves  of 
the  tree  it  feeds  on  are  for  healing.  There  is  no  more 
curse.  The  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb  is  in  it. 
This  is  the  source  of  blessing,  not  of  curse ;  and  His 
servants  serve  Him ;  often  they  cannot  as  they 
would  here.  Note  too  again  here,  how  God  and  the 
Lamb  are  spoken  of  as  one,  as  constantly  in  John's 
writings.  His  servants  shall  have  the  fullest  privi- 
lege of  His  constant  presence,  shall  see  His  face,  and 
their  belonging  to  Him  as  His  own  be  evident  to  all. 
There  is  no  night  there,  nor  need  of  light,  for  the 
Lord  God  gives  it ;  and,  as  to  their  state,  they  reign, 
not  for  the  thousand  years,  as  they  do  over  the  earth, 
but  for  ever  and  ever. 

This  closes  the  description  of  the  heavenly  city  and 
the  whole  prophetic  volume.  What  follows  consists 
of  warning,  or  the  final  expression  of  the  thoughts  of, 
and  relationship  with,  Christ  of  the  assembly. 

The  angel  declares  the  truth  of  these  things,  and 
that  the  Lord  God  of  the  prophets — not  as  the  God 
and  Father  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  nor  as  directly 
teaching  the  assembly  as  dwelling  in  it  by  the  Spirit 
— the  Lord  God  of  the  prophets  has  sent  His  angel  to 
inform  His  servants  of  these  events.  "  Behold,"  says 
Christ,  speaking  as  of  old,  in  the  prophetic  spirit, 
rising  up  to  His  own  personal  testimony,  "  Behold,  I 
come  quickly.  Blessed  is  he  who  keepeth  the  say- 
ings of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."  The  assembly  is 
viewed,  not  as  the  subject  of  prophecy,  but  as  "  the 
things  that  are,"  time  not  being  counted,  specially  time 


THE  REVELATION.  565 

to  come.  Those  that  keep  it  are  those  concerned  in 
the  book,  who  are  warned  that  Christ  will  soon  be 
there.  No  doubt  we  all  can  profit  by  it,  but  we  are 
not  in  the  scenes  it  speaks  of.  John,  impressed  with 
the  dignity  of  the  messenger,  fell  down  and  would 
have  worshipped  him.  But  the  saints  of  the  assembly, 
even  if  made  prophets  of,  were  not  to  return  into  the 
uncertainty  of  ancient  days.  The  angel  was  a  simple 
angel,  John's  fellow-servant,  and  fellow-servant  of  his 
brethren  the  prophets :  he  was  to  worship  God.  Nor 
were  the  sayings  to  be  sealed,  as  with  Daniel:  the 
time  was  at  hand.  When  it  closed  its  testimony,  men 
would  remain  in  the  same  state  for  judgment  or  bless- 
ing. And  Christ  would  quickly  come,  and  every  man 
receive  as  his  work  was.  Verse  7  was  a  warning,  in 
form  of  blessing,  to  those  in  the  circumstances  referred 
to,  to  keep  the  sayings  of  the  book,  but  this  verse  12 
is  the  record  of  Christ's  coming  to  the  general  judg- 
ment of  the  quick. 

Finally,  Christ  announces  Himself,  having  taken  up 
the  word  in  Person  in  verse  12,  as  Alpha  and  Omega, 
the  beginning  and  the  end — God  before  and  after  all ; 
and  filling  duration.  I  suppose  we  are  to  take  as  the 
true  reading :  "  Blessed  are  they  that  wash  their  robes, 
that  they  may  have  a  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and 
may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city."  The 
redeemed,  cleansed  ones,  can  enter  there  and  feed  on 
the  tree  of  life;  for  I  suppose  it  is  the  fruit  here.  With- 
out are  the  unclean  and  violent,  and  those  who  love 
Satanic  falsehood  and  idolatry,  sin  against  purity, 
against  their  neighbour,  against  God,  and  follow  Satan. 

This  closes  the  summing  up.  The  Lord  Jesus  now 
reveals  Himself  in  His  own  Person,  speaking  to  John 
and  the  saints,  and  declares  who  He  is,  in  what 
character  He  appears  to  say  it  to  them.  "I  am  the 
root  and  offspring  of  David" — the  origin  and  heir  of 
the  temporal  promises  of  Israel ;  but  much  more  than 

XXII. 


566  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

that — He  is  the  bright  and  Morning  Star.  It  is  what 
He  is  before  He  appears,  in  both  respects ;  only  the 
former  regards  Israel  born  of  the  seed  of  David 
according  to  the  flesh.  But  the  Lord  has  taken 
another  character.  He  has  not  yet  arisen  as  the  Sun 
of  Righteousness  on  this  benighted  globe ;  but,  to 
faith,  the  dawn  is  there,  and  the  assembly  sees  Him  in 
the  now  far- spent  night  as  the  Morning  Star,  knows 
Him,  while  watching  according  to  His  own  word,  in 
His  bright  heavenly  character — a  character  which 
does  not  wake  a  sleeping  world,  but  is  the  delight  and 
joy  of  those  who  watch.  When  the  sun  arises,  He 
will  not  be  thus  known :  the  earth  will  never  so  know 
Him,  bright  as  the  day  may  be.  When  Christ  is  in 
this  place,  the  Spirit  dwells  in  the  assembly  below, 
and  the  assembly  has  its  own  relationship.  It  is  the 
bride  of  Christ,  and  her  desire  is  toward  Him. 

Thus  "  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come."  It  is 
not  a  warning  from  one  coming  as  a  judge  and  a 
rewarder,  but  the  revelation  of  Himself  which  awakens 
the  desire  of  the  bride  according  to  the  relationship  in 
which  grace  has  set  her.  Nor  is  it  a  mere  sentiment 
or  wish :  the  Spirit  who  dwells  in  the  assembly  leads 
and  suggests  her  thought.  But  the  Spirit  turns  also, 
and  the  heart  of  him  who  enjoys  the  relationship,  to 
others.  "  Let  him  that  heareth  " — let  him  who  hears 
the  voice  of  the  Spirit  in  the  assembly — join  in  the 
cry,  and  say.  Come.  It  is  one  common  hope,  it  should 
be  our  common  desire  ;  and  the  sense  of  what  is  com- 
ing on  the  earth,  and  the  sense  of  failure  in  things  that 
are,  ought  only,  though  it  be  in  truth  an  inferior 
motive,  to  urge  the  cry  in  all.  But  while  still  here, 
the  saint  has  another  place  also.  Not  only  do  his 
desires  go  after  God  upwards  and  the  heavenly  Bride- 
groom, but  he  reflects  God's  known  character,  by  having 
His  nature  and  Spirit  as  manifested  also  in  Christ's 
love,  and  in  possession  of  the  living  water,  though  not 


THE   REVELATION.  567 

of  the  Bridegroom.  He  turns  round  and  invites  others, 
"  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come,"  and  proclaims  it  forth 
then  to  the  world,  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  of 
the  water  of  life  freel}^"  Thus  the  whole  place  of  the 
heavenly  saint,  conscious  of  the  assembly's  place,  is 
brought  out  in  this  verse,  from  his  desire  of  Christ's 
coming,  to  his  call  to  whosoever  will  to  come. 

The  integrity  of  the  book  is  preserved  by  a  solemn 
warning  of  the  danger  of  losing  a  part  in  the  tree  of 
life*  and  the  holy  city.  Christ  then  cheers  the  saint's 
heart,  by  assuring  that  He  would  quickly  come ;  and 
the  heart  of  the  true  saint  responds  with  unfeigned 
and  earnest  desire,  "  Even  so,  come.  Lord  Jesus."  And 
then,  with  the  salutation  of  grace,  the  book  closes, 
leaving  the  promise  and  the  desire  as  the  last  words 
of  Jesus  on  the  heart. 

Let  the  reader  note  here  that,  in  the  beginning  and 
end  of  th©  book,  before  and  after  the  prophetic 
statements,  we  have  in  a  beautiful  way  the  conscious 
position  of  the  saints. 

The  first,  at  the  opening  of  the  whole  book,  gives  the 
individual  conscious  blessing  through  what  Christ  has 
done ;  the  latter,  the  whole  position  of  the  assembly, 
thus  distinguishing  clearly  the  saints  under  the  gospel 
from  those  whose  circumstances  are  prophetically 
made  known  to  them  in  this  book.  "  Unto  him  that 
loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own 
blood,  and  made  us  kings  and  priests  to  God  and  his 
Father."  As  soon  as  Christ  is  named  (and  it  is  so  in 
both  cases),  it  awakens  in  the  saints  the  consciousness 
of  Christ's  love  and  their  own  place  in  relationship 
with  Him.     They  are  already  washed  from  their  sins 

*  The  true  reading  here  is  "tree,"  not  "book;"  but  the  book 
of  life  is  not  life,  nor  our  being  written  there  final,  though  a 
primd  facie  register,  unless  indeed  written  there  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world :  but,  even  so,  it  is  not  the  same  thing 
as  the  possession  ot  life. 

XXII. 


568  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

in  His  own  blood,  and  made  kings  and  priests  to  God 
and  His  Father — have  their  place  and  state  fixed, 
before  any  of  the  prophetic  part  is  developed,  and  in 
the  coming  kingdom  will  enjoy  that  place,  not  of  being 
blessed  under  Christ,  but  of  being  associated  with  Him. 
Here  they  have  their  place  simply  in  the  kingdom  and 
priesthood;  it  is  individual  title  resulting  from  His 
first  coming.  They  are  loved,  washed  in  His  own 
blood,  and  associated  with  Him  in  the  kingdom. 

At  the  end  of  the  book,  Christ  is  revealed  as  the 
Morning  Star,  a  place  forming  no  part  of  the  prophecy, 
but  that  in  which  the  assembly,  who  has  waited  for 
Him,  is  associated  with  Him  for  herself,  and  the  king- 
dom. (Compare  the  promise  to  the  overcomers  in 
Thyatira.)*  This  draws  out  in  active  love  (not  as 
before,  simply  being  loved  and  what  we  are  made) — 
love  first  directed  towards  Christ  in  the  assembly's 
known  relation  to  Himself,  then  to  the  saints  who 
hear,  then  to  the  thirsty,  then  to  all  the  world.  The 
desire  of  the  assembly,  as  the  bride  with  whom  the 
Spirit  is,  is  directed  to  Christ's  second  coming  for  her- 
self— to  the  possessing  the  Morning  Star ;  then  the 
Spirit  turns  to  the  saints,  calling  on  them  to  say  to 
Jesus,  Come — to  join  in  this  desire.  But  we  have  the 
Spirit  though  not  the  Bridegroom;  hence  whoever  is 
athirst  is  called  on  to  come  and  drink,  and  thus  the 
gospel  proclaimed  abroad,  "Whosoever  will,  let  him 
take  the  water  of  life  freely."  It  is  love  acting  in  the 
saint  all  round  from  Christ  to  sinners  in  the  world. 

*  Compare  the  place  of  the  bright  cloud  in  Luke  ix.  There 
it  is  the  Father's  voice. 


.-<..<S^. 


London :  G.  Moreish,  20,  Paternoster  Square,  E.G. 


Date  Due 

H              -.    I   1-      -V- 

. 

•prflTTf 

seaJLA^M' 

iflCTC^ 

^m 

^^96 

iiJit****- 

^  ^_y* 

mT 

..  t-j 

mi 

f> 

