^his  book  belongs  to 


■«<<r>^  <s...c^ 


LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 

PRINCETON,  N.  J. 


PRESENTED  BY 

Mr.   Hoel  Lawrence  McQueen 


DivisiorC 
Section -J 


BS4I8 

V.I 


>J     ■ 


SYNOPSIS 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 


/ 

By  J.  N.  DARBY. 


VOL.  L 


GENESIS— II  CHRONICLES. 


NEW     EDITION— REVISED. 


LONDON: 
G.    MORRISH.    20,    PATERNOSTER     SQUARE. 


CONTENTS. 


FA  OB 

Introduction 

. 

.            •< 

•            •« 

1 

Genesis 

••• 

... 

••• 

8 

Exodus     ... 

•            •< 

•            •■ 

66 

Leviticus 

... 

126 

Numbers  ... 

. 

. 

.       228 

Deuteronomy... 

... 

286 

Joshua      ... 

.. 

. 

.       327 

Judges 

... 

376 

Ruth 

.. 

.. 

.       407 

I  Samuel 

... 

410 

II  Samuel 

.. 

. 

.       458 

I  Kings 

... 

486 

II  Kings 

. 

. 

.       521 

I  Chronicles  ... 

••• 

546 

IJ  Chronicles 

• 

•            • 

.            •< 

•            •■ 

.       573 

PREFACE. 


The  following  Synopsis  was  originally  written 
and  published  in  French,  at  the  desire  and  more 
immediately  for  the  use  of  Christians  speaking 
that  language.  It  has  been  already  translated 
into  English,  and  introduced.  Book  by  Book, 
into  a  religious  publication  appearing  from  time 
to  time.  It  has  been  thought  desirable  to  give 
it  as  a  whole. 

The  Synopsis  of  the  Book  of  Genesis,  which 
was  felt  to  be  too  brief,  has  been  considerably 
enlarged ;  and  the  whole  revised  and  corrected, 
but  without  any  material  change. 

In  the  original  publication  the  review  of  that 
part  of  Leviticus  which  treats  of  the  sacrifices 
which    prefigured    that    of    Christ,    had   been 

a  2 


VI  PREFACE. 

omitted,  as  such  a  review  had  been  already  pub- 
lished long  ago  in  ^*  Notes  on  the  Offerings/* 
and  more  fully  in  French  in  ^^Les  Types  du 
Levitique,"  since  then  translated  into  English 
also.  To  complete  the  Synopsis  now  published, 
this  last  tract  has  been,  after  revisal,  introduced 
into  the  present  work,  of  which  it  naturally 
formed  a  part. 

A  few  words  only  are  needed  to  introduce  the 
reader  to  the  present  publication.  He  is  not  to 
expect  a  commentary,  nor,  on  the  other  hand, 
to  suppose  that  he  has  a  book  which  he  can  read 
without  referring  continually  to  the  word  itself 
in  the  part  treated  of  The  object  of  the  book 
is  to  help  a  Christian,  desirous  of  reading  the 
word  of  God  with  profit,  in  seizing  the  scope  and 
connection  of  that  which  it  contains.  Though  a 
commentary  may  doubtless  aid  the  reader  in 
many  passages  in  which  God  has  given  to  the 
commentator  to  understand  in  the  main  the 
intention  of  the  Spirit   of  God,   or  to  furnish 


PREFACE.  Vll 

philological  principles  and  information,  which 
facilitate  to  another  the  discovery  of  that  in- 
tention ;  yet  if  it  pretend  to  give  the  contents  of 
scripture,  or  if  he  who  uses  it  seeks  these  in  its 
remarks,  such  commentary  can  only  mislead  and 
impoverish  the  soul.  A  commentary,  even  if 
always  right,  can  at  most  give  what  the  com- 
mentator has  himself  learned  from  the  passage. 
The  fullest  and  wisest  must  be  very  far  indeed 
from  the  living  fulness  of  the  divine  word.  The 
Synopsis  now  presented  has  no  pretension  of  the 
kind.  Deeply  convinced  of  the  divine  inspira- 
tion of  the  scriptures,  given  to  us  of  God,  and 
confirmed  in  this  conviction  by  daily  and  grow- 
ing discoveries  of  their  fulness,  depth,  and  per- 
fectness;  ever  more  sensible,  through  grace,  of 
the  admirable  perfection  of  the  parts,  and  the 
wonderful  connection  of  the  whole,  the  writer 
only  hopes  to  help  the  reader  in  the  study  of 
them. 

The  scriptures  have  a  living  source,  and  living 


Vlll  PBEFACE 

power  has  pervaded  their  composition:  hence 
their  infiniteness  of  bearing,  and  the  impossi- 
bility of  separating  any  one  part  from  its  con- 
nection with  the  whole,  because  one  God  is  the 
living  centre  from  which  all  flows ;  one  Christ, 
the  living  centre  round  which  all  its  truth 
circles,  and  to  which  it  refers,  though  in  various 
glory;  and  one  Spirit,  the  divine  sap  which 
carries  its  power  from  its  source  in  God  to  the 
minutest  branches  of  the  all-united  truth,  testi- 
fying of  the  glory,  the  grace,  and  the  truth  of 
Him  whom  God  sets  forth  as  the  object  and 
centre  and  head  of  all  that  is  in  connection  with 
Himself,  of  Him  who  is,  withal,  God  over  all, 
blessed  for  evermore. 

To  give  all  this  as  a  whole  and  perfectly 
would  require  the  Giver  Himself.  Even  in 
learning  it,  we  know  in  part,  and  we  prophesy 
in  part.  The  more — beginning  from  the  utmost 
leaves  and  branches  of  this  revelation  of  the 
mind  of  God,  by  which  we  have  been  reached 


PREFACE.  IX 

when  far  from  Him — we  have  traced  it  up 
towards  its  centre,  and  thence  looked  down 
again  towards  its  extent  and  diversity,  the  more 
we  learn  its  iniiniteness  and  our  own  feebleness 
of  apprehension.  We  learn,  blessed  be  God, 
this,  that  the  love  which  is  its  source  is  found 
in  unmingled  perfectness  and  fullest  display  in 
those  manifestations  of  it  Avhich  have  reached  us 
even  in  our  ruined  state.  The  same  perfect  God 
of  love  is  in  it  all.  But  the  unfoldings  of  divine 
wisdom  in  the  counsels  in  which  God  has  dis- 
played Himself  remain  ever  to  us  a  subject  of 
research  in  which  every  new  discovery,  by  in- 
creasing our  spiritual  intelligence,  makes  the 
infiniteness  of  the  whole,  and  the  way  in  which 
it  surpasses  all  our  thoughts,  only  more  and 
more  clear  to  us.  But  there  are  great  leading 
principles  and  truths,  the  pointing  out  of  which 
in  the  various  books  which  compose  the  scrip- 
tures, may  assist  in  the  intelligence  of  the  various 
parts  of  scripture.     It  is  attempted  to  do  this 


X  PREFACE. 

here.  What  the  reader  is  to  expect,  conse- 
quently, in  this  Synopsis,  is  nothing  more  than 
an  attempt  to  help  him  in  studying  scripture  for 
himself.  All  that  would  turn  him  aside  from 
this  would  be  mischievous  to  him ;  what  helps 
him  in  it  may  be  useful.  He  cannot  even  profit 
much  by  the  following  pages  otherwise  than  in 
using  them  as  an  accompaniment  to  the  study 
of  the  text  itself 

From  what  has  been  said  it  will  easily  be 
understood  that  the  writer  can  readily  feel  the 
imperfection  of  what  he  has  written.  Often  he 
would  have  liked  to  have  introduced  the  de- 
velopments which  he  has  enjoyed,  when  unfolding 
particular  passages  in  detail  and  applying  them 
to  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  others ;  but  this 
would  have  turned  him  aside  from  the  object  of 
the  work.  He  trusts,  however,  that  the  right 
direction  is  given  to  the  scriptural  researches  of 
the  reader :  grace  alone  can  make  those  re- 
searches effectual. 


PREFACE.  xi 

He  cannot  close  this  short  introduction  to  the 
book  without  expressing  the  effect  which  the 
discovery  of  the  perfectness  and  divinely  ordered 
connection  of  the  scriptures  produces  in  his 
mind  as  respects  what  is  called  Rationalism.  No- 
thing is  proved  by  the  system  so  denominated 
but  the  total  absence  of  all  divine  intelligence,  a 
poverty  associated  with  intellectual  pretension, 
an  absence  of  moral  judgment,  a  pettiness  of 
observation  on  what  is  external,  with  a  blind- 
ness to  divine  and  infinite  fulness  in  the  sub- 
stance, which  would  be  contemptible  through  its 
false  pretensions,  if  it  were  not  a  subject  of  pity, 
because  of  those  in  whom  these  pretensions  are 
found.  None  but  God  can  deliver  from  the  pride 
of  human  pretension.  But  the  haughtiness  which 
excludes  God,  because  it  is  incompetent  to  dis- 
cover Him,  and  then  talks  of  His  work,  and 
meddles  with  His  weapons,  according  to  the  mea- 
sure of  its  own  strength,  can  prove  nothing  but 
its  own  contemptible  folly.     Ignorance  is  gene- 


Xll  PREFACE. 

rally  confident,  because  it  is  ignorant ;  and  such 
is  the  mind  of  man  in  dealing  with  the  things  of 
God.  The  writer  must  be  forgiven  for  speaking 
plainly  in  these  days  on  this  point.  The  preten- 
sions of  infidel  reason  infect  even  Christians. 

He  would  add  that  it  has  not  been  his  object 
to  unfold  the  blessed  fruits  the  word  produces  in 
the  mind  and  ways  of  him  who  receives  it,  nor 
the  feelings  produced  in  his  own  mind  in  read- 
ing it,  but  to  help  the  reader  in  the  discovery  of 
that  which  has  produced  them.  May  the  Lord 
only  make  the  word  as  divinely  precious  to  him 
as  it  has  been  to  the  writer ;  to  both  ever  still 
more  sol 


SYNOPSIS 

OF 

THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I  PROPOSE  giving  in  this  work,  of  which  Genesis  is  the 
commencement,  a  short  synopsis  of  the  principal  sub- 
jects of  each  book  of  the  Bible,  to  aid  in  the  study  of 
this  precious  volume  that  our  God  has  given  to  us.  I 
do  not  at  all  pretend  to  give  the  full  contents  of  each 
book,  but  only  (as  God  shall  grant  to  me)  a  sort  of 
index  of  the  subjects,  the  divisions  of  the  books  by 
subjects,  and  (as  far  as  I  am  enabled)  the  object  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  each  part,  hoping  that  it  may  aid 
others  in  reading  the  book  of  God.  The  Bible,  in  its 
object,  is  a  whole,  which  presents  to  us  God  coming 
forth  from  His  essential  fulness  to  manifest  all  that 
He  is,  and  to  bring  back  into  the  enjoyment  of  this 
fulness  with  Himself  those  who,  having  been  made 
partakers  of  His  nature,  have  become  capable  of  com- 
prehending and  loving  His  counsels  and  Himself. 

But  before  this  purpose  is  fully  revealed,  man  is 
brought  upon  the  scene  as  a  responsible  being,  and  his 
history,  as  such,  given  to  us  in  the  various  phases  through 
which  he  has  passed,  up  to  the  cross,  where  his  enmity 
against  God  was  manifested,  and  the  foundation  laid 

VOL.   I.  B 


2  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

for  the  full  revelation  of  that  purpose,  and  the  accom- 
plishment of  God's  good  pleasure  in  man,  and  laid  by 
that  in  which  the  whole  divine  character  in  love  and 
righteousness  was  revealed  and  glorified,  and  God  per- 
fectly glorified  in  every  respect  in  bringing  man  into 
glory.  The  creation  has  served  as  a  sphere  to  this 
manifestation  of  God ;  but  as  a  manifestation  it  would 
have  been  in  itself  altogether  imperfect,  though  in  a 
measure  it  declared  His  glory. 

Sin  moreover  having  entered,  the  state  of  the  creation 
and  the  effects  of  providence,  which  regulated  its  order 
and  details  here  below,  tended,  in  the  state  in  which 
man  was,  to  give  a  false  idea  of  God.  For  if  he  re- 
ferred this  creation  and  this  government  to  God,  he 
saw  a  power  which  belonged  to  Him  alone ;  while  there 
existed  at  the  same  time  evil  which  overthrew  every 
idea  he  could  form  of  powerful  goodness.  The  mind 
of  man  was  lost  in  the  effort  to  explain  it,  and  super- 
stitions and  philosophy  came  in  to  complete  the  con- 
fusion in  which  he  found  himself.  On  the  one  hand, 
superstitions  made  falser  still  the  false  ideas  that  man 
had  formed  for  himself  of  God;  and  on  the  other 
hand,  philosophy,  by  the  efforts  which  man's  natural 
intelligence  made  to  get  rid  of  the  difficulty,  plunged 
him  into  such  obscurity  and  such  uncertainty  that  he 
finished  by  rejecting  every  idea  of  God  whatever,  save 
the  need  which  had  made  him  seek  one. 

These  superstitions  were  in  truth  nothing  more  than 
that  Satan  had  possessed  himself  of  the  idea  of  God 
in  the  heart,  in  order  to  nourish,  under  this  name,  its 
lusts,  and  degrade  it  in  consecrating  them  by  the  name 
of  a  god,  who  was  in  truth  a  demon ;  and  philosophy 
was  but  the  useless  effort  of  the  mind  of  man  to  rise 
to  the  idea  of  God — a  height  which  he  was  incapable 
of  attaining,  and  which  in  consequence  he  abandoned, 
making  it  a  subject  of  pride  to  do  without  it.  Even 
the  law  of  God,  while  declaring  the  responsibility  of 


INTRODUCTION.  3 

man  to  God,  and  thus  asserting  His  authority,  only 
revealed  Him  in  the  exercise  of  judgment,  requiring 
from  man  what  he  ought  to  be,  without  revealing  what 
God  was,  save  in  justice ;  and  in  no  way  in  relation- 
ship with  the  scene  of  misery  and  ignorance  which  sin 
had  brought  upon  the  human  race.  It  did  not  shew 
what  God  was  in  the  midst  of  that  misery,  nor  could 
do  so ;  for  its  office  was  to  require  from  man  consis- 
tency with  a  certain  line  of  conduct,  of  which  the 
Legislator  constituted  Himself  judge,  at  the  end  of  the 
career  of  him  who  was  subjected  to  it.  The  Son  of 
God  is  God  Himself  in  the  midst  of  all  this  scene,  the 
faithful  Witness  of  all  that  He  is  in  His  relationship 
with  it.  In  a  word,  it  is  the  Son  of  God  who  reveals 
God  Himself,  and  who  becomes  thus  necessarily  the 
centre  of  all  His  counsels,  and  of  all  the  manifestation 
of  His  glory,  as  well  as  the  object  of  all  His  ways. 

We  shall  find  then  three  great  subjects  in  the  Bible 
— the  creation  (now  under  the  effect  of  the  fall)  ;* 
the  law,  which  gave  to  man,  such  as  he  is  now,  a  rule 
— to  man  in  the  midst  of  this  creation  to  see  if  he 
could  live  there  according  to  God,  and  be  there  blessed ; 
and  the  Son  of  God. 

The  first  two,  namely,  the  creation  and  the  law,  are 
bound  up  with  the  responsibility  of  the  creature.  We 
shall  find  all  that  is  connected  with  these  two  either 
guilty  or  corrupted.  The  Son,  on  the  contrary — the 
manifestation  of  the  grace  and  love  of  the  Father,  and 
of  God's  love  to  the  world,  when  this  guilt  was  already 

*  I  confine  myself  more  especially  to  the  lower  creation  where 
man  was  placed.  There  are  fallen  angels,  and  the  created 
heavens  are  defiled  through  sin.  But  angels  were  a  distinct 
creation,  and  present  to  celebrate  with  joy  the  creation  as  we 
view  it,  and  as  it  is  viewed  in  Genesis  i.,  after  the  first  verse,  as 
a  scene  with  which  man  has  to  do.  Still  as  responsible  and 
creatures,  where  not  preserved  of  God,  they  were  liable  to  fall, 
and  in  fact  did  fall.  But  they  were  a  distinct  creation.  Hence 
we  have  them  not  in  the  creation  recounted  in  Genesis. 


4  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

there  in  lawless  sin  and  lawbreaking,  the  express 
image  of  the  subsistence  of  God,  in  whom  the  Father 
was  seen — we  shall  see  suflfering  in  love  in  the  midst 
of  this  fallen  creation  and  the  contradictions  of  a  re- 
bellious people,  and  when  God  had  been  perfectly  glori- 
fied in  respect  of  sin,  accomplishing  all  the  counsels  of 
God  in  uniting  all  things  in  blessing  by  His  power  and 
under  His  authority,  those  even  who  with  hatred  had 
rejected  Him  being  forced  to  own  Him  Lord  to  the 
glory  of  God  the  Father ;  and  at  last,  when  He  shall 
have  subjected  all  things,  giving  up  to  God  the  Father 
the  kingdom  of  His  glory  as  Son  of  man,  that  God 
may  be  all  in  all. 

Besides  all  this,  there  are  in  the  counsels  of  God 
those  with  whom  the  God  whom  we  know  in  Jesus 
surrounds  Himself,  who  are  to  be  brought  into  the 
likeness  of  Him  with  whom  they  are  associated  as  sons, 
He  the  firstborn  among  many  brethren  who  are  to 
enjoy  eternally  with  God  His  favour  and  blessing, 
as  it  rests  on  Him  with  whom  and  through  whom  they 
enjoy  it.  There  is  also  an  earthly  people  in  whom  God 
manifests  the  principles  of  His  government  here  below 
and  His  unfailing  faithfulness ;  it  is  to  this  last,  con- 
sequently, that  the  law  was  given.  Finally,  in  the 
purpose  of  God  before  the  world  was  (but  hidden  until 
the  fit  moment  when,  its  redemption  being  accom- 
plished, the  Holy  Spirit  could,  by  dwelling  in  it,  con- 
sequent on  the  accomplishment  of  the  work  of  redemp- 
tion and  the  glorifying  of  Christ,  reveal  to  it  all  the 
efficacy  of  its  redemption  and  the  whole  extent  of  its 
blessing),  there  was  a  church,  chosen  in  Christ,  His 
bride,  to  be  presented  to  Himself  without  spot  or 
wrinkle.  His  body  too,  the  fulness  of  Him  who  filleth 
all  in  all,  united  to  Him  by  the  Spirit  with  which  all 
the  members  are  baptised,  and  soon  to  be  manifested  in 
glory  when  He  takes  that  headship. 

The  cross  is  the  centre  of  all  this  in  every  respect. 


INTRODUCTION.  5 

There  the  history  of  man  in  responsibility,  as  the  child 
of  Adam  ends,  and  there  begins  anew  in  grace  reign- 
ing through  righteousness.  There  good  and  evil  are 
fully  brought  to  an  issue,  hatred  in  man  and  love  in 
God,  sin  and  the  righteousness  of  God  against  it.* 
There  God  is  perfectly  glorified  morally,  and  man 
judged  in  sin  and  redeemed  in  righteousness,  the  domi- 
nion of  evil  destroyed,  and  that  of  man  established  in 
righteousness  as  God  willed  it  should  be,  death  and  he 
that  had  the  power  of  it  set  aside,  and  this  by  an  act 
of  love  which  set  the  Son  of  God  as  man  at  the  head 
of  all  things  in  righteousness.  All,  through  the  cross, 
rests  secure  and  immutable  in  result  on  the  ground 
of  redemption :  what  shall  the  end  of  the  despisers  of 
it  be? 

Hence  we  shall  find,  not  only  the  creation,  the  law, 
and  the  Son  of  God,  but  the  dealings  by  which  God 
has  prepared  the  way  for,  and  led  men  to  expect,  His 
manifestation;  the  development  of  all  the  principles 
on  which  He  entered  into  relationship  with  men ;  the 
consequences  of  the  violation  of  the  law ;  and  lastly, 
in  its  place,  the  manifestation  of  the  church  upon  the 
earth,  and  the  directions  He  has  given  to  it,  together 
with  the  course  of  events  which  are  connected  with  its 
existence  and  its  unfaithfulness  on  the  earth;  with 
that  of  the  earthly  people  of  God;  and  with  man 
himself,  responsible  to  God  and  clothed  with  authority 
by  Him  on  the  earth :  the  whole  closing  with  the  glory 
of  Jesus,  Son  of  man,  maintaining  the  blessing  and 

*  This  is  morally  of  the  greatest  depth  and  fulness.  We  have 
man  in  absolute  evQ,  hatred  against  God  manifested  in  goodness ; 
Satan  in  all  his  power  over  all  Adam's  children,  man  in  perfec- 
tion, Christ,  in  love  to  His  Father  and  perfect  obedience ;  God  in 
righteousness  against  sin,  and  in  love  to  the  sinner ;  and  all  this 
in  the  very  place  of  sin  where  man  was.  Hence  all  founded  on 
it  is  immutably  stable.  A  risen  Christ  is,  as  to  the  human  state 
in  itself,  the  result  of  this,  man  in  a  new  eternal  condition, 
beyond  sin,  death,  Satan's  power  and  judgment. 


6  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

union  of  all  things  under  the  reign  of  God ;  and,  in 
fine,  God  all  in  all.  The  history  of  Jesus ;  the  position 
granted  to  the  church  in  glory  according  to  the  counsels 
of  God,  the  mystery  hidden  from  the  ages ;  her  parti- 
cipation in  the  sufferings  of  Jesus,  and  her  union  with 
Him ;  and  in  general  the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
given  from  on  high,  are  clearly  revealed  in  the  New 
Testament.  That  of  which  we  have  spoken  previously 
forms  the  course  of  the  ages ;  the  church  forms  no  part 
of  them. 

This  separates  the  Bible  naturally  into  two  parts: — 
that  which  speaks  of  the  first  two  subjects,  the  creation 
•and  man  in  his  relationship  with  God  without  law,  and 
His  people  under  law ;  and  that  which  speaks  of  the 
Son  come  upon  the  earth,  and  all  that  relates  to  the 
church  and  its  glory — that  is,  in  general,  the  Old  and 
New  Testament.  We  shall  see,  however,  that,  in  the 
Old,  promise  and  prophecy  referred  always  to  the  Son, 
eternal  object  of  the  counsels  of  God :  as,  in  the  New, 
there  were  prophecies  of  the  future  dealings  of  God 
with  the  earth,  and  so  far  connected  with  the  Old ;  and, 
further,  the  rejection  of  the  Son  gave  occasion  to  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  earth — a  fact  which 
modified  the  whole  state  of  the  people  of  God,  and 
introduced  special  subjects  which  depended  on  this 
presence.  For  there  is  this  peculiar  in  the  historical 
part  of  the  New,  that  the  Son  was  presented  first  to 
the  world,  and  to  the  people  under  the  law,  to  put 
them  anew  to  the  test.  The  bearing  of  His  coming  at 
first  was  not  the  accomplishment  of  the  counsels'  of 
God,  but  to  present  to  man,  still  placed  under  the  old 
order  of  things,  the  faithful  testimony  of  what  God 
was,  if  the  heart  of  man  had  any  capacity  to  receive 
it,  or  to  discern  Him  who  returned  in  grace  into  the 
midst  of  a  fallen  creation,  and  did  so  in  the  very  form 
and  nature  of  him  in  whom  the  fall  had  taken  place ; 
and  to  the  Jews,  if  they  had  been  willing  to  receive 


INTRODUCTION.  7 

Him,  the  Lord  of  glory,  the  object  of  all  the  prophe- 
cies and  of  all  the  promises;  and,  in  fine  (the  world 
not  having  known  Him,  and  His  own  not  having  re- 
ceived Him),  to  accomplish  the  sacrifice,  which  could 
lay  the  foundation  of  a  new  world  before  God,  and 
place  the  redeemed  in  joy  before  the  face  of  His 
Father,  heirs  of  all  that  was  established  in  Him  the 
second  Adam  to  make  the  church  His  body  and  His 
bride. 

From  all  that  I  have  said,  it  results  also  that  the  Old 
Testament  contains  two  very  distinct  parts — often 
united,  it  is  true,  in  the  same  book,  and  even  in  a  single 
passage,  still  distinct  in  their  nature — the  history  of 
man  as  he  was,  and  God's  way  with  him,  or  the  histor- 
ical part,  whether  before  the  law  or  under  the  law ; 
and  the  revelation  of  the  thoughts  and  intentions  of 
God  as  to  the  future,  which  are  always  connected  with 
Christ.  This  revelation  sometimes  takes  the  character 
of  a  positive  prophecy,  sometimes  the  form  of  a  typical 
event  which  prefigures  what  God  would  afterwards 
accomplish.  I  may  cite,  as  an  example  of  this  last 
way  of  expressing  the  thoughts  of  God,  the  sacrifice 
of  Isaac.  Evidently  there  is  an  historical  instruction 
of  the  utmost  importance  in  the  touching  example  of 
Abraham's  obedience ;  but  every  one  easily  recognises 
in  it  the  type  of  a  sacrifice,  for  which  God  prepared 
for  Himself  a  Lamb,  of  which  Isaac,  the  beloved  of 
his  father,  was  but  a  feeble  figure ;  and  where  resur- 
rection, not  in  figure  but  in  power,  is  the  source  of~  life 
and  hope  to  every  believer. 

But  perhaps  I  anticipate  too  much  the  details.  Let 
us  proceed  to  the  general  character  of  the  books  of 
scripture. 


GENESIS. 

Genesis  has  a  character  of  its  own;  and,  as  the  be- 
ginning of  the  Holy  Book,  presents  to  us  all  the  great 
elementary  principles  which  find  their  development  in 
the  history  of  the  relationships  of  God  with  man,  which 
is  recorded  in  the  following  books.  The  germ  of  each 
of  these  principles  will  be  found  here,  unless  we  except 
the  law.  There  was  however  a  law  given  to  Adam  in 
his  innocence ;  and  Hagar,  we  know,  prefigures  at  least 
Sinai.  There  is  scarce  anything  afterwards  accom- 
plished of  which  the  expression  is  not  found  in  this 
book  in  one  form  or  another.  There  is  found  also  in 
it,  though  the  sad  history  of  man's  fall  be  there,  a 
freshness  in  the  relationship  of  men  with  God,  which 
is  scarce  met  with  afterwards  in  men  accustomed  to 
abuse  it  and  to  live  in  a  society  full  of  itself.  But 
whether  it  be  the  creation,  man  and  his  fall,  sin,  the 
power  of  Satan,  the  promises,  the  call  of  God,  His 
judgment  of  the  world,  redemption,  the  covenants,  the 
separation  of  the  people  of  God,  their  condition  of 
strangers  on  the  earth,  the  resurrection,  the  establish- 
ment of  Israel  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  blessing  of 
the  nations,  the  seed  of  promise,  the  exaltation  of  a 
rejected  Lord  to  the  throne  of  the  world,  all  are  found 
here  in  fact  or  in  figure — in  figure,  now  that  we  have 
the  key,  even  the  church  itself. 

Let  us  examine  then  the  contents  of  this  book  in 
order.  First,  we  have  the  creation — creation  in  which 
man  is  found  placed  on  earth  as  centre  and  head.  We 
have  first  the  work  of  God,  and  then  the  rest  of  God : 
at  the  close  of  His  work,  rest  from  labour,  without 
presenting  the  idea  that  any  one  participated  in  it.   God 


GENESIS.  9 

Himself  rested  from  His  work.   Man  comes  in  to  take 
his  place  then  in  happiness  at  its  head. 

But  here  some  brief  general  remarks  deserve  a  place. 
This  revelation  from  God  is  not  a  history  by  Him  of 
all  that  He  has  done,  but  what  has  been  given  to  man 
for  his  profit,  the  truth  as  to  what  he  has  to  say  to. 
Its  object  is  to  communicate  to  man  all  that  regards 
his  own  relationship  with  God.  In  connection  with 
the  second  Adam  he  will  know  as  he  is  known ;  and 
already,  by  means  of  the  work  of  Christ,  he  has  that 
unction  of  the  Holy  One  by  which  he  knows  all  things. 
But  historically  the  revelation  is  partial.  It  communi- 
cates what  is  for  the  conscience  and  spiritual  affections 
of  man.  The  created  world  therefore  is  taken  up  as 
it  subsists  before  the  eyes  of  man,  and  he  in  the  midst 
of  it,  and  in  so  bringing  it  forward  Genesis  gives  God's 
work  as  the  author  of  it.  What  is  here  said  is  true  of 
the  whole  Bible.  Here  it  is  evident  in  this,  that  no- 
thing is  said  of  the  creation  but  what  places  man  in  the 
position  which  God  had  made  for  him  in  the  creation 
itself,  or  presents  to  him  this  sphere  of  his  existence 
as  being  the  work  of  God.  Thus  no  mention  is  made 
of  any  heavenly  beings.  Nothing  is  said  of  their 
creation.  We  find  them  as  soon  as  they  are  in  relation- 
ship with  men ;  although  afterwards,  as  a  truth,  it  is 
fully  recognised  of  course  that  they  are  so  created. 

Thus  also,  as  regards  this  earth,  except  the  fact  of 
its  creation,  nothing  is  said  of  it  beyond  what  relates 
to  the  present  form  of  it.  The  fact  is  stated  that 
God  created  all  things,  all  man  sees,  all  the  material 
universe.  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens 
and  the  earth."  What  may  have  taken  place  between 
that  time  and  the  moment  when  the  earth  (for  it  only 
is  then  spoken  of)  was  without  form  and  void,  is  left 
in  entire  obscurity.  Darkness  was  then  upon  the  face 
of  the  deep,  but  the  darkness  is  only  spoken  of  as 
resting  on  the  face  of  the  deep. 

L 


10  THE   BOOKS    OF   THE   BIBLE. 

From  out  of  this  state  of  chaos  and  darkness  in 
which  the  earth  then  lay  God  brought  it,  first  intro- 
ducing light  into  it  by  His  word,  and  then  formed  seas 
and  dry  land,  and  furnished  it  with  plants  and  living 
creatures.  In  this  earth,  thus  prepared  and  furnished, 
man,  made  after  the  image  of  God,  is  placed  as  lord  of 
all  that  was  in  it.  Its  fruits  are  given  him  for  food ; 
and  God  rests  from  His  work,  and  distinguishes  with 
His  blessing  the  day  which  saw  His  labours  closed. 
Man  enjoyed  the  fruit  of  God's  work  rather  than 
entered  into  the  rest;  for  in  nothing  had  he  taken  part 
in  the  work. 

The  first  four  days,  God  brings  light  and  order  out 
of  darkness  and  confusion:  light,  the  first  day;  the 
expanse  as  a  scene  of  heavenly  power  over  the  earth, 
the  second  day;  then  He  divided  what  was  formed 
and  orderly,  on  the  one  hand,  from  the  moving  power- 
ful but  shapeless  mass  of  waters,  on  the  other,  and  then 
ornamented  the  ordered  habitable  scene  with  beauty  and 
fruitfulness  on  the  third.  The  symbols  of  directing 
power  were  set  visibly  in  their  places  on  the  fourth. 

The  scene  of  man's  display  and  dominion  was  formed, 
but  man  was  not  yet  there.  But  before  He  formed 
man,  God  created  living  energies  of  every  kind  in  the 
seas,  and  earth,  and  air,  which,  instinct  with  life,  should 
propagate  and  multiply,  the  proof  of  God's  life-giving 
power,  that  to  matter  He  could  communicate  living 
energy ;  and  thus,  not  only  a  scene  was  formed,  where 
His  purposes  in  man  should  be  displayed,  but  that 
existence,  which  man  should  rule  so  as  to  display  his 
energies  and  rights  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and 
as  holding  his  place  as  vicegerent  over  the  earth,  apart 
and  distinct  from  all,  the  centre  of  all,  the  ruler  of  all, 
as  interested  in  them  as  his ;  living  in  his  own  sphere 
of  blessedness  according  to  his  nature,  and  as  to  others, 
ordering  all  in  blessing  and  subjection.  In  the  midst 
of  all  the  prepared  creation,  in  a  word,  man  is  set. 


GENESIS.  11 

But  this  was  not  all.  He  was  not  to  spring  out  of 
matter  by  the  mere  will  of  God,  as  the  beasts,  by  that 
power  which  calls  things  that  are  not  as  though  they 
were,  and  they  are.  God  formed  man  out  of  the  dust, 
and  when  formed  breathed  from  Himself  into  his 
nostrils  the  breath  of  life,  and  thus  man  became  a 
living  soul  in  immediate  connection  with  God  Himself. 
As  the  apostle  states  elsewhere,  we  also  are  His  offspring. 
It  is  not  said  "  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  ;"  but  "  Let  us 
make."  And  He  made  man  in  His  likeness,  created 
him  indeed  to  multiply  as  the  other  living  creatures, 
but  gave  him  dominion  over  them,  and  made  him  the 
centre  and  head  of  God's  creation  on  the  earth.  The 
seeds  of  the  fruitful  earth  were  given  to  him,  the  green 
herb  and  its  increase  to  the  beasts.  Death  and  violence 
were  not  yet.* 

We  shall  see,  in  chapter  ii.,  another  immensely  im- 
portant principle  brought  out  as  to  man,  when  the 
question  of  his  relationship  to  God  is  brought  forward. 
Here  his  creation  is  a  distinct  one  from  all  else ;  he  is 
presented  simply,  apart  from  every  other  thought,  as 

*  Nothing  can  be  more  marked  than  the  distinction  of  man — '■ 
of  that  being  in  whom  the  purposes  of  God  also  were  to  be  ful- 
filled ;  His  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men,  His  good  pleasure 
in  (not  merely  good  will  towards)  men  proved  by  His  blessed 
Son  becoming  a  man.  Here  no  doubt  it  is  the  responsible  man, 
but  the  difference  from  all  other  creatures  is  marked  as  strongly 
as  possible.  The  sixth  day's  creation  finishes  with  the  usual 
formula,  "And  God  saw  that  it  was  good"  (chap.  i.  25),  before 
man  is  spoken  of.  Then  comes  a  solemn  consultation  to  give 
him  a  special  place,  and  the  image  and  likeness  of  God  are  in- 
troduced by  God  as  that  after  which  He  creates  him.  And  it  is 
repeated, "  so  God  created  man  in  his  own  image."  I  must  say, 
to  make  a  mere  animal  of  him  is  monstrous  and  slights  this 
passage,  the  emphatic  declaration  of  God.  As  an  order  of  being, 
he  is  evidently  the  counterpart  of  the  ways  of  God,  though  this 
be  only  fully  accomplished  in  Christ  according  to  Psalm  viii. 
which  just  brings  this  out  :  compare  Eomans  v.  14  and 
Hebrews  ii. 


12  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

God's  workmanship  as  a  creature,  the  head  and  centre 
of  the  rest,  the  ruler  over  them  all.  But  this  we  may- 
remark  :  while  he  represents  God  and  is  like  Him  we 
have  nothing  of  righteousness  and  holiness  here.  This 
came  in  by  redemption  and  the  partaking  of  the  divine 
nature.  There  was  of  course  the  absence  of  evil,  and 
so  far  the  likeness  of  God;  but  ignorance  of  it,  not 
what  God  is  in  respect  of  it.  It  is  much  more  here 
the  place  man  holds,  than  his  nature,  though  the 
absence  of  evil,  and  the  spring  of  condescending  affec- 
tions as  the  centre  of  being,  must  have  been  found 
there,  had  he  not  fallen.  These  last  are  more  the 
likeness,  his  place  more  the  image.  He  was  the  central 
authority  of  all  things,  and  all  things  referred  to  him 
as  their  head.  All  authority  and  all  affections  were  re- 
lated to  him  as  their  centre  and  head,  and  no  sin,  sorrow, 
or  evil,  or  insubordinate  self-seeking  was  there.  Un- 
f  alien  moral  order  would  have  been  his  delight. 

The  first  three  verses  of  chapter  ii.  belong  to  the 
first  chapter.  It  is  the  rest  of  God,  He  ceasing  from 
His  own  works,  all  very  good. 

In  chapter  ii.  we  have  man's  relationship  with  God, 
and  his  own  portion  as  such.  Hence  the  Lord*  God  is 
introduced :  not  merely  God  as  a  creator,  but  God  in 
relationship  with  those  He  has  created.  Hence  we 
have  the  special  manner  of  man's  creation. 

Only  a  word  or  two  is  called  for  as  to  the  garden. 
It  was  a  place  of  delights.     Eden  means  pleasure.     It 

*  That  is  Jehovah  Elohun,  a  personal  name  as  well  as  G-od- 
head.  It  was  important  too  that  Israel  should  know  that  their 
God  was  the  original  Creator  of  all.  Still  it  is  only  used  when 
special  ways  and  connection  with  man  are  introduced.  The  dis- 
tinction of  Jehovistic  and  Elohistic  documents  is  the  merest 
child's  play,  and  flows  from  entire  ignorance  of  the  ways  and 
mind  of  God.  There  is  always  a  reason  for  one  or  the  other. 
Elohim  is  simply  God ;  Jehovah  is  the  acting  governing  person 
in  time,  though  self-existing,  who  abides  ever  the  same  and 
having  to  do  with  others,  whc  is.  aoid  was,  and  is  to  come. 


GENESIS.  13 

has  wholly  disappeared,  and  it  was  meant  that  it 
should;  only  we  find,  by  two  at  least  of  the  rivers, 
that  it  was  on  this  earth  substantially  as  we  have  it. 
Jehovah  Elohim  had  formed  the  man,  Jehovah  Elohim 
had  planted  the  garden.  The  river  of  God  to  water 
the  earth  had  its  rise  there.  The  fresh  springs  of  God 
are  found  in  the  place  of  His  delight.  Man  was  set 
there  to  dress  and  keep  it.  Man  and  the  earth  are 
both  now  in  ruin. 

But  we  have  in  this  chapter,  more  particularly,  the 
special  relationship  of  man  with  God,  with  his  wife 
(type  of  Christ  and  His  church),  with  the  creation; 
and  the  two  great  principles,  from  which  everything 
flows  as  regards  man,  established  in  the  garden  where 
man  was  placed  in  blessing,  namely,  responsibility  in 
obedience,  and  a  sovereign  source  of  life — the  tree  of 
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  and  the  tree  of  life. 
In  these  two  things,  in  conciliating  these  two,  lies  the 
lot  of  every  man.*  It  is  impossible  out  of  Christ.  It 
is  the  question  raised  in  the  law,  and  answered  in  grace 
in  Christ.  The  law  put  life  as  the  result  of  the  perfect 
obedience  of  him  who  knew  good  and  evil,  that  is,  made 
it  depend  on  the  result  of  our  responsibility.  Christ, 
having  undergone  the  consequence  of  man's  having 
failed,  becomes  (in  the  power  of  a  life  which  had  gained 
the  victory  over  death  which  was  the  consequence  of 
that  disobedience)  a  source  of  life  eternal  that  evil 
could  not  reach,  and  that  in  a  righteousness  perfect 
according  to  a  work  which  has  taken  away  all  guilt 
from  him  that  has  share  in  it,  a  righteousness  more- 

*  In  Eden  the  two  principles  were  there,  obedience  and  life; 
man  failed,  incurred  death,  and  was  excluded  from  life  there. 
The  law  did  not  treat  man  as  lost,  though  it  proves  him  so,  but 
takes  up  the  two  principles  and  makes  life  dependent  on  obedi- 
ence. Christ  takes  the  consequence  of  failure  for  us  on  the 
cross,  and  is  the  som-ce  of  divine  life  to  us,  and  that  in  a  new 
resurrection  state. 

n. 


14  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

over  in  which  we  stand  before  God  according  to  His 
own  mind  and  righteous  will  and  nature,  according  to 
His  own  glory.  His  priesthood*  applies  to  the  details 
of  the  development  of  this  life  in  the  midst  of  evil, 
and  the  place  of  divine  perfectness  in  which  we  are 
set  by  His  work,  and  reconciles  our  present  infirmities 
with  our  divinely  given  place  before  God.  In  the 
garden  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  did  not  yet 
exist :  obedience  only  in  refraining  from  an  act,  which 
was  no  sin  if  it  had  not  been  forbidden,  constituted 
the  test.  It  was  not  a  prohibition  of  sin  as  at  Sinai, 
and  a  claim  of  good  when  good  and  evil  were  known. 

The  condition  of  man,  in  contrast  with  every  other 
creature  here  below,  found  its  source  in  this,  that, 
instead  of  springing  from  the  earth  or  water  by  the 
sole  word  of  God,  as  a  living  being,  man  was  formed 
and  fashioned  from  the  dust,  and  God  places  him  in 
immediate  relationship,  as  a  living  being,  with  Himself; 
inasmuch  as  he  becomes  a  living  being  through  God 
Himself's  breathing  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of 
life. 

All  animated  creatures  are  called  living  souls,  and 
said  to  have  the  breath  of  life;  but  God  did  not  breathe 
into  the  nostrils  of  any  in  order  to  their  becoming 
living  souls.  Man  was,  by  his  existence,  in  immediate 
relationship  with  God,  as  deriving  his  life  immediately 
from  Himself;  hence  he  is  called  in  Acts  xvii.  the 
offspring  of  God,  and  in  Luke  it  is  said  "  the  [son]  of 
Adam  the  [son]  of  God." 

It  is  important  to  consider  this  chapter  as  laying 
down,  in  a  special  manner,  all  the  principles  of  the 
relationship  of  man,  whether  with  God,  with  his  wife, 
or  with  the  inferior  creation.     Here  were  all  things  in 

*  The  difference  between  priesthood  and  advocacy  will  be 
treated  in  its  place  in  John  and  Hebrews.  I  only  remark  here 
that  priesthood  refers  to  help  and  access  to  God,  advocacy  to 
tailure. 


GENESIS,  15 

their  own  order  as  creatures  of  God  in  connection  with 
the  earth;  but  man's  labour  not  the  means  of  their 
growth  and  fruitfulness.  Nor  did  rain  from  heaven 
minister  fruitfulness  from  above.  The  mist  that 
watered  it  rose  from  the  earth,  drawn  up  by  power 
and  blessing,  but  not  coming  down.  Yet  man  was,  as 
to  his  place,  in  a  peculiar  one  in  reference  to  God.  Man 
did  not  dwell  in  heaven ;  God  did  not  dwell  on  earth. 
But  God  had  formed  a  place  of  peculiar  blessing  and 
delight  for  man's  habitation,  and  there  He  visited  him. 
Out  of  this  garden,  where  he  was  placed  by  the  hand 
of  God  as  sovereign  of  the  world,  flowed  rivers  which 
watered  and  characterised  the  world  without.  Upon 
Adam  reposed  the  duty  of  obedience.  The  image  of 
God  upon  earth,  in  the  absence  of  evil  from  his  nature, 
and  as  the  centre  of  a  vast  system  around  him  and  in 
connection  with  him,  his  own  proper  blessing  was  in 
his  immediate  connection  and  intercourse  with  God, 
according  to  the  place  he  was  set  in. 

As  soon  as  God  had  redeemed  a  people,  He  dwelt 
among  them.  His  abiding  presence  is  the  consequence 
of  redemption  and  through  it  only.  (Ex.  xxix.  46.) 
Here  He  created,  blessed,  and  visited.  Adam,  created 
the  conscious  centre  of  all  around  him,  had  his  blessing 
and  security  in  dependence  on  and  intercourse  with  God. 
This,  as  we  shall  see,  he  forfeited,  and  became  the 
craving  centre  of  his  own  wishes  and  ambition,  which 
he  could  never  satisfy. 

Earthly  nature  then  in  its  perfection,  with  man,  in 
relationship  with  God  by  creation  and  the  breath  of 
life  that  was  in  him,  for  its  centre;  enjoyment;  a  source 
of  abiding  life,  and  a  means  of  putting  responsibility 
to  the  test ;  the  sources  of  universal  refreshment  to  the 
world  without ;  and,  if  continuing  in  his  created  condi- 
tion blessed  intercourse  with  God  on  this  ground 
— such  was  the  position  of  the  first  and  innocent 
Adam.     That  he  might  not  be  alone  here,  but  have  a 

IL 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

companion,  fellowship,  and  the  enjoyment  of  affection, 
God  formed — not  another  man,  for  then  the  one  were 
not  a  centre — ^but  out  of  the  one  man  himself  his  wife, 
that  the  union  might  be  the  most  absolute  and  intimate 
possible,  and  Adam  head  and  centre  of  all.  He  receives 
her,  moreover,  from  the  hand  of  God  Himself.  Such 
was  nature  around  man :  what  God  always  owns,  and 
man  never  sins  against  with  impunity,  though  sin  has 
spoiled  it  all ;  the  picture  of  what  Christ,  the  church, 
and  the  universe  shall  be  at  the  end  in  power  in  the 
obedient  man.  As  yet  all  was  innocence,  unconscious 
of  evil. 

In  chapter  iii.  we  find — what,  alas  !  has  always  hap- 
pened, and  happened  immediately  when  God  has  set 
up  anything  in  the  hands  of  responsible  man — disobe- 
dience and  failure.  So  it  was  in  Adam,  so  in  Noah,  so 
in  Israel  with  the  golden  calf,  so  in  the  priesthood  with 
strange  fire,  so  in  Solomon  son  of  David,  and  Nebu- 
chadnezzar. So  indeed  in  the  church,  1  John  ii.  18, 19, 
and  Jude.  It  was  always  the  first  thing  when  what 
was  set  up  was  trusted  to  man.  All  is  set  up  again 
in  Christ,  the  man  of  God's  purpose.  The  subtlety 
of  the  hidden  enemy  of  our  souls  is  now  at  work. 
The  first  effect  is  the  distrust  of  God  which  he 
inspires;  then  lusts  and  disobedience;  utter  dis- 
honour done  to  God,  whether  as  regards  His  truth 
or  His  love;  the  power  of 'natural  affections  over 
man;  the  consciousness  of  being  naked  and  power- 
less; effort  to  hide  it  from  oneself;*  terror  of  God 
— seeking  to  hide  from  Him ;  self -justification,  which 
seeks  to  cast  upon  another,  and  even  upon  God, 
that  of  which  we  have  been  guilty.     After  that,  we 

*  He  made  fig  leaves  to  cover  his  nakedness  as  to  human 
shame,  but  when  God  came  in  he  was  as  naked  as  ever.  '  I  heard 
thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was  afraid,  and  went  and  hid  my- 
self, for  I  was  naked.'  The  fig  leaves  were  man's  covering.  God 
clothed  them  with  skins  which  were  had  through  death. 


GENESIS.  17 

have,  not  the  blessing  or  restoration  of  man,  or  promises 
made  to  him,  but  the  judgment  pronounced  upon  the 
serpent,  and,  in  that,  the  promise  made  to  the  second 
Adam,  the  victorious  man,  but  who  in  grace  has  His 
birthplace  where  the  weakness  and  the  fall  were.  It 
is  the  Seed  of  the  woman  who  bruises  the  serpent's 
head. 

Remark  too  how  complete  was  the  fall  and  separa- 
tion from  God.  God  had  fully  blessed ;  Satan  suggests 
that  God  keeps  back  the  best  gift  out  of  envy,  lest 
man  should  be  like  Him.  Man  trusts  Satan  for  kind- 
ness rather  than  God,  whom  he  judges  according  to 
Satan's  lie.  He  believes  Satan  instead  of  God,  when 
he  tells  him  he  should  not  die,  as  God  said  he  should, 
and  casts  off  the  God  who  had  blessed  him,  to  gratify 
his  lusts.  Not  trusting  God,  he  uses  his  own  will  to 
seek  happiness  by,  as  a  surer  way,  as  men  do  now. 

We  see  in  Philippians  ii.  how  completely  the  Lord 
Jesus  glorified  God  in  all  these  points,  acting  in  a  way 
exactly  opposite  to  Adam.  We  may  remark  too  that 
Adam  did  it  to  exalt  himself,  to  be  as  God,  as  a 
robbery;  while  Christ,  when  He  was  in  the  divine 
glory,  emptied  Himself  to  be  like  man,  and  was 
obedient,  not  disobedient,  unto  death.  Remark,  too, 
how  the  hiding  of  sin  from  self  is  gone  when  God 
comes  in.  Adam,  who  had  covered  his  nakedness, 
speaks  of  it  when  God  is  there  as  much  as  if  he  had 
done  nothing  to  cover  it.  And  so  it  is  with  all  our 
efforts  to  make  out  what  shall  hide  our  sin,  or  make 
out  righteousness.  Moreover  man  flies  from  God  before 
ever  God  drives  him  in  righteousness  from  His  presence 
and  blessing.  The  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  in  a 
state  of  disobedience  makes  us  afraid  of  God,  and  must 
have  a  divine  work  and  righteousness  to  cover  it. 
Remark  farther,  what  is  of  great  importance,  Adam 
had  no  promise :  there  is  none  to  the  first  Adam ;  no 
restoration  of  the  first  man,  no  way  back  to  the  tree 
VOL.  I.  III.  0 


18  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE  BIBLE. 

of  life ;  all  is  in  the  Second,  the  woman's  Seed.     In 
judging  Satan  He  and  His  victory  are  promised. 

What  follows  is  the  present  result  as  to  the  govern- 
ment of  God ;  the  temporal  sentence  pronounced  on 
Adam  and  his  wife,  until  death,  under  the  power  of 
which  he  was  fallen,  seized  him.  There  was  a  sign 
however  of  deeper  mercies.  Life  is  recognised  as  still 
there  though  death  had  come  in :  Eve  is  the  mother  of 
all  living ;  a  faith,  it  would  seem,  real,  though  obscure, 
at  any  rate,  ours.  But  there  is  yet  more.  Before  they 
are  driven  out,  and  shut  out  from  all  return  back  to 
the  tree  of  life  according  to  nature,  God  clothes  them 
with  a  garment  which  covers  their  nakedness,  a  garment 
which  had  its  origin  in  death  (the  death  of  another), 
which  had  come  in,  but  which  hid  the  effects  of  the 
sin  that  had  introduced  it.  Man  was  no  longer  naked. 
So,  though  out  from  God's  presence  in  nature,  we  have 
not  yet  indeed  the  serpent's  head  bruised,  though  this 
is  sure  to  be  accomplished,  the  prince  of  this  world  is 
judged  (though  he  be  it  still),  and  we  know  it  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  come  down  from  heaven,  when  Christ, 
whom  the  world  led  by  Satan  slew,  was  seated  at  God's 
right  hand ;  but  if  that  be  not  yet  accomplished,  we  are 
before  God  clothed  with  the  clothing  which  He  has 
put  upon  us,  that  best  robe.  It  is  not  now  a  promise 
or  a  figure,  but  an  accomplished  work — a  work  of  God. 
God  has  made  our  coat ;  the  world  may  mock  at  such  a 
thought,  we  know  what  it  means.  But  he  is  justly 
driven  out  of  the  garden,  an  outcast  from  paradise  and 
God,  and  hindered  from  partaking  of  the  tree  of  life, 
that  he  may  not  perpetuate  here  below  a  life  of  dis- 
aster and  of  misery.  The  way  of  the  tree  of  life  was 
henceforth  inaccessible  to  man,*  according  to  nature, 
as  the  creature  of  God.  There  is  no  return  to  the 
paradise  of  man  in  innocence.      Adam,  already  in  sin 

*  The  cherubim  I  believe  always  to  represent  judicial  govern- 
ment and  power. 


GENESIS.  19 

and  far  from  God,  is  the  parent  of  a  race  in  the  same 
condition  as  himself.* 

But  grace  could  work.  The  grace  of  a  God  above 
the  evil  of  man,  and  Abel  approaches  Him  by  faith. 

Hereon  follows  the  separation  of  the  families  of 
God  and  of  the  enemy,  of  the  world  and  of  faith. 
Abel  comes  as  guilty,  and,  unable  as  he  is  to  draw 
near  to  God,  setting  the  death  of  another  between 
himself  and  God,  recognises  the  judgment  of  sin — has 
faith  in  expiation.  Cain,  labouring  honestly  out- 
wardly where  God  had  set  him  to  do  so,  externally 
a  worshipper  of  the  true  God,  has  not  the  conscience 
of  sin;  he  brings  as  an  offering  the  fruits  which  are 
signs  of  the  curse,  proof  of  the  complete  blinding  of 
the  heart,  and  hardening  of  the  conscience  of  a  sinful 
race  driven  out  from  God.  He  supposes  that  all  is 
well ;  why  should  not  God  receive  him  ?  There  is  no 
sense  of  sin  and  ruin.  Thus  is  brought  in  sin,  not  only 
against  God  which  Adam  had  fully  wrought,  but 
against  one's  neighbour,  as  it  has  been  displayed  in  the 
case  of  Jesus ;  and  Cain  himself  is  a  striking  type  of 
the  state  of  the  Jews. 

In  these  two  chapters  we  have  sin  in  all  its  forms, 
as  a  picture  set  before  us  in  Adam's  and  Cain's  conduct 
— sin  in  its  proper  original  character  against  God,  and 
then  more  particularly  against  Christ  (in  figure)  in  the 
conduct  of  Cain,  with  its  present  consequences  set 
forth  as  regards  the  earth.  We  may  remark,  in  both 
Adam's  and  Cain's  case,  how  the  government  of  God 
on  the  earth  is  set  in  prominence  as  to  the  effects  of 

"'  Whatever  Eve's  own  condition  as  believing  promise,  what 
she  says  at  the  birth  of  Cain  was  the  expression  of  the  thought 
that  the  fulfihnent  of  promise  was  in  nature,  which  could  not 
be.  Sin  was  there  and  death,  and  the  judgment  of  the  hope  of 
promise  connected  with  nature  come  in.  "I  have  gotten  a  man 
from  Jehovah  "  was  faith  in  promise,  but  expectation  of  the  ac- 
compHshment  of  promise  in  nature.  And  Cain  had  to  go  out 
from  the  presence  of  Jehovah. 

IV. 


20  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

sin.  Separation  from  God  of  a  being  capable  of,  and 
naturally  formed  for,  intercourse  with  Him,  is  there, 
but  left  rather  for  the  moral  weighing  of  the  soul. 
The  publicly  revealed  judgment  is  that  of  consequences 
on  earth.  It  is  clearly  said  no  doubt,  "  He  drove  out 
the  man  "  with  whom  He  was  to  have  held  intercourse 
(chap,  iii.) ;  and  "  from  thy  face,"  says  Cain,  "  am  I 
driven  out."  (Chap,  iv.)  But  what  is  developed  is  the 
earthly  condition.  Adam  is  shut  out  from  a  peaceful 
and  unlaborious  paradise,  to  labour  and  till  the  ground. 
Cain  is  cursed  from  the  earth  in  this  very  position,  and 
a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond ;  but  he  will  be  as  happy 
there  as  he  can,  and  frustrate  God's  judgment  as  far 
as  he  can,  and  settle  himself  in  comfort  in  the  earth 
as  his,  where  God  had  made  him  a  vagabond  ;*  and 
that  is  the  world.  Here  it  is  first  pictured  in  its  true 
character. 

Remark  also  the  two  solemn  questions  of  God : 
"  Where  art  thou  ?" — man's  own  state  apart  from  God 
— intercourse  with  Him  lost;  and,  "What  hast  thou 
done  ?" — sin  committed  in  that  state ;  of  which  the 
consummation  and  full  witness  is  in  the  rejection  and 
death  of  the  Lord. 

In  the  history  of  Lamech  we  have  on  man's  part 
self-tvill  in  lust  (he  had  two  wives),  and  vengeance  in 
self-defence ;  but,  I  apprehend,  an  intimation  in  God's 
judgment,  that  as  Cain  was  the  preserved  though 
punished  Jew,  his  posterity  at  the  end,  before  the  heir 
was  raised  up  and  men  called  on  Jehovah  in  the  earth, 
would  be  sevenfold  watched  over  of  God.  Lamech 
acknowledges  he  had  slain  to  his  hurt,  but  shall  be 
avenged. 

In  the  second  chapter  then  we  have  man  in  the  order 

*  Nod  is  "vagabond."  God  had  made  him  Nod;  and  he 
settles  himself,  calls  "the  land  after  his  own  name,"  or  at  least 
his  son's  name,  as  an  inheritance,  and  embellishes  his  city  with 
ai-ts  and  the  delights  of  music — a  remarkable  picture. 


GENESIS.  21 

of  created  blessing,  the  state  in  which  he  is;  in  the 
third,  man's  fall  from  God,  by  which  his  intercourse 
with  God  on  this  ground  is  foreclosed ;  in  the  fourth, 
his  wickedness  in  connection  with  grace  in  the  evil 
state  resulting  from  his  fall ;  what  the  world  there- 
upon became,  man  being  driven  out  from  the  presence 
of  Him  who  accepted  by  sacrifice  in  grace,  and  ordermg 
its  comforts  and  pleasures  without  God,  yet  borne  with, 
and  a  remnant  preserved,  and  the  heir  of  God's  counsels, 
Seth,  set  up,  and  men  calling  on  the  name  of  God  in 
relationship  with  them,  that  is,  on  Jehovah. 

Driven  from  the  presence  of  God,  Cain  seeks,  in  the 
importance  of  his  family,  in  the  arts  and  the  enjoy- 
ments of  life,  temporal  consolation,  and  tries  to  render 
the  world,  where  God  had  sent  him  forth  as  a  vagabond, 
a  settled  abode  and  as  agreeable  as  possible,  far  from 
God.  Sin  has  here  the  character  of  forgetfulness  of 
all  that  had  passed  in  the  history  of  man ;  of  hatred 
against  grace  and  against  him  who  was  the  object  and 
vessel  of  it;  of  pride  and  indifference;  and  then  despair, 
which  seeks  comfort  in  worldliness.  We  have  also  the 
man  of  grace  (Abel,  type  of  Christ  and  of  them  that 
are  His)  rejected,  and  left  without  heritage  here  below; 
man,  his  enemy,  judged  and  abandoned  to  himself ;  and 
another  (Seth)  the  object  of  the  counsels  of  God,  who 
becomes  heir  of  the  world  on  the  part  of  God.  We 
must  remember  however  that  they  are  only  figures  of 
these  things,  and  that  in  the  antitype  the  man  who  is 
heir  of  all  is  the  same  as  He  who  has  been  put  to 
death. 

In  chapter  v.  we  have  the  family  of  God  upon  the 
earth,  subject  to  death,  but  depositary  of  the  counsels 
and  of  the  testimony  of  God.  Here  we  may  remark 
Enoch,  who  has  his  portion  in  heaven,  and  who  bears 
witness  to  the  world  of  the  coming  of  Jesus  in  judg- 
ment, but  is  himself  taken  up  there  before  it ;  and  Noah, 
on  the  other  hand,  warned  for  himself,  preaching  right- 

vm. 


22  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

eousness  and  judgment,  and  passing  through  the  judg- 
ments to  begin  a  new  world — figures  of  the  church  and 
the  Jews  in  connection  with  Christ's  coming. 

Finally  we  find  power  and  force  here  below,  the 
result  of  the  sons  of  God  nc>t  keeping  their  first  estate, 
of  apostasy;  and  God  executes  judgment  instead  of 
any  longer  pleading  with  men  by  the  testimony  of  His 
Spirit  in  grace,  which  has  its  allotted  term.  The  obedi- 
ence of  faith  is  the  security  of  the  warned  remnant ; 
but  the  principle  of  degeneracy  worked  on  in  spite  of 
the  testimony,  and  worked  on  the  accomplishment  of 
the  testimony  it  despised.  Man  grew  worse  and  worse, 
and  God's  creation  was  utterly  defiled  and  filled  with 
violence,  the  two  universal  characters  of  active  will 
out  of  God.  As  regards  man,  it  was  now  brought  out, 
when  he  was  left  to  himself  (for  before  the  flood,  save 
gracious  testimony,  he  was  so  left),  that  every  thought 
of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually.  God  creates 
and  destroys ;  He  calls  and  repents  not.  Creation  was 
utterly  corrupted,  and  God  destroys  it  wherever  the 
breath  of  life  is.  The  testimony  of  these  things  is  gone 
out  everywhere  among  the  heathen.  We  have  here  the 
exact  though  brief  account  of  them,  so  far  as  needed 
to  shew  what  man  was  and  is,  and  God's  ways  with 
him. 

In  the  midst  of  the  ruin  and  judgment  God  points 
out  the  way  of  salvation  through  the  judgment.  The 
remnant  taught  of  God  profit  by  it.  The  fiood  is 
brought  upon  the  world  of  the  ungodly.  Up  to  this, 
though  the  seed  of  the  woman  had  been  promised, 
sacrifice  brought  in,  and  testimony  given,  there  were 
no  special  dealings  of  God  with  man.  It  was  man 
walking  before  God  in  wickedness,  no  calling  out,  no 
law,  no  judgment.  The  world,  man,  was  judged  (save 
Noah  and  his  family)  and  its  deeds  were  hidden  under 
an  overwhelming  flood.  The  judgment  of  God  is  ac- 
complished :  but  He  remembers  His  mercy. 


GENESIS.  23 

In  chapter  ix.  begins  the  history  of  the  new  earth. 
God  blesses  the  earth  more  than  before;  and  the  answer 
to  the  sweet  savour  of  the  sacrifice  assures  the  world 
that  a  universal  deluge  will  never  recur.  God  makes 
a  covenant*  with  the  creation  to  this  effect.  Govern- 
ment is  established  in  the  hand  of  man,  and  death 
begins  to  furnish  him  with  nourishment.  It  does  not 
appear  to  me  that,  before  this,  there  had  been  either 
government  or  idolatry.  There  had  been  sin  against 
God,  violence  without  restraint  against  one  another, 
and  corruption ;  the  two  perpetual  characters  of  sin, 
amongst  men,  and  even  in  Satan  as  far  as  may  be.f 
God  cared  for  His  creation  in  mercy ;  but  with  Noah 
new  principles  were  brought  out.  The  sacrifice  of 
Christ  (in  figure)  becomes  a  ground  of  dealing  with 
the  earth,  not  alone  of  accepting  man,  as  in  A.bel ;  and 
on  this  a  covenant  is  founded.  That  is,  God  binds 
Himself  in  grace,  so  that  faith  has  a  sure  ground  to  go 
upon,  that  on  which  it  can  count. 

Another  very  important  principle  introduced  was 
the  second  referred  to — government  in  the  hand  of 
man.  Covenant  was  sure,  for  God  is  faithful  when  He 
binds  Himself.  Government  was  entrusted  to  the 
hands  of  men.  Alas !  this  new  trial  soon  has  the  same 
result  as  before.  The  government  confided  to  Noah 
loses  immediately  its  honour.  The  earth,  under  mercy, 
relieved  (as  Lamech  had  announced)  by  agricultural 
care,  becomes  in  its  fruits  a  snare  to  Noah,  who  becomes 

*  Covenant,  when  used  in  connection  with  the  Lord,  is  always, 
it  seems  to  me,  some  order  established  by  God  and  announced  to 
man,  according  to  the  terms  of  which  He  enters  into  relationship 
with  man,  or  according  to  which  man  is  to  approach  Him. 

t  There  are  three  characters  of  sin — violence,  falsehood  and 
con'uption.  The  two  first  are  directly  ascribed  to  Satan ;  alas, 
man  follows  him  in  them,  the  third  is  more  properly  man's.  All 
three  are  noticed  in  Colossians  iii.  5-9.  In  fact  we  get  these 
three  characters  at  the  close — the  false  prophet,  the  beast,  and 
Babylon. 

IX. 


24  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

intoxicated,  and  his  own  son  dishonours  him ;  on  whose 
race  consequently  the  curse  falls.  This  is  given  in 
view  of  the  people  opposed  to  Israel,  the  centre  of 
God's  earthly  government,  and  of  the  relationship  of 
God  with  that  family. 

In  these  chapters  then  we  have  the  old  earth  closed 
and  the  new  begun  on  new  principles.  This  lasts  till 
the  judgment  by  fire.  Man's  failure  in  the  old  world 
is  set  forth,  and  God's  judgment  thereon,  in  Adam  and 
Cain.  Now  the  special  judgment  and  the  special 
blessing  in  connection  with  Israel  begins  to  shew  itself, 
for  we  are  yet  on  the  earth  here.  The  historical  course 
of  Noah's  family  is  brought  out  in  connection  with 
these  two  points,  the  blessing  and  the  curse  in  Shem 
and  Ham.  This  is  God's  survey  of  the  new  world,  in 
its  three  heads  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth,  in  a  brief 
declaration  of  what  characterised  their  position  in  the 
earth.  Its  whole  history  is  stated  in  a  few  words.  How 
mighty  in  everything  is  the  word  !  He  who  knows  all 
can  state  all  briefly  and  surely.  We  begin  afresh  with 
chapter  x.  with  the  generation  or  history  of  Noah's 
sons. 

We  have  thus  the  establishment  of  the  new  earth 
and  its  whole  general  prophetic  history,  as  this  earth, 
in  the  first  account  of  Noah,  and  God's  communications 
with  him,  Shem  being  owned  as  the  root  of  God's 
family  in  it,  allied  to  the  name  of  Jehovah,  with  special 
judgment  on  Canaan,  whose  place,  we  know,  Israel 
took. 

Chapters  x.,  xi.  give  us  the  history  of  the  world  as 
peopled  and  established  after  the  deluge,  and  the  ways 
of  men  in  this  new  world ;  the  great  platform  of  all 
the  development  of  the  human  race  as  peopling  this 
world  after  the  flood,  and  the  principles  and  judgments 
on  which  it  is  founded.  Chapter  x.  gives  the  facts, 
chapter  xi.  how  it  came  about  in  judgment,  for  chapter  x. 
and  xi.  are  not  to  be  taken  as  chronologically  consequent; 


GENESIS.  25 

for  the  division  into  nations  and  tongues  was  conse- 
quent on  the  attempt  at  unity  in  human  pride  in  Babel ; 
and  then,  lastly,  we  have  the  family  Jehovah  owned, 
to  trace  the  descent  in  it  to  the  vessel  of  promise :  to- 
gether with  God's  orderings  of  the  world.  The  posterity 
of  Noah  is  given  by  families  and  nations  (a  new  thing 
in  the  earth),  out  of  which,  from  the  race  of  Ham,  arises 
the  first  power  which  rules  by  its  own  force  and  founds 
an  empire ;  for  that  which  is  according  to  flesh  comes 
first.  We  have  then,  that  the  moral  history  of  the 
world  may  be  known  as  well  as  the  external  form  it 
assumed,  the  universal  association  of  men  to  exalt 
themselves  against  God,  and  make  to  themselves  a  name 
independently  of  Him,*  an  eflfort  stamped  on  God's 
part  with  the  name  of  Babel  (confusion),  and  which 
ends  in  judgment  and  in  the  dispersion  of  the  race, 
thenceforth  jealous  of  and  hostile  to  one  another.-)- 
Lastly  we  have  the  genealogy  of  the  race  by  which 
God  was  pleased  to  name  Himself;  for  God  is  Jehovah, | 
the  God  of  Shem. 

The  importance  of  these  chapters  will  be  felt.  The 
preceding  chapters  gave  us,  after  the  creation,  the  great 
original  principles  of  man's  ruin,  closing  with  judgment, 
in  which  the  old  world  found  its  close.  Here  we  have 
the  history  of    our   present  world,    and,  as  seen  in 

^'  The  idea  of  a  building  high  enough  to  escape  the  flood  is 
an  idea  of  which  there  is  not  the  smallest  trace  in  this  passage. 
It  was  the  pride  of  man  seeking  a  centre  and  a  name  without 
God,  and  coalescing  together.  The  rise  of  imperial  power  and 
dominion  came  after  this,  in  which  individual  will  and  energy 
gained  the  ascendency.  They  are  two  phases  of  human  effort 
without  God. 

t  Pentecost  was  a  beautiful  testimony  :  God  rose  there  above 
the  confusion  and  judgment,  and  found,  even  in  its  effects,  the 
means  of  getting  near  the  heart  of  man  ;  so  that  grace  overruled 
judgment,  even  when  it  was  not  exercised  in  the  power  which 
regenerates  the  world. 

I  All  in  chapter  ix.  is  simply  Elohim,  God,  till  we  get  to  verse 
26,  where  it  is  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Shem. 
X.,   XL 


26  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Genesis  (which  uncovers  the  roots  of  all  that  was  to 
be  for  the  revelation  of  God's  thoughts  and  the  display 
of  His  government),  in  its  great  principles  and  original 
sources,  which  imprint  their  character  on  the  results, 
till  another  judgment  from  God  Himself  obliterates  all 
but  its  responsibility,  and  gives  room  for  another  and 
a  better  world. 

The  result  of  this  history  is  that  the  world  is  set  out 
by  families.  The  fashion  of  this  world  has  obliterated 
the  memory  and  the  perception  of  this,  but  not  the 
power.  It  is  rooted  in  the  judgment  of  God,  and,  when 
the  acquired  force  of  this  world  becomes  weak,  will  be 
evermore  apparent,  as  it  now  really  works.  The  foun- 
tain heads  were  three,  first  named  in  the  order,  Shem, 
and  Ham,  and  Japheth:  the  first  being  the  family  in 
which  the  covenant  was  to  be  established  on  earth,  and 
with  which  God  was  to  be  in  relationship;  then  he  who 
was  in  hostility  with  God's  family ;  and  last,  though 
eldest  and  proudest,  the  Gentile  Japheth. 

In  the  detail  Japheth  is  given  first.  The  isles  of 
the  Gentiles  in  general,  that  is,  the  countries  with  which 
we  are  familiar,  and  much  of  northern  Asia,  were 
peopled  by  his  descendants.  But  the  great  moral 
questions,  and  power  of  good  and  evil  in  the  world, 
arose  elsewhere,  and  the  evil  now  (for  it  was  man's 
day)  before  the  good. 

The  East,  as  we  call  it,  Palestine,  down  the  Euphrates, 
Egypt,  &c.,  was  in  the  hands  of  Ham.  There  power  first 
establishes  itself  by  the  will  of  one  in  Nimrod.  A 
mighty  hunter — force  and  craft — works  to  bring  un- 
tamed man,  as  well  as  beast,  under  his  yoke.  And 
cities  arise ;  but  Babel  was  the  beginning  of  his  king- 
dom ;  others  he  went  out  and  built,  or  conquered. 
Then  come  the  well-known  Egyptians,  Mizraim.  An- 
other branch  of  this  family  is  marked  as  forming  the 
races  in  possession  of  the  inheritance  destined  of  God 
for  His  people. 


GENESIS.  27 

Shem  comes  last,  the  father  of  Hebrews,  the  brother 
of  him  who  has  long  despised  him  as  possessed  of  an 
elder  brother's  title.  Such  is  the  general  result  in  the 
peopling  of  the  world  under  God's  ordering. 

The  way  was  this.  Man  sought  to  make  a  centre 
for  himself.  Adam,  living  in  the  earth,  would  have 
been  so,  and  its  link  with  God  ;  as  Christ  will  be  here- 
after, and  ever  was  in  the  purpose  of  God,  for  Adam 
was  the  image  of  him  that  was  to  come.  But  will  has 
none  but  itself.  Noah,  whose  influence  would  have 
been  just,  has  no  place  in  the  whole  history  (after  his 
worship),  save  that  he  lost  the  place  of  authority  by 
falling  into  sin,  in  the  loss  of  self-restraint.*  Will 
characterised  all  now ;  but  in  a  multitude  of  wills,  all 
impotent  as  centres,  what  can  be  done  ?  A  common 
centre  and  interest  is  sought  independent  and  exclusive 
of  God.  They  were  to  till  the  earth  ;  but  scattered  in 
peaceful  quietness,  to  be  of  no  importance,  they  would 
not.  They  must  get  a  name  for  themselves  to  be  a 
centre.  And  God  scatters  into  nations  by  judgment 
what  would  not  fill  the  earth  by  families  in  peace. 
Tongues  and  nations  must  be  added  to  families,  to 
designate  men  on  the  earth.  The  judged  place  becomes 
the  seat  of  the  energetic  will  of  one — of  the  apostate 
power.  The  beginning  of  Nimrod's  kingdom  was 
Babel.  Tongues  were  a  restraint,  and  an  iron  band 
round  men. 

In  Shem  God's  history  begins.  He  is  Jehovah,  the 
God  of  Shem.  We  have  dates  and  epochs,  for  after 
all  God  governs,  and  the  world  must  follow :  man 
belongs  to  God.  Other  people's  ages  were  shortened 
surely  besides  those  here  named :  here  we  know  when. 
And  when  the  earth  was  divided,  for  God  after  all  dis- 
posed of  it,  men's  years  lost  one-half  of  what  they  were, 

*  This  is  a  striking  fact  in  the  character  of  the  history  of  man 
after  the  flood.  We  get  the  full  plain  statement  of  what  he 
became. 

X.,  XI. 


28  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

as  they  had  already  done  immediately  after  the  flood. 
But  of  known  history  God's  people  have  ever  been  the 
centre.  This  comes  down  to  Abraham.  And  here 
again  a  new  element  of  evil  had  become  universal,  at 
least  practically  so — idolatry  (Josh.  xxiv.  2),  though  it 
had  not  been  the  subject  hitherto.  It  is  man  in  the 
world ;  and  in  Shem,  the  secret  providential  ordering  of 
things  by  God.  Still  it  ended  in  the  power  of  evil, 
even  in  the  family  of  Shem. 

We  have  seen  the  wickedness  and  violence  of  man, 
his  rebellion  against  God,  and  Satan's  craft  to  bring 
him  into  this  state :  but  here  an  immense  step  is  made, 
an  astonishing  condition  of  evil  appears  on  the  scene. 
Satan  thrusts  himself,  to  man's  mind,  into  the  place  of 
power,  and  seizes  the  idea  of  God  in  man's  mind,  placing 
himself  between  God  and  him,  so  that  men  worship 
demons  as  God.  When  it  began,  scripture  does  not  say ; 
but  the  passage  cited  shews  that  it  had  contaminated 
even  Shem's  family,  in  the  part  of  it  too  which  scrip- 
ture itself  counts  up  as  God's  genealogy  in  the  earth  at 
the  time  we  have  arrived  at.  Individuals  might  be  pious ; 
but  in  every  sense  the  link  of  the  world  with  God  was 
gone.  They  had  given  themselves  up,  even  in  the 
family  which  as  a  race  was  in  relationship  with  God, 
to  the  worship  and  power  of  Satan.  What  a  tale  all 
tells  of  man  !     What  a  tale  of  the  patience  of  God ! 

Here  therefore  we  change  entirely  the  whole  system 
and  order  of  thought;  and  a  principle,  in  exercise  with- 
out doubt  from  the  beginning  as  to  individual  salva- 
tion, but  not  manifested  in  the  order  of  things,  declares 
itself,  and  comes  into  evidence  in  the  history  of  the 
earth.  Abraham  is  called,  chosen,  and  made  personally 
the  depositary  of  the  promises.  But  remark  that  here, 
in  order  that  this  great  principle  may  be  preserved  in 
its  own  purity  as  an  act  of  God,  the  occasion  given  in 
the  fact  we  have  referred  to  is  not  mentioned.  We 
find  it  in  Joshua  xxiv.      God  comes  down,  after  judg- 


GENESIS.  29 

ment,  in  sovereign  grace  to  hctve  a  family  of  His  own 
by  the  calling  of  grace — an  immense  principle. 

But  it  is  well  to  dwell  a  moment  on  what  was  really 
a  most  important  epoch  in  the  history  of  God's  ways 
with  the  world,  where  the  proper  history  of  faith 
b  egins,  though  of  course  there  were  believers  individu- 
ally  before.  But  as  Adam  was  the  head  of  the  ruined 
race,  so  Abraham  was  the  father  of  the  faithful,  the 
head  of  the  race  of  God  on  the  earth,  both  after  the 
flesh  and  after  the  Spirit.  Christ  the  fulness  of  all 
blessing  we  know,  in  whom  we  have  far  higher  bless- 
ings than  those  revealed  in  Abraham.  Still  in  God's  ways 
upon  the  earth  Abraham  was  the  head  of  the  accepted 
race.  Idolatry,  as  we  have  seen,  had  at  this  time 
gained  a  footing  in  the  family  of  Shem  himself, 
"Your  fathers,"  says  Joshua  (xxiv.  2),  "dwelt  in  old 
time  beyond  the  flood,  Terah,  the  father  of  Abraham, 
and  the  father  of  Nahor ;  and  they  served  other  gods.'* 
Now  these  gods  were  demons.  (1  Cor.  x.  20 ;  it  is  a 
citation  of  Deut.  xxxii.  17.)  That  is  (now  that  God  had 
interfered  in  judgment  and  in  power),  these  demons 
had  possessed  themselves  of  this  position  in  the  spirit 
of  man,  and  taken  the  place  in  his  mind  of  the  sources 
of  the  authority  displayed  and  of  blessing  still 
bestowed.  They  presented  themselves  to  him  as 
authors  of  those  judgments,  of  all  which  drew  forth 
the  worship,  the  gratitude,  and  the  terror  of  the 
natural  heart  of  corrupted  man,  expressed  in  his 
worship  according  to  the  principles  on  which  he  was, 
on  which  he  alone  could  be,  in  relationship  with  those 
superior  beings,  to  whom  he  attributed  the  power  to 
answer  his  desires  or  to  avert  the  things  which  he 
feared.  It  was  not  merely  man  corrupted  and  in  re- 
bellion against  God,  it  was  his  religion  itself  which 
corrupted  him ;  and  he  made  of  his  corruption  a  re- 
ligion. The  demons  had  taken  the  place  of  God  in  his 
mind,  and  having  the  ascendency  over  his  conscience, 

XI. 


so  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

ii"  man  did  not  forget  it,  hardened  or  misled  it.  He 
was  religiously  bad ;  and  there  is  no  degradation  like 
that.  What  a  state  !  What  folly  !  How  long,  O 
Lord  ? 

But  if  the  human  race  plunge  thus  into  darkness, 
taking  demons  for  their  god,  and,  incapable  of  self- 
sustainment,  substitute  for  their  own  rebellion  against 
God  servitude  to  what  is  more  elevated  in  rebellion, 
placing  themselves  in  miserable  dependence  upon  it, 
God  raises  and  lifts  us  up  above  all  this  evil,  and  by 
His  calling  introduces  us  into  His  own  thoughts — 
thoughts  far  more  precious  than  the  restoration  of 
what  was  fallen.  He  separates  a  people  to  hopes  which 
suit  the  majesty  and  the  love  of  Him  who  calls  them, 
^nd  places  them  in  a  position  of  proximity  to  Himself, 
which  the  blessing  of  the  world  under  His  government 
would  never  have  given  them.  He  is  their  God.  He 
communicates  with  them  in  a  way  which  is  in  accord- 
ance with  this  intimacy ;  and  we  hear  speak,  for  the 
first  time,  of  faith  (chap.  xv.  6),  based  on  these  com- 
munications and  these  direct  testimonies  of  God,  though 
it  may  have  operated  from  the  beginning. 

From  chapter  xii.  then  there  is  developed  altogether 
a  new  order  of  events,  which  refer  to  the  call  of  God, 
to  His  covenants,  to  His  promises,  to  the  manifestation 
of  His  people  as  a  distinct  people  on  the  earth,  to  the 
counsels  of  God.  Before  the  deluge,  it  was  man  such 
as  he  was — fallen  before  God ;  and  though  there  was  a 
testimony  from  the  beginning,  still  no  dispensational 
intervention  of  God  in  His  own  ways,  but  man,  with 
that  testimony  as  to  divine  institutions,*  left  to  him- 
self, resulting  in  such  violence  and  corruption  as  brought 
on  the  deluge  in  judgment  on  the  world.  Afterwards, 
God  having  interposed  in  judgment  and  begun  the 

*  Sacrifice  may  be  called  an  institution  of  God  perhaps,  but  it 
was  individual.  There  was  no  establishment  of  a  people  who 
were  God's  upon  earth. 


GENESIS.  31 

world  that  now  is,  there  was  the  government  of  that 
world  and  its  failure  and  the  consequences  of  this 
failure ;  but,  the  nations  being  established  and  having 
submitted  themselves  to  the  power  of  demons,  the  call 
of  God,  the  deposit  of  promise  in  him  who  was  chosen 
of  God,  His  elect  ones  (seed  of  the  depositary  of  the 
promises),  and  subsequently  His  people,  rise  up  to  our 
view. 

Hence  we  find  them  at  once  called  upon  to  separate 
themselves  entirely  from  all  that  connected  them  with 
their  position  in  nature  on  the  earth,  and  to  belong  to 
God  on  the  ground  of  promise  and  confidence  in  His 
word.  "Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and  from  thy 
kindred,  and  from  thy  father's  house,  unto  a  land  that 
I  will  shew  thee."  This  was  a  solemn  event.  It  was 
in  principle  the  judgment  of  the  world,  though  in  the 
way  of  grace  to  those  called  out  of  it. 

That  we  may  fully  understand  this,  we  must  remem- 
ber that  the  world  had  been  constituted  by  the  judg- 
ment of  God  passed  upon  the  enterprise  of  building 
the  tower.  Countries  and  nations  had  been  formed,  as 
it  is  to  this  day.  That  was  the  world.  Satan  had  full 
hold  of  it,  and  the  very  world  which  God  had  provi- 
dentially formed  Abram  had  to  leave.  God  v/ould 
have  a  family,  a  people  for  Himself,  not  of  it,  though 
out  of  it.  Another  fact  adds  to  Abram's  importance. 
There  had  been  saints  individually,  known  and  un- 
known, but  no  head  of  a  race  since  Adam.  Adam 
fallen  was  the  head  of  a  fallen  race.  Abram  was  called 
to  be  the  root  of  the  tree  of  promise,  of  God's  people 
natural  or  spiritual.  He  was  the  father  of  the  circum- 
cision, and  of  all  them  that  believe. 

In  the  outset  however  Abram  still  held  to  his  family ; 
or  at  least,  if  it  held  to  him,  he  did  not  break  with  it : 
and  though  he  quitted  his  country  on  the  call  of  God, 
he  stops  as  far  from  the  land  of  promise  as  before. 
For,  thus  called,  man  must  belong  wholly  to  God  on  a 


52  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

new  principle.     In  fine,  he  sets  out  as  God  had  said  to 
him. 

We  have  then  here  Abram  called  by  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  glory  of  God  (compare  Acts  vii.)  for  the 
journey  of  faith.  The  promises  are  given  to  him, 
whether  of  a  numerous  posterity,  or  of  the  blessing 
of  all  the  families  on  the  earth  in  him^*  He  sets  out, 
he  arrives.  There  are  not  many  experiences,  though 
there  will  be  deeper  knowledge  of  God,  in  a  path  which 
is  purely  of  faith  :  power  is  there,  and  man  walks  with 
God.  In  the  history  of  Jacob  we  have  many.  Arrived 
in  Canaan,  Abraham  enters  into  possession  of  nothing, 
for  his  life  must  still  be  of  faith.  And  here  we  see,  by 
comparing  this  passage  with  Hebrews  xi.,  the  effect  of 
being  left  as  pilgrims  and  strangers  on  the  earth,  not 
yet  in  possession  of  what  is  promised.  Abraham  goes 
in  the  obedience  of  faith  to  the  promised  land,  and 
there  has  not  so  much  as  to  set  foot  upon ;  but  in 
virtue  of  this — as  God,  though  He  could  prove,  could 
not  leave  faith  without  an  answer,  nor,  indeed,  where 
tried  without  leading  it  on  to  the  knowledge  of  further 
blessing,  for  He  never  does — he  has  before  him  the 
city  which  hath  foundations,  and  the  yet  better 
country.  The  energy  of  faith  through  grace  put  him 
in  a  position  which,  as  it  was  not  possession,  necessarily 
set  him  in  connection  with  higher  and  better  things ; 
for  he  was  luider  the  personal  calling  of  God  for 
blessing:  so,  practically,  we  are  come  into  the  body 

*  This  last  promise  is  repeated  only  in  chapter  xxii.,  during 
Abraham's  history,  and  then  to  the  seed  alone  ;  the  promise  of 
his  posterity  and  of  the  land  to  him  and  to  his  seed  is  often  re- 
peated. It  is  to  this  promise  given  to  Abram  in  chapter  xii.  and 
confirmed  to  the  seed  in  chapter  xxvi.,  that  the  apostle  refers  in 
Galatians.  The  earthly  seed,  on  the  contrary,  was  to  be  nmner- 
ous.  The  translation  of  Galatians  iii.  16,  should  be, "  now  to 
Abraham  were  the  promises  made,  and  to  his  seed."  Ajid  in  the 
following  verse,  not  in  Christ  but  to  Christ.  He  was  the  seed  of 
promise. 


GENESIS.  S3 

and  heavenly  things  below.  But  there  is  the  path  of 
faith — not  possession — and  the  heavenly  scene  opens 
before  us.  Abraham  in  Ur  could  not  see  the  heavenly 
portion ;  a  stranger  in  the  land  of  promise,  it  was  his 
natural  object  under  grace.  Such  is  our  own  case. 
Only  Abraham  rises  above  his  calling;  we  enter  by 
the  Spirit  into  what  we  are  called  to. 

But  then  there  is  a  second  revelation  of  the  Lord  to 
him  in  the  land,  in  the  place  into  which  he  had  been 
called.  The  first  was  to  call  him  out  of  the  place  he 
was  in,  and  make  him  walk  in  the  path  of  promise. 
Now  the  Lord  reveals  Himself  to  him  for  communion, 
where  he  is,  speaks  with  him,  unfolds  to  him  how  the 
promise  will  be  accomplished,  and  Abraham  thereon 
worships  Him.  He  has  in  the  land  his  tent  and  his 
altar.  This  is  the  second  part  of  the  life  of  faith.  The 
revelation  of  God,  when  far  from  Him,  sets  us  out  on 
the  joiu*ney  of  faith,  inspires  the  walk  toward  heaven. 
When  in  the  heavenly  position,  God  reveals  Himself 
for  communion  and  worship  and  a  full  revelation  of 
His  ways.  The  Canaanite  is  in  the  land  ;  the  heir  of 
promise  has  no  possession  of  the  thing  promised.  We 
have  to  do  with  spiritual  wickedness  in  heavenly 
places,  but  the  Lord  reveals  Himself,  shews  the  heir 
and  inheritance  when  the  Canaanite  will  be  gone ;  and 
so  Abram  worships  by  faith,  as  before  he  walked  by 
faith.     This  is  the  full  double  function  of  faith. 

The  rest  of  the  chapter  is  the  history  of  his  personal 
want  of  it.  Pressed  by  circumstances,  he  does  not 
consult  God,  finds  himself  in  the  presence  of  the  world, 
where  he  has  sought  help  and  refuge,  and  denies  his 
true  relationship  with  his  wife  (just  as  has  been  done 
in  respect  of  the  church),  is  cherished  by  the  world, 
which  God  at  last  judges,  sending  Abram  again  out 
from  it.  During  this  period,  and  until  he  was  returned 
to  the  place  from  which  he  started,  he  had  no  altar. 
When  he  left  Egypt  and  returned  to  his  strangership 
VOL.  I.  XII.  D 


S4  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE.     . 

in  Canaan,  he  had  what  he  had  before.  But  he  must 
return  first  to  the  same  place  and  find  his  altar  again. 
What  a  warning  for  Christians  as  to  the  relationship 
of  the  church  with  Christ  !*  And,  however  the  world 
may  be  a  help  for  the  church,  this  relationship  cannot 
be  maintained  when  we  seek  that  help. 

I  would  again  recall  here  a  remark  made  elsewhere, 
that  in  types  the  woman  presents  the  position  in  which 
those  prefigured  are  placed;  the  man,  the  conduct, 
faithful  or  unfaithful,  of  those  that  are  there. 

After  this  (chap,  xiii.)  we  have,  in  the  conduct  of 
Abram  and  Lot,  the  disinterestedness  and  self-renun- 
ciation of  true  faith  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the 
other,  him,  who,  though  a  believer,  had,  as  regards  the 
walk  of  faith,  only  followed  that  of  another,  and  was 
now  put  to  the  test  by  circumstances  which  arise  :  and 
this,  remark,  is  when  they  have  together  left  their  un- 
believing connection  with  the  world  as  an  outward 
refuge.  Lot  had  done  so  with  Abram,  but  his  inward 
heart  and  will  clung  to  the  ease  of  it.  Abram  had  re- 
turned in  spirit  genuinely,  perhaps  with  a  deeper  ex- 
perience, to  his  pilgrim  portion  in  Canaan.  Yet  the 
advantages  he  possessed  in  it  led  to  the  difficulty,  for 
treasure  here  is  not  heaven,  even  if  the  possessor  of 
it  be  heavenly-minded:  an  important  lesson.  Still 
Abram  behaves  beautifully.  Lot  chooses  the  world, 
fair  in  appearance,  not  as  Egypt,  the  world  as  such, 
but  as  self-ease,  and  what  did  not  seem,  was  not  out- 
wardly, separated  from,  Canaan ;  but  which  was  soon 
after  the  scene  and  object  of  what  did  not  appear — 
the  sure  judgments  of  God.  The  renunciation  of  a 
present  portion  down  here,  and  of  self  in  it,  by  Abram 

*  There  may  be  a  certain  typical  reference  to  Israel  while  in 
the  world  and  away  from  God.  But  these  things  happened  mito 
them  for  ensamples  (ruTrot)  and  are  written  for  our  admonition  on 
whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  come.  Abraham  was  away  from 
iia  altar  at  Bethel. 


GENESIS.  35 

is  the  occasion  for  him  of  a  much  clearer  knowledge  of 
the  extent,  and  a  still  firmer  assurance  of  the  certainty, 
of  the  promise.  It  is  when  he  gives  up  all  to  Lot  as 
he  might  choose  it,  that  the  Lord  says  to  Abram  to 
look  north,  south,  east,  west,  from  where  he  was,  adding 
he  would  give  it  to  him  and  to  his  seed  for  ever.  In  a 
word,  we  have  the  believer  acting  in  the  spirit  of  the 
heavenly  calling — the  faithful  believer,  and  the  worldly- 
minded  believer. 

Abram  maintains  now  his  own  proper  portion;  he 
dwells  in  Canaan,  goes  here  and  there  as  a  pilgrim  with 
his  tent,  and  builds  his  altar.  All  this  was  the  path 
of  the  heavenly  man ;  his  characteristic  portion  here, 
a  pilgrim  and  a  worshipper.  Lot  had  lifted  up  his 
eyes,  moved  by  his  own  will  and  lust,  and  sees  the 
plain  of  Jordan  well  watered:  why  should  he  not 
enjoy  it  ?  God  makes  Abram  lift  up  his,  and  shews 
him  all  the  extent  of  the  promise,  and  with  the  promise 
tells  him  to  walk  through  it  all,  to  realise,  in  his  ex- 
perience and  knowledge,  all  the  extent  of  the  promise 
made.  The  scene  soon  changes.  What  is  linked  with 
the  world  must  suffer  its  vicissitudes.  Nor  can  the 
godly  man,  though  ensnared  oft,  be  content  with  its 
evil.  Lot  (2  Pet.  ii.  7,  8)  suffers  from  the  iniquity  by 
which  he  is  surrounded,  and  undergoes  the  ravages  of 
the  power  of  the  world,  of  which  Abram  is  victor,  and 
of  which  he  will  receive  nothing  to  enrich  himself. 
Such  are  the  just  discipline  and  faithful  ways  of  God. 
Nor  was  it  yet  all. 

These  last  circumstances  are  the  occasion  of  the 
manifestation  of  the  kingly  Priest,  King  of  righteous- 
ness, and  King  of  peace,  that  is,  Christ,  millennial  King 
of  the  world,  blessing  victorious  Abram,  and,  on 
Abram's  behalf,  the  most  high  God,  who  had  delivered 
his  enemies  into  his  hand. 

In  this  picture,  then,  we  have  the  final  triumph  of 
the  Lord  and  the  family  of  faith  over  the  power  of  the 

XIII. 


%6  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

world,  realised  in  spirit  by  the  church  (and  finally  in 
glory)  for  a  heavenly  hope  and  association  with  Christ, 
and  literally  by  the  Jews  on  the  earth,  for  whom  Christ 
will  be  Melchisedec-priest  in  full  accomplished  posi- 
tion ;  Priest  on  His  throne,  Mediator  in  this  character, 
blessing  them,  and  blessing  God  for  them ;  God  Him- 
self then  taking,  fully  and  indeed,  the  character  of 
possessor  of  heaven  and  earth.  The  most  high  God  is 
His  proper  millennial  name ;  Almighty  with  the  patri- 
archs, Jehovah  with  Israel,  and  Most  High  for  the 
millennium.  The  discussion  of  where  the  Most  High 
is  found,  in  connection  with  the  promises  to  Abraham 
and  the  Messiah,  is  beautifully  brought  out  in  Psalm 
xci.,  and  Jehovah  the  God  of  the  Jews  is  recognised  as 
He  who  is.  It  is  a  kind  of  dialogue.  These  are  con- 
nected with  the  earth.  Our  place,  and  the  divine  name 
we  are  in  relationship  with  God  by,  are  outside  all  these 
and  properly  heavenly.  It  is  the  Son  who  has  revealed 
the  Father,  and  now  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  gives  us  the 
consciousness  of  sonship,  and  shews  a  man,  the  heavenly 
Christ,  at  the  Father's  right  hand  in  glory,  when  He  had 
by  Himself  accomplished  the  purification  of  our  sins. 

But  the  contrast  of  the  heavenly-minded  who  do 
not  settle  on  the  earth,  and  of  those  who  do,  with  the 
world's  power  over  the  latter,  and  the  entire  victory  of 
the  former  over  the  power  of  the  world,  and  then 
Christ's  reign.  King  and  Priest,  and  God's  taking  all 
into  His  hand  by  Him,  are  clearly  and  wonderfully 
brought  out.* 

^-  This  closes  the  general  histoiy  of  these  gi-eat  elements  of 
God's  ways.  Heavenly  things  are,  no  doubt,  out  of  sight,  save 
we  look  behind  the  scene,  where  Abram's  faith  went.  Still  the 
path  of  faith,  the  snare  of  the  world,  the  moral  victory  of  un- 
selfish faith,  which  has  God  and  His  promises  for  its  portion, 
and  its  actual  final  victory,  and  God's  possession  of  heaven  and 
earth  imder  the  Melchisedec  priesthood  of  Christ,  priest  on  His 
throne,  are  fully  brought  out,  and  the  whole  scene  completed. 
This  makes  chapters  xii. — xiv.  a  section  by  itself. 


GENESIS.  37 

When  God  had  thus  revealed  Himself,  according  to 
His  establishment  of  blessing  in  power  on  the  earth, 
through  the  priestly  king  Melchisedec,  naturally  the 
actual  blessing  of  the  chosen  people  finds  its  place; 
and  we  come  down  to  the  actual  earthly  scene,  and  in 
chapter  xv.  have  the  detailed  instruction  of  the  Lord 
to  Abram,  regarding  the  earthly  seed  and  the  land 
given  to  him,  the  whole  confirmed  by  a  covenant  where 
God,  as  light  to  guide  and  furnace  to  try,  deigns  to 
bind  Himself  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  whole. 
Death  makes  it  sure.  Jehovah  confirms  thus  the  coven- 
ant in  going,  in  grace,  through  that  which  bound  Him  ; 
Abram,  heir  of  the  promises,  undergoes  the  terror  and 
shadow  of  it.  It  is  not  here  precisely  expiation,  but 
what  belonged  to  the  confirmation  of  the  promises,  by 
the  only  thing  which  could  establish  them  in  favour  of 
man  a  sinner.  It  is  evident  that  this  unfolding  of 
God's  ways,  and  the  establishment  of  the  covenant 
embraces  (though  the  covenant  be  made  in  favour  of 
the  earthly  people)  new  and  important  principles.  God 
Himself  was  Abram's  defence  and  portion.  That  is 
the  highest  portion  of  all,  so  far  as  anything  given  to 
man  can  go.* 

But  Abram  feels  yet  his  connection  with  the  earth 
as  an  abiding  place  in  connection  with  the  flesh,  and  it 
was  indeed  God's  purpose  so  to  bless  him.  That  is  in 
its  nature  Jewish,  and  we  have  consequently  the  Jewish 
portion  unfolded.  The  whole  scene  descends  thus  here 
to  earthly  hopes,  and  promises,  and  covenant,  and  the 
land.  Abram's  mind  goes  down ;  for  it  is  going  down — 
when  God  says  (on  his  having  refused  everything  from 
the  world,  in  view  of  the  world  to  come  as  a  future 
hope),  *I  am  thy  reward,'  as  He  had  been  his  shield — to 
say,  What  wilt  thou  give  me  ?     But  the  divine  word 

-■'  The  declaration  of  God  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  xv.,  is 
in  connection  with  Abram's  refusing  to  take  anything  from  the 
world,  as  related  in  the  end  of  chapter  xiv. 
XIV.,    XV. 


38  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

uses  it,  to  unfold  on  God's  part  His  purposes  in  this  re- 
spect, which,  as  regards  the  government  of  this  world, 
are  of  real  importance.  I  have  no  heir,  says  Abram ; 
nothing  to  continue,  by  a  family  tie,  the  possession  of 
my  inheritance  on  earth,  according  to  promise  ;  for  on 
earth,  where  men  die,  there  must  be  succession.  And 
so  it  was  to  be.  But  still,  as  to  the  earth,  it  was  to  be 
by  dependence  on  Jehovah,  by  promise,  and  by  faith. 
Although  connected  here  with  the  earth,  it  was  not  ac- 
cording to  nature:  on  this  footing  all  was  foreclosed 
against  Abram — he  had  no  seed.  Hence,  the  seed  of 
faith  and  promise  comes  forth — not  indeed  the  one 
seed — but  the  Jews  as  children  of  promise.  The  prin- 
ciple is  set  forth  and  faith  counted  for  righteousness 
while  Abram  believed  God.  Thus,  for  this  world, 
Israel  was  the  seed  of  promise,  the  heir.  Then  comes 
covenant  as  to  the  land,  according  to  promise  made  in 
the  call  of  Abram.  The  Lord  binds  Himself  to  Abram 
according  to  death,  as  we  have  seen  (for  indeed  it  is 
assured  in  the  death  of  Christ,  without  which  they 
could  have  nothing).  This  is,  as  to  present  fulfilment, 
connected  with  the  suffering  of  the  people  in  Egypt, 
and  their  subsequent  deliverance,  when  the  oppressors 
of  the  people  and  the  usurpers  of  the  inheritance  would 
both  be  judged. 

The  character  of  the  act  by  which  the  covenant  was 
made,  we  have  already  noticed.  The  reader  may  com- 
pare Jeremiah  xxxiv.  18,  19,  as  to  the  force  of  this 
act.  It  is  not  here,  moreover,  a  promise  by  Avhich 
Abram  is  called  out  by  faith,  but  the  assuring  the  in- 
heritance to  his  seed  by  covenant,  and  here  without 
condition.  It  is  the  promise  to  Israel,  the  seed  of 
promise,  the  heir  in  connection  with  the  earth  and 
flesh.  Remark,  moreover,  that  the  prolonged  sorrow 
and  oppression  of  God's  people — the  delay  of  the  pro- 
mised heir — is  in  connection  with  the  patience  of 
God  towards  those  that  are  to  be  judged.    (Compare  2 


GENESIS.  39 

Peter  iii.  9.)  We  may  remark  that  the  oppressors  of 
Israel  are  judged  for  the  sake  of  Israel,  the  usurpers 
of  his  inheritance  for  him. 

Here  the  laying  out  of  God's  plans  and  purposes 
closes,  even  as  to  the  earthly  people,  and  man's  ways, 
and  God's  ways  for  their  fulfilment,  begin  to  be  un- 
folded with  chapter  xvi.,*  with  the  paths  of  those,  or 
hindrances  from  those,  with  whom  His  people  may  be 
connected  in  any  way.  These  are  developed  up  to 
chapter  xxiii.  when  Abraham  ceases  to  be  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  stem  of  promise.  Sarah  dies,  the  vessel 
of  the  seed  of  promise,  and  the  risen  heir  comes  into 
notice  as  the  one  whom  God  sets  forth.  They  that 
are  born  after  the  flesh  precede  those  who  are  born 
according  to  promise. 

We  cannot  but  remark,  what  gives  so  striking  a 
character  to  the  book  of  Genesis,  and  such  freshness 
to  all  that  is  in  it  (particularly  to  what  we  have  gone 
through  hitherto),  how  all  the  great  principles  of  man's 
estate  and  of  God's  ways  are  brought  out  in  it.  It  is 
a  heading  and  summary  of  all  man's  state  and  God's 
ways  with  him  in  it — not  of  redemption,  though  sacri- 
fice and  covering  of  sin  be  found,  nor  of  its  glorious 
results.  Redemption  is  in  Exodus.  Man's  state  and 
God's  ways  and  fundamental  promises  are  here. 

Chapter  xvi. — Abram  seeking,  at  Sarah's  instigation, 
to  anticipate  the  will  of  God  and  the  accomplishment 
of  the  promise  in  its  time,  we  have  the  covenant  of 

*  Chapter  xv.  stands  by  itself,  between  the  general  principles 
already  treated  of  and  the  historical  account  which  follows,  but 
which,  though  historical,  gives  great  leading  principles  which, 
with  the  exception  of  Isaac,  apply  to  Israel  and  the  earth.  It  is 
the  unconditional  promise  as  to  Israel,  the  land,  and  the  cove- 
nant. In  the  subsequent  chapters,  however,  we  find  the  promised 
seed. 

XVI. 


40  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  law  in  Hagar,  the  source  of  distress  and  disquietude. 
God,  however,  takes  care  of  the  seed  according  to  the 
flesh.  The  application  of  this  as  a  figure  is  clear  from 
Galatians  iv.  The  pride  of  man  under  the  law  is 
marked  in  Hagar's  spirit,  yet  her  son  cannot  be  heir. 
The  haste  of  man,  who  will  not  wait  God's  time,  will 
not  wait  on  Him  as  to  means  of  accomplishment  (so 
was  it  with  Jacob  for  the  blessing)  is  full  of  moral 
warning  to  us ;  it  is  ever  the  source  of  disquietude  and 
sorrow.  Hagar,  too,  was  an  Egyptian — a  remembrance, 
also,  of  the  want  of  faith  in  Abram.  The  law  and 
flesh,  and  indeed  sin,  ever  go  together  (see  John  viii. 
84-36) ;  and  in  connection  with  the  unbelief  of  nature, 
that  is,  Egypt. 

As  regards  the  order  of  these  chapters,  I  may  add, 
xii.,  xiii.,  xiv.  go  together,  and  are  dependent  on  the 
double  manifestation  of  God  to  Abram;  first,  to  call 
him,  and  then  in  Canaan.  We  have  power,  failure, 
return,  and  endurmg  heavenly  faith  contrasted  with 
worldliness,  and  thereto  the  display  of  earthly  power 
attached,  to  that  faith,  closing  with  victory,  God  pos- 
sessor of  heaven  and  earth,  and  Melchisedec. 

Though  chapter  xv.  stands  alone  as  a  whole,  chapter 
xvi.  is  so  far  connected  with  it,  that  it  is  the  fleshly 
attempt  on  Sarah's  part  to  have  the  seed  which  was 
assured  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  Abram  in  the 
beginning  of  chapter  xv.  Here  all  is  failure  ;  but  the 
purposes  of  God  will  be  accomplished  according  to 
promise,  and  not  of  the  flesh  and  man's  will. 

In  chapter  xvii.  we  have  a  fresh  revelation  of  the 
Lord  to  Abram,  and,  I  think,  are  upon  higher  and 
holier  ground.  It  is  not  here  calling,  or  worship,  or 
the  world  and  victory  over  it  in  Lot  (xii.-xiv.*),  or  a 

*  In  chapter  xii.  it  is  the  path  of  faith,  though  with  failing, 
that  failing  the  not  owning  the  separated  relationship  of  God's 
people  (the  church)  to  the  heir  of  the  world.  Then  chapters 
xiii.,  xiv.  the  heliever  in  a  worldly  place  taken  as  his  portion, 


GENESIS.  41 

revelation  by  the  word  of  how  God  would  accomplish 
His  earthly  promises,  and  what  His  people  should  go 
through  (xv.) — not  what  God  was  for  Abram,  but  what 
He  was  Himself.  It  is  not,  I  am  thy  shield  and  thine 
exceeding  great  reward;  but  I  am  God  Almighty. 
This  is  not  all  He  was,  but  it  is  what  He  was — His 
own  name ;  and  Abram  is  called  upon  to  walk  corre- 
spondently  to  this  name.  Hence,  also,  he  does  not 
worship  or  request  anything  from  God,  however  high 
the  privilege,  but  Elohim  talks  with  him.  The  various 
parts  of  His  purposes  are  unfolded,  and  what  Abram 
is  to  be  before  Him  in  whom  he  believed.  It  is  the 
starting-point  of  God's  history  of  His  connection  with, 
and  ways  in,  the  world,  Jew  and  Gentile  starting  from 
His  original  sovereign  title.  That  which  brings  in  the 
Gentiles  as  well  as  Israel  is  before  us.  It  is  not  the 
individual  seed  of  promise,  as  in  chapter  xxii.,  to  which 
the  promise  of  chapter  xii.  was  confirmed,  but  the  title  of 
God  with  the  first  vessels  of  promise  as  root  of  a  people 
set  apart  to  God.  In  general  God's  covenant  was  with 
him.  It  is  not  a  legal  binding,  but  a  free  engagement 
of  God  in  grace,  according  to  His  own  mind,  that 
Abraham  should  be  the  father  of  many  nations.  It  is 
in  three  parts.  God  would  be  a  God  to  Abraham,  and 
to  his  seed  after  him;  the  land  wherein  he  was  a 
stranger  is  to  be  to  him  and  to  his  seed  after  him ;  and 
nations  and  kings  should  come  out  of  him.  All  these 
promises  are  without  condition ;  but  principles  are  set 
forth  binding  on  Abraham,  and  expressive  of  the  cha- 
racter of  those  who  enjoy  the  privileges  of  God — cir- 
cumcision and  free  sovereign  promise.  Circumcision 
in  contrast  with  law  (see  John  vii.  22),  but  expressive 


the  victory  of  the  separated  ones,  the  faith  which  would  not 
take  a  shoe-latchet.  Chapter  xv.  the  revelation  of  a  numerous 
seed  and  Israel's  place.  Chapter  xvi.  the  attempt  to  have  the 
promise  in  riesh — Hagar.    See  Galatians. 

XVII. 


42  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

of  the  death  of  the  flesh  (compare  Rom.  iv.  10-13),*  and 
next,  the  promise  of  the  seed  is  given ;  but  this  when 
Abraham,  as  to  the  body,  was  now  dead ;  and  as  the 
character  of  circumcision  was  peremptory — for  flesh 
cannot  have  to  say  to  God  in  light — so  was  it  as  to  the 
promise ;  it  was  to  the  son  of  promise.  Though  God 
might  outwardly  bless  the  seed  according  to  flesh,  the 
covenant  was  exclusively  with  the  heir  of  promise. 
Death  of  flesh  (for  we  are  away  from  God),  and  simple 
sovereign  grace,  are  peremptory.  The  barren  woman 
m.ust  be  the  mother  of  thousands.  Abraham  rejoices 
in  the  promise,  and  acts  obediently  in  the  order  of 
Go.L 

There  is  another  element  here,  a  common  one  to  this 
purport  in  scripture,  God's  giving  a  name  to  Abram 
and  to  Sarai  also.  It  signifies  the  title  of  direct  autho- 
rity, and  entering  into  relationship  on  this  ground.  So 
Adam,  so  Pharaoh,  so  Nebuchadnezzar.  Here  God  hav- 
ing revealed  His  own  name  gives  one  to  Abram  in  con- 
nection with  Himself.  Thenceforth  He  is  the  God  of 
Abraham,  revealing  Abraham's  place,  and  the  sign  of 
the  covenant  in  separation  to  Himself  too ;  Abraham  is 
the  father  of  many  nations ;  Ishmael  even  is  preserved 
and  blessed;  but  the  promised  seed  stands  alone,  also  has 
his  name  (laughter),  the  child  of  mere  promise  of  her 
whom  God  named  too,  intimating,  though  not  revealing, 
resurrection  (compare  Rom.  iv.  19-22).  For  this  world, 
Israel  as  to  promise  holds  the  place  of  Sarah  thus 
named,  but  when  dead  according  to  the  flesh. 

Chapter  xviii.  is  again  a  new  unfolding  of  God's 
ways,   here   especially  in   connection  with   the  seed, 

*  I  read  verse  12  thus  :  "  And  father  of  circumcision  [that  is, 
of  true  separation  to  God,  such  as  God  owns] ,  not  only  to  those 
of  the  circumcision,  but  to  those  who  walk  in  the  steps  of  the 
faith  of  Abraham,  which  he  had  being  yet  uncircumcised." 
That  is,  God  recognises  them  (believers  from  among  the  Gentiles) 
as  being  truly  circumcised. 


GENESIS.  43 

already  in  a  general  way,  as  part  of  God's  purpose  that 
it  should  be  Abraham's  seed  according  to  grace  and 
promise  when  flesh  had  no  hope,  and  not  according 
to  the  flesh,  but  now  specifically  revealed  as  a  present 
thing  to  Abraham.  This  seed  of  promise  is  here  the 
main  object  in  view,  and  the  present  immediate  object 
of  hope.  This  is  so  on  to  the  end  of  chapter  xxi.  But 
I  apprehend,  he*  is  here  seen  as  heir  of  the  world  and 
judge;  while  Abraham's  personal  relationship  with 
God  is  in  grace,  by  promise,  where  he  is  not  seen ;  and 
so  far  has  the  ground  of  faith,  and,  in  figure,  a  christian 
position.  Hence,  God  Himself  being  known  (not 
merely  His  gifts),  Abraham  rises  higher  than  in  chapter 
XV.,  and,  instead  of  asking  gifts  for  himself,  intercedes 
for  others.  All  is  the  effect  of  the  gift  of  the  heir  being 
known.  After  chapter  xxii.  the  proper  figures  of  the 
church  as  yet  unrevealed  come  in,  because  the  seed  is 
raised:  we  get,  however,  great  individual  principles 
here. 

Abraham  is  accustomed  to  the  divine  presence,  and  it 
is  quickly  felt  by  him ;  and  although  he  says  nothing 
referring  to  the  divine  glory  till  the  Lord  is  pleased  to 
discover  Himself,  yet  from  the  first  he  acts  with  an 
instinctive  deference  which  was  as  fully  accepted  by 
Him  who  came.  In  verse  3  Abraham  addresses  him- 
self to  one,  yet  speaks  in  his  hospitality  to  all,  and 
to  this  they  all  answer,  and  inquire  withal  for  Sarai ; 
but  in  verse  10  it  is  again  individual,  the  effectual 
promise  of  the  Lord.  In  the  rebuke  of  Sarah's  unbelief 
Jehovah  reveals  Himself.  He  judges  flesh  and  its  un- 
belief, as  He  promises.  Abraham  accompanies  the 
three  on  their  way ;  two  go  on,  and  Abraham  is  left 
alone  with  Jehovah.  In  this  respect  it  is  a  lovely  scene 
of  holy  consciousness  and  yet  deferential  waiting  on 
the  good  pleasure  of  God.     The  immediate  promise  of 

*  That  is,  the  Seed,  but  who  is  withal  Jehovah,  the  First  and 
the  Last. 

XVIII. 


44  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

the  arrival  of  the  seed  is  given.  Abraham  enjoys  the 
most  intimate  communion  with  Jehovah,  who  reveals 
His  counsels  to  him  as  to  His  friend.  Intercession  is 
the  fruit  of  this  revelation.  (Compare  Is.  vi.)  Judgment 
falls  on  the  world  ;  and  whilst  Abraham,  on  the  top  of 
the  mountain,  communes  with  God  of  the  judgment 
which  was  to  fall  upon  the  world  below,  where  he  was 
not.  Lot,  who  had  taken  his  place  in  it,  is  saved  so  as 
by  fire.  Righteousness  which  walks  with  the  world 
puts  itself  in  the  position  of  judge,  and  is  at  the  same 
time  useless  and  intolerable.  Abraham  escapes  all 
judgment,  and  sees  it  from  on  high.  Lot  is  saved  from 
the  judgment  which  falls  upon  the  world  in  which  he 
found  himself.  The  place  where  Abraham  enjoyed 
God  is  for  him  a  place  of  sterility  and  fear:  he  is 
forced  to  take  refuge  there  in  the  end,  because  he  is 
afraid  to  be  anywhere  else. 

In  general,  Abraham  has  the  character  here  of  com- 
munion with  God,  which  faith,  without  sight,  gives — 
not  by  an  indwelling  Holy  Ghost,  no  doubt,  according 
to  the  privilege  of  the  saints  now  (that  was  reserved 
for  the  time  of  fuller  blessing,  when  the  church's  Head 
should  be  glorified),  but  in  the  general  character  of  the 
blessing.  The  promised  seed  is  announced  as  to  come, 
but  not  yet  brought  into  the  world,  that  is,  in  the  way 
of  manifested  glory.  Meanwhile,  Abraham  knows  and 
believes  it.  God  then  treats  him,  as  we  have  seen,  as 
a  friend,  and  tells  him,  not  what  concerns  himself,  but 
the  world,  (with  a  friend  I  speak  of  what  I  have  on 
my  heart,  not  merely  of  my  business  with  him)  ;  and 
then,  as  he  has  received  these  communications  from 
God,  so  he  intercedes  with  God — a  stranger  in  the 
place  of  promise,  on  high  in  communion  with  Him, 
And  this  is  still  more  the  place  of  the  saints  now 
through  the  Holy  Ghost :  the  full  communication  of 
the  mind  and  ways  of  God  in  the  word,  and  the  Lord's 
coming  to  take  them  up,  so  that  this  is  the  scene  they 


GENESIS.  45 

live  in  by  faith,  and  founded  on  that  comes  intercession. 
Abraham  had  the  promise  of  the  heir  for  himself 
already  ;  here  he  is  the  vessel  of  divine  knowledge 
of  what  concerns  the  world  too.  This  puts  him  in 
the  place  of  full  grace,  and  so  of  intercession.  His 
faith  associates  him  with  the  mind  and  character  of 
God.  It  brings  out,  withal,  the  patience  and  perfect- 
ness  of  judgment  with  God. 

Lot,  in  the  following  chapter,  because  of  his  connec- 
tion with  the  heavenly  man,  depositary  of  God's 
counsels  and  wisdom,  and  intercessor,  himself  down  in 
the  plain  of  this  world,  which  he  had  chosen,  as  the 
Jews  have,  is  delivered  by  providential  power ;  but  he 
passes  through  the  tribulation,  and  suffers  the  loss  of  all 
that  for  which  he  had  refused  the  heavenly  condition, 
and  sought  the  earth,  as  ignorant  of  the  judgment  as 
he  was  of  the  heavenly  treasure.  Such  is  the  position 
of  the  people  of  faith  when  sunk  into  the  world  of 
judgment.  Soon  abandoned  to  the  uncertainty  of  un- 
belief in  the  presence  of  visible  judgment,  he  seeks 
his  refuge  in  that  place  of  Abraham's  blessing  to 
which  he  had  previously  been  afraid  to  flee,  and 
which  he  had  earlier  abandoned  for  the  ease  of 
the  well-watered  plain ;  but  he  is  in  miserable  dark- 
ness, the  parent  of  a  perpetual  thorn  to  the  peo- 
ple of  God.  But  this  last  part  is  only  historically 
given,  that  Israel  might  know  the  origin  of  Moab 
and  Amnion ;  and  furnishes  a  general  principle  for 
all  times. 

Thus  faith  had  its  place,  and  the  world  had  been 
judged.  So  will  it  be  in  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man; 
but  here  the  heir  is  not  yet  actually  brought  in,  but 
expected,  and  the  path  of  faith,  or  the  opposite,  till  He 
comes  depicted. 

In  chapters  xx.,  xxi.  we  have  the  question  of  the  heir 
and  of  the  path  of  faith  in  another  point  of  view. 
Abraham  denies  his  relationship  with  his  wife,  and  is 

XIX.-XXI. 


46  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLK 

reproved  by  the  world  itself,  which  knows  better  than 
he  what  she  should  be.  God,  however,  guards  the 
promises  in  His  faithfulness,  and  judges  that  which 
meddles  with  her  who  has  to  say  to  them.  The  heir 
of  promise  is  bom;  and  the  heir  according  to  the 
flesh,  son  of  the  bondwoman  or  of  the  law,  is  entirely 
rejected.  Now  Abraham  reproves  the  powerful  of 
the  earth,  before  whom  he  had  previously  denied  his 
relationship  with  his  wife. 

But  these  two  chapters  must  be  somewhat  more 
developed.  Like  Abram's  going  down  to  Egypt,  we 
have  unbeliei'  working  in  respect  of  the  path  into 
which  he  had  been  called  by  grace,  shewn,  as  it  ever 
is,  in  reference  to  walking  in  the  intimacy  of  the  re- 
lationship in  which  God  had  set  him,  of  which  woman 
is  the  expression  in  the  types.  Here  Sarah  is  the 
mother  of  the  heir  of  the  world,  the  wife  of  Abraham, 
according  to  promise,  and,  for  Abraham,  according  to 
the  church's  hope,  as  we  have  seen  (though  Israel  were 
the  vessel  according  to  flesh).  This  position  he  denies. 
Sarah  is  again  his  sister.  This  was  worse  than  before, 
for  she  is,  to  faith,  mother  of  the  heir  of  the  world. 
Abimelech  was  wrong,  and  acted  to  please  himself,  but 
acted  unconscious  of  it.  Abraham  before  God  was  in 
the  falser  position  of  the  two.  God  warns  Abimelech, 
and  preserves  Sarah  by  His  own  power,  whom  Abra- 
ham's want  of  faith  had  connected  with  the  world; 
and  Abimelech  returns  her,  with  the  cutting  reproof  to 
the  church,  as  here  typified,  that  she  at  least  ought  to 
have  known  her  own  relationship  to  Christ.  Still,  in 
the  main,  Abraham  was  in  the  place  of  faith  and 
blessing ;  and,  as  God's  prophet,  to  whom  none  should 
do  harm,  intercedes  for  the  faulty  Abimelech,  for  here 
all  is  grace.  There  is  another  point  to  notice  here, 
that  this  was  an  arrangement  of  unbelief  when  first 
he  started  from  his  father's  house  (chap.  xx.  13),  so 
soon  was  the  germ  of  unbelief  at  work  in  the  called  of 


GENESIS.  47 

promise.  But  God  maintains  the  divine  title  to  the 
allegiance  of  the  church  at  all  times.  But  now  the 
heir  is  born,  the  heir  of  promise. 

The  effect  of  this  is,  that  not  only  is  the  difference 
known  to  faith,  but  the  heir  of  the  bondwoman  is 
utterly  cast  out  as  to  the  inheritance.  Historically  he 
is  preserved  according  to  God's  promise,  a  figure  of 
legal  Israel ;  but,  as  regards  any  portion  of  the  inheri- 
tance, wholly  cast  out. 

And  here,  further,  Abraham  fears  no  longer  before 
the  prince  of  this  world,  but  reproves  him.  He  has 
the  world,  as  well  as  the  heavenly  communion,  now 
that  the  heir  is  come ;  and  the  world  owns  that  God  is 
with  him  in  all  things.  Hence  the  well  of  the  oath 
is  the  witness  of  Abraham's  title  in  the  world,  and 
Abimelech's  owning  God  to  be  with  him.  There,  ac- 
cording to  the  oath  and  his  title  thus  owned  by  the 
world,  he  plants  a  grove,  takes  possession  of  the  earth, 
and  worships,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  everlasting 
God — of  Him  who  had  once  promised  to  Israel,  and 
never  abandoned  His  purpose,  and  had  now  accom- 
plished on  the  earth  what  His  mouth  had  spoken :  not, 
indeed,  so  blessed  a  portion  as  the  heavenly  intercourse 
and  possession  of  faith,  but  a  proof  of  the  unchange- 
able faithfulness  of  the  God  who  had  given  the  pro- 
mises. There  Abraham,  in  figure,  now  abides,  where 
the  power  of  the  world  had  been.  This  will  belong  to 
Israel  in  the  letter,  but  we,  on  whom  the  ends  of  the 
world  are  come,  have  it  in  a  higher  and  better  way.  It 
was  the  pledge  of  what  should  be  and  will  be ;  our  hope 
is  transferred  to  heaven  where  Christ  is  gone.  But  we 
reign  there  in  a  better  way. 

But  on  this  introduction  of  the  heir,  he  necessarily 
becomes  the  main  subject ;  and  chapter  xxii.  opens  with 
it :  "  It  came  to  pass  after  these  things,"  for,  indeed,  a 
new  scene  now  opens.  The  heir  of  the  promise  is 
sacrificed  and  raised  again  in  figure,  and  the  promise  is 
XXII. 


48  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

confirmed  to  the  seed*  The  ancient  depositary  or  form 
of  the  covenant  (even  that  of  promise),  mother  of  the 
heir  (Sarah),  now  disappears.  Abraham  sends  Eliezer, 
the  steward  of  his  house,  to  seek  a  wife  for  the  risen 
heir,  for  his  only  son  Isaac,  from  the  country  whither 
Isaac  was  not  to  return — in  the  world  such  as  it  is : 
beautiful  figure  of  the  mission  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who, 
fulfilling  His  office  (after  the  Lord's  death  and  resur- 
rection) with  the  elect  of  God  who  are  to  form  the 
Lamb's  wife  in  the  counsels  of  God,  conducts  her 
(already  adorned  with  His  gifts,  but  waiting  the 
moment  when  she  shall  see  Him  who  is  heir  of  all 
things  that  belong  to  His  Father)  across  the  desert  to 
her  heavenly  bridegroom.  The  call  and  readiness  of 
the  appointed  bride  is  beautifully  depicted,  and  she 
goes  with  him,  who  prefigures  the  Spirit,  to  the  bride- 
groom who  is  heir  of  all.  But  mark  how  false  and 
wretched  the  position  of  the  espoused  wife,  if  Isaac 
had  lost  his  hold  upon  her  heart— her  home  in  nature 
left,  and  she  in  the  wilderness  with  one  who  was 
nothing  to  her,  if  not  her  guide  to  Isaac.  The  walk 
of  the  Spirit,  moreover,  in  man,  is  depicted  in  the  most 
instructive  manner  in  the  details  of  this  history,  in 
the  conduct  of  Eliezer :  his  simple  subjection  to  what 
was  for  him  the  word  of  God  even  when  all  seemed 
well  (vers.  21-23) ;  heart-reference  in  thankfulness  to 
God  the  first  feeling  (ver.  26) ;  purpose  of  heart  in 
service  (ver.  33),  and  the  like. 

We  have  next  the  election  of  God  which  now  sets 
apart  the  earthly  people,  Jacob.  It  is  remarkable  how 
little  we  have  of  Isaac,  nothing  but  his  remaining  in 
heavenly  places,  I  mean  of  course  in  the  figure,  a  wife 

-!■  This  distinct  confiiination  to  (not  in)  the  seed,  is  what  the 
apostle  refers  to  as  the  one  seed,  that  is  Christ.  The  general 
promises  as  to  Israel  were  of  a  seed  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for 
number.  Tliis  is  the  confirmation  to  the  one  seed,  when  risen,  of 
the  promise  given  in  chapter  xii. 


GENESIS.  49 

being  sought  for  him  on  earth.  We  are  on  earth ;  yet 
the  heavenly  thing  is  to  us  fully  revealed  and  we  have 
the  earnest  of  all.  In  Abraham  promise  and  princi- 
ples are  brightly  unfolded  to  us,  and  the  earthly  people 
of  promise  in  Jacob  are  fully  developed ;  principles 
which  we  have  all  through.  Jacob  values  the  pro- 
mises of  God;  but  if  Lot  was  attracted  by  the  well- 
watered  plain,  the  unbelief  of  Jacob  was  manifested 
in  the  use  of  carnal  means  to  obtain  possession  of  the 
promises,  instead  of  waiting  upon  God.  Thus  his 
years  were  "few  and  evil ;"  and  he  was  continually  the 
object  of  similar  deceit  too.  Remark  here,  that  while 
the  experience  of  Abraham  was  altogether  higher  and 
better,  and  he  had  far  fuller  communion  with  God  in 
His  mind,  as  it  is  with  a  faithful  Christian  enjoying  the 
things  that  are  not  seen,  giving  up  readily  in  the  world, 
and  interceding  for  others,  yet  the  unfaithful  believer 
has  much  more  experience  in  his  path,  because  he  is 
not  living  with  God.  This  we  see  in  Jacob.  He  prevails 
by  faith  through  grace,  but  he  wrestles  for  himself, 
Abraham  intercedes  for  others.  But  if  we  have  in 
Isaac  a  risen  Christ,  bridegroom,  as  to  the  figure,  of 
the  church  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  descended  to  seek 
here  below  for  Him  who  is  on  high ;  in  Jacob  we  have 
Israel,  driven  out  of  the  land  of  promise,  kept  of  God 
to  enjoy  it  afterwards.  I  believe,  however,  that  in  his 
marriages  we  have  the  Lord,  who,  while  loving  Israel 
(Rachel),  has  yet  first  received  the  Gentiles  or  the 
church,  and  then  the  Jews. 

These  subjects  conduct  us  to  the  end  of  chapter  xxv. 
— the  sacrifice  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  the  calling 
of  the  church  in  the  figure  of  Rebecca,  and  the  elec- 
tion of  Israel,  the  younger,  to  the  promise  and  blessing 
in  the  earth.  As  regards  the  first  point,  the  promises 
were  settled  in  Isaac  living  on  the  earth,  as  they  were 
in  the  Person  of  Christ.  There  Abraham  had  to  give 
all  up  in  entire  and  absolute  confidence  in  God,  and 

VOL.  I.  XXIII.  E 


50  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

trust  them,  with  Isaac,  in  God's  hand.  So  did  Christ: 
all  was  His  in  connection  with  the  promises  in  Israel. 
He  gave  up  all  on  the  cross  to  receive  it  in  resurrec- 
tion from  His  Father.  Here  note,  no  personal  sacrifice 
is  ever  made  without  a  fresh  ground  of  relationship 
with  God  in  grace ;  for  God  gives  that  which  sustains 
us  in  the  sacrifice,  which  was  not  needed  to  enjoy  the 
thing  sacrificed.  God  had  given  promises  in  Isaac; 
but  to  trust  God  with  a  sacrificed  Isaac,  resurrection 
must  be  known;  and  so  Abraham  trusted  that  God 
would  raise  him  from  the  dead.  For  God  could  not 
fail  in  His  promises. 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  the  bearing  of  this 
part  of  scripture  is  considered.  I  only  remark  here 
that  the  promise  made  to  Abraham  (chap,  xii.)  is  here 
confined  to  the  one  sacrificed  and  risen  seed,  Isaac. 
There  were  other  promises  to  a  seed  numerous  as  the 
stars  in  heaven  (itself  a  promise) ;  but  the  promise  of 
the  blessing  of  the  families  of  the  earth  was  given 
first  to  Abram  alone.  (Chap,  xxii.)  Hence  the 
Apostle  Paul  speaks  of  one  seed.  The  promise  is 
not  spoken  of  elsewhere  to  Abram.  It  is  confirmed 
to  the  risen  seed.  In  the  end  of  the  chapter,  besides 
the  general  stem  of  the  nations,  Rebecca's  origin  is  set 
forth. 

In  chapter  xxiii.,  as  we  have  said,  the  vessel  of  pro- 
mise, Sarah,  disappears,  to  mak  eway  for  Rebecca,  the 
son's  bride ;  but  with  it,  while  Abraham  has  no  portion 
in  the  land  and  must  buy  his  sepulchre,  he  has  the  sure 
pledge  that  he  will  hereafter  have  it.  He  buries  his 
dead  there. 

And  now  the  heir's,  bride  must  be  sought.  Remark, 
first,  that  she  receives  tokens  of  grace ;  then,  as  an  es- 
poused one,  gifts.  She  shews  her  willing  mind  through 
^race,  and  is  led  of  Eliezer  in  loneliness  across  the 
(desert,  leaving  her  father's  house,  to  possess  all  with 
Isaac,  to  whom  his  father  has  given  everything.     We 


GENESIS.  61 

have  here  fully  the  church  in  a  figure :  Isaac,  who  is 
the  risen  man — between  the  man  of  promise,  Abraham, 
and  Jacob,  when  Israel  the  earthly  people  comes  into 
the  scene — must  not  on  any  account  go  back  to  the 
country  of  nature,  out  of  which  his  wife  was  to  be 
called.  He  is  exclusively  the  heavenly  man.  Rebecca 
must  go  to  him.  With  him  before  her,  her  journey  was 
blessed ;  he  once  out  of  her  mind,  she  was  a  stranger 
who  had  left  all  to  be  homeless  and  portionless  for 
nothing.  Such  is  the  church.  But  to  return  was  to 
give  up  Isaac. 

Next  mark,  in  the  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost  pre- 
sented in  Eliezer,  entire  confidence  in  God:  he  asks, 
and  is  answered ;  but  it  must  be  entirely  according  to 
the  word  (here  Abraham's),  "  Is  she  of  the  kindred  ?" 
Next,  when  the  blessing  is  known,  thanksgiving  comes 
before  joy ;  and  next,  entire  and  exclusive  consecration 
to  the  service  he  had  to  perform.  He  will  not  eat  till 
he  has  told  his  errand,  and  then  no  hesitation :  he  has 
one  work  and  nothing  else.  Would  it  were  so  with 
all  who  are  Christ's  1  Eliezer  conducts  her  to  Isaac, 
who  is  gone  out  and  comes  to  meet  her;  and  there, 
to  the  son's  comfort,  she  replaces  Sarah,  the  vessel  of 
promise,  in  the  yet  better  place  of  the  risen  heir's 
wife. 

Abraham's  course  was  finished.  Promises  have  given 
place  to  the  church  called  by  grace.  But  all  that  spring 
from  him  have  a  place  in  the  record  of  God ;  but  Isaac 
is  heir  of  all,  though  Ishmael  be  great  and  have  princes 
before  him.* 


*  Though  the  subjects  in  general  follow,  chapter  xxv.  is  not 
in  historical  sequence.  The  "  then  "  has  no  real  force.  It  is  a 
general  gathering  up  of  the  different  families  of  Abraham.  Isaac 
was  heir  of  his  possessions,  he  gave  gifts  to  his  concubines'  sons 
and  sent  them  away.  Then  we  have  his  death,  and  his  two 
weU-known  sons,  but  Ishmael,  the  son  after  the  flesh,  first;  but 
Isaac  and  then  Jacob  carry  on  the  divine  history. 
XXIV. 


52  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Chapter  xxv.  19  begins,  in  a  measure,  a  new  scene. 
We  are  returned  from  the  glimpse  of  heavenly  things 
in  Isaac,  to  earthly  and  Jewish  things  in  Jacob.  From 
the  barren  woman — for  all  must  be  grace  and  divine 
power — spring  two,  in  whom  election,  not  only  in  the 
grace  of  calling,  but  in  sovereignty  and  in  contrast 
with  works,  is  brought  out.  We  have  the  purpose  of 
God  revealed  to  Rebecca,  but  of  the  history  we  have 
only  so  much  as  gives  the  character  and  spring  of  con- 
duct in  Esau  and  Jacob.  In  Jacob  there  was  nothing 
naturally  attractive;  but  Esau  despised  the  gift  of 
God ;  his  judgment  of  what  was  valuable  had  its  origin 
from  seK.  He  was  profane ;  though  God,  in  His  secret 
counsels,  had  ordained  the  blessing  in  Jacob.  Esau 
saw  nothing  beyond  the  earthly  advantage  of  the  gift, 
and  nothing  of  the  Giver  or  relationship  with  Him. 
Present  things  governed  him,  his  own  present  enjoy- 
ment ;  and  God's  promise  had  no  further  importance. 
Jacob,  however  wretched  his  way  of  getting  it,  valued 
the  promise  for  its  own  sake ;  gave  up  present  things, 
poor  things  no  doubt,  but  enough  to  govern  Esau's 
heart,  to  get  it.  In  this  we  have  merely  the  presentation 
of  the  character  of  the  two  sons.  God's  dealings  with 
them  will  come  later,  for  Isaac's  history  now  only 
begins.  He  is  here  the  designated  heir  of  the  world, 
but  was  to  have,  as  such  heir,  the  proper  portion  of 
Israel  in  the  earth.  Chapter  xxiv.  gave,  in  figure,  the 
secret  history  of  the  church  in  connection  with  the 
risen  heir. 

Here  (chap,  xxvi.)  Isaac  replaces  Abraham  as  heir 
upon  the  earth.  It  is  a  new  revelation,  when  Isaac  is 
himself  in  a  strange  land,  like  the  one  made  to  Abraham 
at  the  first ;  only  that  Isaac  was  already  in  connection 
with  the  calling  of  God,  but  not  in  enjoyment  of  the 
promise.  There  was  a  famine  in  the  land,  and  Isaac 
could  not  dwell  in  it,  and  he  goes  to  those  who  had 
part  of  the  land  in  possession,  but  had  no  title — the 


GENESIS.  53 

future  enemies  and  oppressors  of  his  people.  But  God 
appears  to  him  there,  and  tells  him  not  to  return  into 
the  world,  but  to  dwell  in  the  land  which  He  should 
tell  him  of.  He  is  maintained  in  the  heavenly  places, 
but  still  as  a  place  of  promise,  though  not  now  seeking 
it  as  unknown,  but  still  as  an  object  of  faith.  It  was 
a  fresh  calling  under  different  circumstances  (the  Lord 
appearing  to  him  anew),  not  indeed  to  journey  to  a 
land,  but  to  dwell  where  He  should  shew  him,  and  not 
to  seek  natural  resources  (Egypt).  He  was  not  to  go 
back,  but  to  live  by  faith.  But  the  land  is  also  shewn 
and  the  promises  renewed,  both  as  to  Israel,  and  the 
nations,  and  the  land.  For  the  moment  he  was  to 
sojourn  in  the  land  where  he  was,  that  is,  where 
the  Philistines  were.  Thus  the  whole  land,  Philistines 
and  all,  was  given  to  him,  and  he  dwelt  in  Gerar. 

This  is  the  position  of  Isaac  ;  as  the  first  half  of 
chapter  xii.  is  the  position  of  Abraham.  From  verse 
7  to  the  end  we  have  his  personal  walk  as  to  faith,  as 
Abraham's  in  the  latter  part  of  chapter  xii. ;  and  the 
settlement  of  what  should  be  his  portion  in  his  pos- 
terity according  to  the  faith  that  he  had.  He  fails 
like  Abraham,  and  yet  more  as  to  energy.  He  denies 
his  wife,  as  Abraham  had  done,  and  he  leaves  in  the 
hand  of  the  enemy  the  wells  which  Abraham  had  dug : 
he  had  failed  in  faith  in  God  before  Abimelech,  and, 
though  God  had  said  to  him  "  Sojourn  in  this  land,"  he 
has  to  recede  before  the  will  of  Abimelech,  then  driven 
from  well  to  well,  and  has  room  only  where  the  Philis- 
tine has  room.  In  Beersheba  he  meets  with  God, 
where  he  has  pitched  his  tent,  where  Abraham  had  set 
his  bounds  with  Abimelech  when  Isaac  was  born.  But 
Abraham  had  not  received  direction  as  to  sojourning 
in  the  land,  and  had  reproved  Abimelech,  whose 
servants  had  taken  the  well,  and  Abimelech  had  given 
it  up.  Abraham  had  dug  all  these  wells  as  he  needed, 
as  a  stranger,  and  they  were  not  taken  away :  the  only 

XXV.,  XXVI. 


64  XHE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

one  contended  for  was  Beersheba,  and  that  Abimelech 
gave  up.  However  Beersheba  was,  in  divine  provi- 
dence, the  limit  of  the  land  according  to  the  faith  of 
Israel.  The  Philistines  did  remain  till  David  came, 
the  representative  of  Christ.  The  otherwise  heirs  of 
the  land  possessed  it  not  fully.  There  the  Lord  ap- 
peared and  blessed  Isaac :  there  Israel  reposed  and 
worshipped.  This  chapter  is  Isaac's  history;  it  answers 
to  Abraham's.  (Chap,  xii.,  xx.) 

Esau's  ways  were  as  careless,  as  his  thoughts  as  to 
the  birthright  were  profane.  He  marries  with  the 
women  of  the  land. 

Jacob's  history  now  begins.*  Heir  of  the  promises, 
and  valuing  them,  he  uses  means  to  have  them,  evil 
and  low  in  character.  God  answers  his  faith,  and 
chastens  his  evil  and  unbelief.  God  could  have  brought 
the  blessing  in  His  own  way  (or  made  Isaac  cross  his 
hands  as  He  did  Jacob) ;  Jacob,  led  by  his  mother,  fol- 
lowed his  own  way,  and  did  not  wait  for  God.  But 
the  blessing  was  prophetic,  and  not  to  be  recalled. 
The  ways  of  God  and  His  purpose  were  not  to  be 
changed.  Isaac  was  guilty,  and  Jacob  more  so :  aU 
was  overruled  to  answer  faith  and  chasten  evil  in  the 
believer.  Esau  had  deliberately  given  up  the  right, 
when  he  had  the  choice :  God  was  not  in  his  thoughts: 
he  cannot  receive  the  blessing  when  the  consequences 
are  there.  Man  must  act  by  faith  alone,  when  the  con- 
sequences are  not  seen,  in  order  to  be  blessed,  when 
the  time  for  blessing  comes. 

Jacob  becomes  now  the  picture  of  cast-out  and 
wandering  Israel,  heir  of  the  promises,  watched  over, 
but  an  outcast.      The  wanderings  of  Abraham  were 

*  In  general,  Abraham  is  the  root  of  all  promise  and  the 
pictmre  of  the  life  of  faith :  Isaac,  of  the  heavenly  man,  who 
receives  the  church ;  and  Jacob,  of  Israel,  heii'  of  the  promises 
according  to  the  flesh. 


GENESIS.  55 

in  the  land  of  promise ;  those  of  Jacob,  out  of  it :  two 
things  very  different  one  from  another.  God,  indeed, 
was  with  Jacob,  and  never  left  him;  but  Abraham 
walked  with  God :  in  the  realisation  of  His  presence 
he  built  his  altar.  Jacob  had  no  altar ;  he  was  not  in 
the  place  of  promise.  For  such  a  path  takes  us  out  of 
communion.  Although  God  in  His  faithfulness  be 
with  us,  we  are  not  with  Him.  However,  so  soon  as 
he  bows  to  the  chastisement — destitute,  and  with  his 
staff,  and  a  stone  for  his  pillow,  God  reveals  Himself 
to  him,  and  assures  to  him  all  the  promises,  not  in  the 
full  revelation  of  communion,  but  in  a  dream.  And 
here  all  the  promises  are  renewed,  but  with  a  notable 
difference  from  all  before ;  for  now  the  promise  of  the 
blessings  to  the  nations  is  to  him  and  his  seed;  for 
here  we  are  in  connection  with  Israel  and  the  blessing 
of  the  earth.  Thus  it  is  not  merely  the  one  seed, 
Christ;  but  the  seed  of  Israel  in  possession  of  the 
land — the  millennial  possession  of  the  earth. 

But  another  promise  was  added,  a  precious  and  im- 
portant one,  that,  outcast  and  a  wanderer  as  he  was, 
God  would  keep  him  in  all  places  whither  he  went,  and 
bring  him  back  to  the  land,  and  fulfil  all  without  fail, 
not  leaving  him  till  he  had  accomplished  all.  God 
was  above  ;  Jacob,  the  object  of  promise  and  blessing, 
of  the  earth ;  but  earth  was  all  under  the  providential 
control  of  heaven  ;  and  the  angels  had  Jacob  for  their 
care,  ascended  and  descended,  accomplishing  the  will 
of  God.*  Awoke  up,  Jacob  binds  himself  to  Jehovah 
as  his  God — for  Jehovah  stood  at  the  top  of  the  ladder; 
and  thus  He  became,  prophetically,  the  God  of  a  restored 
Israel,  with  whom,  though  far  from  heaven,  was  the 
house  of  God  on  earth  in  connection  with  heaven.  It 
was  a  legal  though  just  vow,  and  all  prophetic.     He  is 

*  Christ  is  the  ohject  in  John ;  the  ladder  is  merely  to  connect 
the  scene. 

XXVII.,  XXVIII. 


56  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

now  a  stranger,  and  in  many  things  represents  Christ 
afflicted  in  the  affliction  of  His  people. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  in  the  two  wives,  as  I  have 
said,  we  have  the  Gentiles  and  Israel :  Rachel  first 
loved  on  the  earth,  but  not  possessed ;  but  Leah  the 
fruitful  mother  of  children.  Rachel  had  children  also 
afterwards  on  the  earth.  Rachel,  as  representing  the 
Jews,  is  the  mother  of  Joseph,  and  later  of  Benjamin, 
that  is,  of  a  suffering  Christ  glorified  among  the  Gen- 
tiles, while  rejected  of  Israel ;  and  of  a  reigning  Christ, 
the  son  of  his  mother's  sorrow,  but  of  his  father's  right 
hand. 

Jacob's  personal  history  is  the  sad  tale  of  deceit  and 
wrong  done  to  him ;  but  God,  as  He  had  promised,  pre- 
serving him  throughout.  What  a  difference  from 
Eliezer  and  Abraham,  where  the  power  and  character 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  seen!  Here  providence  preserves, 
but  it  is  Jacob's  history.  He  is  bitterly  deceived  as  he 
had  deceived,  but  preserved  according  to  promise.  At 
the  return  of  Jacob  the  hosts  of  God  came  to  meet 
him.  He  receives  a  new  and  wondrous  proof  of  God's 
mighty  and  gracious  care,  which  should  have  recalled 
Bethel  to  him.  But  this  does  not  remove  his  terror. 
He  must  anew  use  the  means  of  unbelief,  and  sends 
children  and  wives  and  all  on  before,  and  presents 
after  presents  to  appease  Esau;  but  his  strength  was 
not  there.  God  would  not  leave  him  in  the  hands  of 
Esau,  but  He  deals  with  him  Himself.  He  wrestles 
with  him,  sustaining  at  the  same  time  his  faith  in  the 
wrestling ;  and,  after  making  him  feel  his  weakness, 
and  that  for  all  his  life,  gives  him,  in  weakness,  the 
place  and  part  of  victor.  He  is  a  prince  with  God, 
and  prevails  with  God  and  with  men — victory  in  con- 
flict with  a  God  who  is  dealing  with  him,  but  no  re- 
velation of,  or  communion  with  Him. 

This  is  a  wonderful  scene :  the  dealings  of  God  with 
a  soul  that  does  not  walk  with  Him.     It  is  not,  how- 


GENESIS.  57 

ever,  the  calm  communion  of  Abraham  with  Jehovah : 
Abraham  intercedes  for  others,  instead  of  wrestling 
for  himself.  So  also,  though  God  gives  Jacob  a  name 
and  so  far  recognises  his  relationship  with  Himself,  He 
does  not  reveal  to  Jacob  His  name,  as  He  had  done  to 
Abraham.  Jacob,  too,  still  employs  his  deceitful  ways ; 
for  he  had  no  thought  of  going  to  Seir,  as  he  said. 
But  he  is  delivered  from  Esau,  as  from  Laban,  and  at 
last  establishes  himself  at  Shechem,  buying  lands 
where  he  ought  to  have  remained  a  stranger.  God  re- 
moves him  out  of  it,  but  by  strange  and  humbling 
circumstances ;  still  God's  fear  on  the  nations  preserves 
him.  He  is  not  yet  back  to  the  point  where  God  had 
given  him  the  promises  and  assured  the  blessing ;  that 
was  at  Bethel.  Here,  however,  he  was  able  to  build 
an  altar,  using,  at  the  same  time,  the  name  which  ex- 
alted his  own  position,  and  which  took  the  ground  of 
the  blessing  which  had  been  granted  to  him  ;  an  act  of 
faith,  it  is  true,  but  which  confined  itself  to  the  bless- 
ing, instead  of  rising  up  to  the  Blesser.  This,  indeed, 
he  was  not  properly  able  to  do  yet.  God  was  dealing 
with  him,  and  he  was,  in  a  measure,  thinking  on  God ; 
but  proper  communion  was  not  there :  so  is  it  in  like 
case  with  us. 

However,  God  led  him  onward,  and  now  tells  him  to 
o  up  to  the  place  whence  he  had  set  out,  and  there 
uild  an  altar,  where  he  had  entered  into  covenant 
with  God,  the  faithful  God,  who  had  been  with  him  all 
the  way  in  which  he  went.  But  what  a  discovery  is 
made  here  !  He  must  now  meet  God  Himself,  and  not 
simply  be  dealt  with  for  his  good — God's  name  still 
unknown,  no  full  revelation  of  Him.  And  this  is  a 
great  difference.     Now  he  must  meet  Him. 

He  remembers — he  knew  it  well,  although  he  paid 
no  attention  to  it  until  he  had  to  meet  God — there 
were  false  gods  in  his  family.  Meeting  God  Himself — 
not  in  secret  and  mysterious  struggle,  but  face  to  face, 

XXIX.-XXXVI. 


58  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

BO  to  speak — brings  all  to  light.  He  purifies  himself, 
and  the  false  gods  are  removed,  and  he  goes  up  to 
Bethel.  There  God  reveals  Himself  openly  to  him,  in 
grace  making  known  His  name,  unasked,  to  him  as  to 
Abraham,  and  confers  upon  him  anew  the  name  of 
Israel,  as  if  he  had  not  received  it  before.  Rachel 
gives  birth  to  him  who,  child  of  his  mother's  sorrow, 
is  the  son  of  his  father's  right  hand  (remarkable  type 
of  Christ  the  Lord) ;  for  this  is,  figuratively,  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  promise  in  power  in  his  person,  though 
the  former  standing  of  Israel,  represented  by  Rachel, 
must  disappear;  but  her  remembrance  is  kept  up  in 
the  land. 

The  apostate  world  establishes  itself  in  power,  while 
the  heirs  of  promise  are  still  poor  pilgrims  upon  the 
earth.     This  last  is  a  distinct  point  of  revelation. 

What  follows  from  chapter  xxxvii.  is  the  interesting 
history  of  Joseph,  to  which  even  children  ever  yield  a 
ready  ear,  although  ignorant  of  all  the  beauties  which 
the  believer  finds  who  knows  Jesus,  and  recognises 
Him  as  prefigured  there :  for  there  is  an  intrinsic 
beauty,  where  the  heart  is  not  yet  hardened,  in  all 
that  reveals  Him.  Joseph,  as  revealed  in  his  dreams 
(faith  alone  could  thus  own  it),  is,  in  the  counsels  of 
God,  heir  of  the  glory  and  chief  of  all  the  family. 
His  brothers  are  jealous  of  this ;  so  much  the  more 
that  he  is  the  beloved  of  his  father.  He  is  sold  to  the 
Gentiles  by  his  brethren,  and,  in  the  figure,  instead  of 
being  put  to  death,  as  the  Jews  did  to  the  true  Joseph 
(that  being  not  possible),  is  passed  for  dead.  Mean- 
while Judah  falls  into  every  kind  of  shame  and  sin, 
which  does  not  deprive  him,  however,  of  the  royal 
genealogy.  Joseph  is  brought  low  among  the  Gentiles, 
through  false  accusations  put  in  prison,  his  "  feet  made 
fast  in  the  stocks."      "  The  iron  enters  into  his  soul :" 


GENESIS.  59 

"till  the  time  came  that  his  cause  was  known,  the 
word  of  the  Lord  tried  him." 

Rising  out  of  his  humiliation,  he  is  elevated,  un- 
known now  of  his  brethren,  to  the  right  hand  of  the 
throne ;  and  the  administration  of  all  power  over  the 
Gentiles  committed  to  him.  In  his  humiliation,  inter- 
preter of  the  thoughts  and  counsels  of  God;  in  his 
elevation,  he  administers  with  power  according  to  the 
same  wisdom,  and  reduces  all  under  the  immediate 
authority  of  him  who  was  seated  on  the  throne. 

At  the  same  time  another  scene  presents  itself.  His 
brethren,  who  had  rejected  him,  forced  by  famine,  are 
brought,  by  the  path  of  repentance  and  humiliation,  to 
own  him  at  length  in  glory,  whom  they  had  once  re- 
jected when  connected  with  themselves.  Benjamin, 
type  of  the  power  of  the  Lord  upon  earth  among  the 
Jews,  is  united  to  him  who,  unknown,  had  the  power 
of  the  throne  among  the  Gentiles;  that  is,  Christ  unites 
these  two  characters.  But  this  brings  all  the  brethren 
into  comiection  with  Joseph. 

Finally,  Jacob  and  his  family  are  placed,  as  a  people 
apart,  in  the  most  favoured  country  of  all  that  was 
under  the  power  of  the  throne  of  the  great  king. 
Nothing  can  be  more  touching  than  the  conduct  of 
Joseph  towards  his  brethren ;  but  I  must  leave  these 
reflections  to  the  hearts  of  my  readers,  placing  them, 
as  far  as  my  hearty  desires  can,  under  the  precious  in- 
fluence of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  rapid  survey  I  have 
given,  gives  the  type  a  clearer  application  than  more 
detail  would,  and  that  is  what  is  of  the  deepest  interest 
here. 

Only  remark  that  here  the  repentance  is  immediately 
in  connection  with  the  rejection  of  Joseph ;  this  is 
brought  on  the  conscience  of  Joseph's  brethren.  So 
in  the  end  will  it  be  with  Israel.  It  is  not  here  in 
reference  to  the  law — that  we  shall  have  after  Sinai — 
but  in  typical  connection  with  the  Messiah.      Their 

XXXVII.-XLI. 


60  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

consciences  are  fully  convinced,  and  they  go  back  to 
all  the  circumstances  of  his  rejection.  It  is  only 
gradually  that  Joseph  reveals  himself,  and  with  many 
exercises  of  heart,  which  his  dealings  work  in  his 
brethren.  In  the  end  Judah  is  brought  into  promi- 
nence in  connection  with  Benjamin.  It  is  when  Judah 
takes  the  sorrow  of  Israel  to  heart,  in  connection  with 
Benjamin,  and  the  loss  of  Joseph,  and  puts  himself 
into  it,  that  Joseph,  in  his  glory,  is  revealed  to  them 
as  their  brother:  it  is  a  lovely  scene.  The  perfect 
grace  of  Joseph  at  the  end  is  a  wonderful  picture 
of  Christ's  revelation  of  Himself.  (Chap.  xlv.  4-8, 
et  seqq.) 

It  is  touching  to  remark,  when  Jacob  is  presented 
to  Pharaoh,  though  acknowledging  that,  compared 
with  those  of  his  fathers,  his  life  had  been  a  sad  one, 
he  can  bless  the  monarch  of  all  the  country,  himself  a 
despised  shepherd  ;  and  "  without  contradiction  the 
less  is  blessed  of  the  greater."  The  least  and  most 
faltering  of  God's  children  has  the  superiority,  and  is 
conscious  of  it,  in  presence  of  the  most  elevated  men 
of  the  world. 

The  coming  down  to  Egypt  was  according  to  God : 
so  we  have  here  Israel  viewed  as  abiding  God's  time, 
even  when  oppressed,  not  as  cast  out  and  wandering  as 
the  effect  of  disobedience.  Both  are  true.  God,  remark, 
appears  to  him  as  the  God  of  Isaac  his  father,  not  of 
Abraham:  his  blessing  comes  under  the  risen  Christ. 
What  hangs  on  promises  Israel  has  lost  by  the  rejection 
of  Christ ;  but  God  can  appear  for  him  in  pure  grace, 
in  connection  with  a  risen  Saviour,  and  fulfil  them 
according  to  His  own  faithfulness;*  and  so  it  is  in 

*  This  is  the  subject  of  Romans  xi.  28-33.  In  verse  81  read 
"even  so  have  these  not  now  believed  in  your  mercy  that  they 
also  might  be  objects  of  mercy."  They  had  forfeited  the  promises, 
and  take  them  now  on  no  higher  ground  than  a  Gentile  ;  that  is, 
pure  mercy. 


GENESIS.  61 

figure  here.  Therefore  is  Israel  blessed  in  spite  of  all, 
though  long  oppressed  and  a  stranger.  When  he  is  in 
connection  with  Joseph,  the  scene  changes ;  that  is,  in 
his  connection,  in  the  world,  with  a  glorified  Christ  re- 
vealed to  him  there,  he  has  the  best  of  the  land,  which 
is  brought  into  universal  order  and  subjection  as  be- 
longing to  Pharaoh,  whom  Joseph  represented,  and 
whose  authority  he  exercised  over  it.  Beersheba,  the 
border  of  Israel — from  henceforward  he  was  a  stranger 
— is  the  place  of  this  revelation  of  God. 

One  cannot  fail  to  see  in  the  history  of  Joseph  one 
of  the  most  remarkable  types  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
that,  in  many  details  of  the  ways  of  God  in  regard  to 
the  Jews  and  Gentiles. 

Lastly,  in  chapter  xlviii.  besides  the  prophetical 
character — important  in  the  history  of  Israel — we  see 
Joseph  as  heir ;  the  double  portion  (mark  of  the  eldest, 
heir  of  the  father,  among  the  Jews)  being  given  to 
him  (see  1  Chron.  v.  1,  2) ;  and  not  only  as  heir,  but  as 
heir  in  Canaan — Jacob's  heir  there  where  Rachel  had 
died ;  that  is,  where  Israel,  as  the  Jewish  beloved  one 
of  God,  had  failed  and  gone.  Here,  too,  all  is  ordered 
according  to  the  purpose  and  counsel  of  God,  not  ac- 
cording to  nature;  and  Joseph,  in  his  children,  pos- 
sesses, as  heir,  the  portion  taken  from  the  hand 
of  the  enemy  by  power;  for  Joseph,  after  his  re- 
jection, is  ever  Christ  as  glorified,  and  then  heir  of 
the  world. 

We  have  then  the  lot  of  the  children  of  Jacob ;  and 
two  facts,  the  burying  of  Jacob,  and  the  command- 
ment concerning  the  bones  of  Joseph,  given  as  a  certain 
pledge  of  the  re-establishment  of  Israel,  left,  according 
to  what  had  been  said  to  Abraham,  and  in  appearance 
abandoned,  in  a  strange  country,  whilst  the  patience  of 
God  bore  yet  with  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites,  a 
patience  which  strikes  only  when  it  is  impossible  to 
bear  the  evil  any  longer.  (Chaps,  xlix.,  1.) 

XLII.-XLVIII. 


62  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Kemark  the  beauty  of  the  grace  in  Joseph.  (Chap. 
xlv.  7,  8,  and  1,  17,  19,  20.) 

It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  this  difference  between 
the  prophecies  of  Jacob  and  Moses  as  to  the  tribes. 
Here  the  prophecy  refers  to  the  responsibihty  of  the 
first  parent-source  of  the  tribe,  as  Eeuben,  Simeon, 
Levi ;  and  to  the  counsels  of  God,  which  put  forward 
Judah  (the  stock  from  which  the  Lord  sprang  as  re- 
gards the  royalty),  and  Joseph  (type  of  Christ  as 
Nazarene,  separated  from  his  brethren,  and  afterwards 
exalted).  The  rest,  if  we  except  Benjamin  who  ravages 
with  power,  gives  the  general  characters  of  the  posi- 
tion and  conduct  of  the  tribes  of  Israel ;  Dan,  of  his 
wickedness,  and  even  of  his  character  of  traitor.  I 
may  add  that  besides  the  royal  place  of  Judah  main- 
tained as  a  distinct  tribe  till  Christ  came,  up  to  the 
end  of  Issachar,  it  is  the  sad  history  of  Israel  in  its 
responsibility  and  what  befell  them.  Dan  adds  to  this 
traitorous  unfaithfulness,  as  indeed  he  set  up,  we  may 
say,  tribal  idolatry.  This  casts  the  faith  of  Jacob  on 
waiting  for  God's  salvation,  and  grace  comes  in.  All 
that  follows  is  blessing,  and  Christ  the  shepherd  and 
stone  of  Israel.  Moses  gives  rather  the  history  of 
the  people  as  entering  into  the  country  on  leaving 
the  wilderness  ;  and  we  find  the  priesthood  and 
people  to  be  the  two  points  brought  into  promi- 
nence, although  power  and  a  special  blessing  be  given 
to  Judah. 

I  add  a  few  details  as  to  this  prophetic  blessing, 
hoping  to  make  it  more  clear.  We  may  remark,  in  the 
tribes,  responsibility  and  the  future  of  Israel  as  first- 
born according  to  nature.  Reuben  represents  Israel 
in  this  character ;  Simeon  and  Levi,  who  come  after 
and  will  maintain  their  right  by  nature's  force,  are  no 
better.  Then  we  have  the  purpose  of  God  in  the  king 
and  the  whole  of  the  royal  tribe  till  Christ  come,  to 
whom  the  gathering  of  the  peoples  shall  be.     Joseph 


GENESIS.  63 

comes  with  Benjamin  at  the  end,  the  representative  of 
Christ  personally  glorified,  as  Benjamin  of  Christ  in 
judgment  on  earth.  Joseph  is  a  personal  representative 
of  Christ,  separated  from  His  brethren,  glorious  and 
blessed  as  the  heir  of  all  the  resources  of  God.  Dan, 
before  this,  though  owned  as  a  judging  tribe  and  so 
Israel  in  him,  yet  marks  out  that  apostasy  and  power 
of  Satan  in  Israel,  which  led  the  remnant  to  look  beyond 
the  portion  of  the  people,  unfaithful  in  every  way,  to 
Him  who  was  the  salvation:  "We  have  waited  for 
thy  salvation,  0  Jehovah." 

I  rather  think,  as  already  noticed,  that  in  the  other 
tribes  we  have  a  distinct  contrast  of  what  Israel  is  as 
oppressed,  before  Christ — who  has  taken  the  full  Joseph 
character  in  glory,  and  has  answered  the  faith  of  the 
remnant  expressed  in  verse  18 — and  after;  and  that 
thus,  in  these  characters  of  the  tribes,  we  have  the 
whole  history  of  Israel.  Judah  and  Joseph  have  been 
already  marked  out  and  distinguished  in  the  history — 
Judah  as  surety  for  and  connected  with  Benjamin,  and 
Joseph  in  all  his  history.  Thus,  after  Judah,  in  Zebulun 
and  Issachar  we  have  Israel  mixed  with  the  world, 
busied  in  its  waters  to  seek  profit,  and  a  slave  to  it  for 
rest  and  quiet ;  but  this  ends  in  Dan  and  apostasy,  so 
that  the  remnant,  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  wait  for 
the  salvation  which  is  to  come  with  the  true  Joseph. 
All  is  prosperity  when  this  is  looked  to.  Once  over- 
come, he  overcomes  at  the  last:  his  bread  is  fat  and 
yields  royal  dainties  in  his  own  land,  not  seeking  them 
by  mixture  with,  and  subjection  to,  the  world.  And 
Naphtali  is  in  the  liberty  of  God,  and  full  of  goodly 
words.  In  Joseph  and  Benjamin  we  have  the  crowning 
of  all  blessing  in  the  double  character  of  Christ,  the 
heavenly  Heir  of  all,  and  power  and  strength  upon  the 
earth  that  subdues  all. 

So  that  the  whole  series  would  be  thus: — Reuben, 
Simeon,  and  Levi,  the  moral  character  and  failure  of 

XLIX..  L. 


64  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

responsible  Israel.  It  will  be  found,  as  ever,  corrup- 
tion and  violence :  such  is  man.  Next,  the  'purpose 
of  God  in  Judah:  he  remains  till  Shiloh  come,  to 
whom  the  gathering  of  the  peoples  belongs.  But 
He  was  rejected  when  He  came  to  Judah,  and  there 
was  no  gathering  :  "  beauty "  and  "  bands "  were 
broken. 

Next,  the  state  of  Israel  being  such,  intercourse  with 
nations  (which,  when  not  in  the  power  of  God,  is  cor- 
ruption), subjection  to  their  yoke  for  ease,  and  apostasy: 
still  owned  as  a  people,  however;  and  then  the  remnant 
looking  to  the  only  source,  and  waiting,  not  for  good  in 
Israel,  but  salvation  from  Jehovah  Elohim.  Thereon 
deliverance  and  blessing  for  Israel ;  and  finally  (what 
we  have  already  seen  as  the  double  character  of  Christ 
— separated  from  His  brethren,*  and  then  glorified) 
Joseph  and  Benjamin  present  Him  to  us  as  the 
heavenly  glorified  Man  to  whom  all  is  entrusted,  and 
the  all -conquering  Lord  on  the  earth. 

On  the  whole,  I  think  we  have  a  complete  history  of 
Israel  in  this  way.  First  his  failure :  Reuben,  Simeon, 
and  Levi,  corruption  and  violence,  as  already  remarked. 
Then  Judah,  God's  purpose  in  His  people,  in  connection 
with  the  royal  stock  and  Shiloh.  This  is  plain  enough. 
To  Him  the  gathering  of  the  peoples  was  to  be. 
Zebulun  and  Issachar  then  shew  their  mixture  with, 
and  subjection  to,  the  Gentiles  for  gain  and  prosperity; 
Dan,  the  treachery  of  Satanic  power,  when  faith  waits 
for  Jehovah's  salvation.  Gad,  Asher,  Naphtali,  and 
Joseph  and  Benjamin,  the  fruit  and  power  of  this 
salvation  when  the  Shepherd,  the  Stone  of  Israel,  shall 
be  also  there,  when  prosperity  full  in  Israel  shall  over- 
pass its  bounds,  and  victorious  power  shall  belong  to 
them. 

Personally  the  fear  of    God  was  in  Joseph  from 

*  Joseph  is  so  characterised  in  Deuteronomy  also. 


GENESIS.  65 

beginning  to  end:  a  mighty  principle,  and  the  true 
basis  of  power.  Whatever  his  glory,  he  does  not  forget 
Canaan  or  the  earthly  promise — he  sends  his  bones 
there  :  nor  has  Christ.  So  Joseph,  when  Israel  is  gone, 
forgives  his  brethren  their  wrong,  and  nourishes  them 
with  his  riches.  So  is  it  with  Christ :  He  is  above  the 
wrong  and  the  just  fears  of  them  that  rejected  Him ; 
He  will  bless  Israel  from  His  own  stores  of  heavenly 
glory.     The  Lord  hasten  it  in  its  day  I 


^•^ 


70L.  I. 


EXODUS. 


In  the  Book  of  Exodus  we  have,  as  the  general  and 
characteristic  subject,  the  deliverance  and  redemption 
of  the  people  of  God,  and  their  establishment  as  a 
people  before  Him,  whether  under  the  law,  or  under 
the  government  of  God  in  longsuffering — of  a  God  who, 
having  so  brought  them  to  Himself,  provided  for  His 
unfaithful  people;  not  indeed  entrance  into  His  own 
presence,  but  a  way  of  approaching  Him,  at  least  at  a 
distance,  although  they  had  failed.  But  the  veil  was 
unrent :  God  did  not  come  out  to  them,  nor  could  they 
go  in  to  God.  And  this  is  of  all  possible  importance,  and 
characteristic  of  the  difference  of  Christianity.  God 
did  come  amongst  sinful  men  in  love  in  Christ,  and 
man  is  gone  in  to  God,  in  righteousness,  and  withal  the 
veil  is  rent  from  top  to  bottom.  The  law  required 
from  man  what  man  ought  to  be  as  a  child  of  Adam ; 
life  was  put  as  the  consequence  of  keeping  it,  and  there 
was  a  curse  for  him  if  it  was  not  kept.  God's  relation- 
ship with  the  people  had  at  first  been  in  grace;  but 
this  did  not  continue,  and  the  people  never  entered 
thereinto  with  intelligence,  nor  understood  this  grace 
like  persons  who  stood  in  need  of  it  as  sinners.  Let 
us  examine  the  course  of  these  divine  instructions. 

First,  we  have  the  historical  circumstances  which 
relate  to  the  captivity  of  Israel — the  persecutions 
which  this  people  had  to  endure,  and  the  providential 
superintendence  of  God  answering  the  faith  of  the 
parents  of  the  infant  Moses,  and  thus  accomplishing 
the  counsels  of  His  grace,  which  not  only  preserved 
the  child's  life,  but  placed  him  in  an  elevated  position 


EXODUS.  67 

in  the  court  of  Pharaoh.  The  things  that  are  done 
on  the  earth  He  doeth  them  Himself.  He  prepares 
all  beforehand  when  nothing  is  as  yet  apparent  to 
man. 

But,  although  providence  responds  to  faith,  and  acts 
in  order  to  accomplish  God's  purposes,  and  control  the 
walk  of  His  children,  it  is  not  the  guide  of  faith, 
although  it  is  made  so  sometimes  by  believers  who  are 
wanting  in  clearness  of  light.  Moses's  faith  is  seen  in 
his  giving  up,  when  grown  to  age,  all  the  advantages 
of  the  position  in  which  God  had  set  him  by  His  pro- 
vidence. Providence  may,  and  often  does,  give  that 
which  forms,  in  many  respects,  the  servants  of  God 
for  their  work,  as  vessels;  but  cannot  be  their 
power  in  the  work.  These  two  things  must  not  be 
confounded.  It  gives  that,  the  giving  up  of  which  is 
a  testimony  of  the  reality  of  faith  and  of  the  power 
of  God  which  operates  in  the  soul.  It  is  given  that  it 
may  be  given  up.  This  is  part  of  the  preparation. 
This  faith  acted  through  affections  which  attached  him 
to  God,  and  consequently  to  the  people  of  God  in  their 
distress,  and  manifested  itself,  not  in  the  helps  or  re- 
liefs which  his  position  could  well  have  enabled  him  to 
give  to  them,  but  in  inducing  him  to  identify  himself 
with  that  people  because  it  was  God's  people.  Faith 
attaches  itself  to  God,  and  appreciates,  and  would 
have  part  in  the  bond  that  exists  between  God  and  His 
people;  and  thus  it  thinks  not  of  patronising  from 
above,  as  if  the  world  had  authority  over  the  people 
of  God,  or  was  able  to  be  a  blessing  to  them.  It  feels 
(because  it  is  faith)  that  God  loves  His  people ;  that 
His  people  are  precious  to  Him — His  own  on  the 
earth ;  and  faith  sets  itself  thus,  through  very  affec- 
tion, in  the  position  where  His  people  find  themselves. 
This  is  what  Christ  did.  Faith  does  but  follow  Him 
in  His  career  of  love,  however  great  the  distance  at 
which  it  walks. 

I.,  II. 


68  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

How  many  reasons  might  have  induced  Moses  to 
remain  in  the  position  where  he  was;  and  this  even 
under  the  pretext  of  being  able  to  do  more  for  the 
people;  but  this  would  have  been  leaning  on  the  power 
of  Pharaoh,  instead  of  recognising  the  bond  between 
the  people  and  God :  it  might  have  resulted  in  a  relief 
which  the  world  would  have  granted,  but  not  in  a  de- 
liverance by  God,  accomplished  in  His  love  and  in  His 
power.  Moses  would  have  been  spared  much  affliction, 
but  lost  his  true  glory ;  Pharaoh  flattered,  and  his 
authority  over  the  people  of  God  recognised;  and  Israel 
would  have  remained  in  captivity,  leaning  on  Pharaoh, 
instead  of  recognising  God  in  the  precious  and  even 
glorious  relationship  of  His  people  with  Him.  God 
would  not  have  been  glorified.  Yet  all  human  reason- 
ing, and  all  reasoning  connected  with  providential 
ways,  would  have  induced  Moses  to  remain  in  his  posi- 
tion: faith  made  him  give  it  up.  All  would  really 
have  been  spoiled. 

Moses,  then,  identifies  himself  with  the  people  of 
God.  A  certain  natural  activity,  and  the  unconscious 
habits  of  a  strength  which  was  not  purely  from  on 
high,  accompanied  him,  perhaps;  however,  it  is  the 
first  devotedness  which  is  pointed  out  by  the  Holy 
Ghost*  as  the  good  and  acceptable  fruit  of  faith.  But 
it  ought  to  have  been  more  entirely  subject  to  God, 
and  to  have  had  its  starting-point  in  Him  alone,  and  in 
obedience  to  His  expressed  will.  We  have,  in  this  case, 
an  example  of  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  often  acts. 
The  earnest  energy  of  faithfulness  is  allowed  to  be 
manifested,   but   the   instrument   is  put  aside  for  a 

*  Hebrews  xi.  24-26.  This  is  often  the  case  with  God's 
children,  faithful  in  their  principles  and  desires,  they  have  not 
done  with  self  and  its  energies ;  indeed  this  is  always  the  case 
tiQ  seK  is  utterly  judged  and  known  and,  so  to  speak,  replaced 
by  Christ,  and  doing  simply  God's  will.  But  the  world  is  always 
stronger  than  the  Christian's  energy  in  the  flesh. 


EXODUS.  69 

moment,  in  order  that  the  service  may  depend  directly 
and  entirely  upon  God.  There  was  something  analog- 
ous to  this  even  in  Jesus,  save  that  there  was  not  in 
Him  either  false  reckoning,  or  error,  or  external  provi- 
dences in  consequence  to  deliver  Him  from  them.  In 
Him  the  perfection  of  the  energy  of  life  within,  acted 
always  in  the  knowledge  of  who  His  Father  was,  and 
at  the  same  time  submitted  to  His  will  in  the  circum- 
stances in  which  He  had  morally  placed  Him.  But  the 
Lord  appeared  as  Son  with  the  doctors  in  the  temple, 
and  then  was  subject  to  Joseph  and  Mary  till  the  time 
and  way  appointed  of  God,  only  alike  perfect  in  both. 
Moses,  fearful  even  amid  faithfulness,  and  dreading 
the  power  which  lent  him,  unconsciously  perhaps,  a 
certain  habit  of  energy  (for  one  is  afraid  of  that  from 
which  one  draws  one's  strength),  and  repulsed  by  the 
unbelief  of  those  towards  whom  his  love  and  his  faith- 
fulness carried  him,  for  "  they  understood  [him]  not," 
fled  to  the  desert;  a  type,  as  to  the  fact  itself,  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  rejected  by  the  people  whom  He 
loved. 

There  is  a  difference  between  this  type  and  that  of 
Joseph.  Joseph  takes  the  position  (as  put  to  death)  of 
Jesus  raised  to  the  right  hand  of  the  supreme  throne 
over  the  Gentiles,  in  the  end  receiving  his  brethren 
from  whom  he  had  been  separated.  His  children  are 
to  him  a  testimony  of  his  blessing  at  that  time.  He 
calls  them  Manasseh  ("because  God,"  says  he  "has 
made  me  forget  all  my  labours,  and  all  the  house  of 
my  father"),  and  Ephraim  ("because  God  has  made 
me  fruitful  in  the  land  of  my  affliction  "),  Moses  pre- 
sents to  us  Christ  separated  from  His  brethren;* 
and    although  Zipporah    might    be   considered   as   a 

*  As  a  figure  he  came  to  his  own  and  they  rejected  him ;  see 
lower  down.  Stephen  notices  this  morally  (Acts  vii.) ;  and  so 
Christ  is  separated  from  His  brethren  in  the  world  till  He  returns 
in  power. 

II. 


70  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

type  of  the  church  (as  well  as  Joseph's  wife), 
as  the  bride  of  the  rejected  Deliverer  during  his 
separation  from  Israel,  yet,  as  to  what  regards 
his  heart,  his  feelings  (which  are  expressed  in 
the  names  that  he  gives  to  his  children),  they  are 
governed  by  the  thought  of  being  separated  from  the 
people  of  Israel:  his  fraternal  affections  are  there — 
his  thoughts  are  there — his  rest  and  his  country  are 
there.  He  is  a  stranger  everywhere  else.  Moses  is 
the  type  of  Jesus  as  the  deliverer  of  Israel.  He  calls 
his  son  Gershom,  that  is  to  say,  a  "  stranger  there ;" 
"for,"  says  he,  "I  have  sojourned  in  a  strange  land." 
Jethro  presents  to  us  the  Gentiles  among  whom  Christ 
and  His  glory  were  driven  when  He  was  rejected  by 
the  Jews. 

But  at  last  God  looks  upon  His  people,  and  not  only 
gives  the  faith  that  identifies  itself  with  His  people, 
but  displays  the  power  which  delivers  them.  That 
Moses,  who  was  rejected  as  a  prince  and  a  judge,  must 
now  appear  in  the  midst  of  Israel  and  of  the  world  as 
a  prince  and  a  deliverer. 

Stephen  made  use  of  these  two  examples,  in  order 
to  convict  the  consciences  of  the  Sanhedrim  of  their 
similar  and  still  greater  sin  in  the  case  of  Christ. 

God — who  to  appearance  had  left  Moses  in  the  power 
of  his  enemies,  without  recognising  his  faith — mani- 
fests Himself  now  to  him  when  alone,  in  order  to  send 
him  to  deliver  Israel  and  to  judge  the  world. 

Considered  as  a  practical  history,  this  sending  away 
of  Moses  into  the  wilderness,  and  his  long  sojourn 
there,  is  full  of  instruction.  God  shews  Himself  to  us 
as  destroying  the  hope  of  the  flesh,  and  humbling  its 
strength.  He  makes  of  the  adopted  son  of  the  house 
of  the  king,  a  shepherd,  under  the  protection  of  a 
stranger;  and  this  during  forty  years,  before  he  can 
xmdertake  God's  work,  in  order  that  the  work  might 
be  a  work  of    obedience,  and  the  strength  that  of 


EXODUS.  71 

God ;  and  Moses'  hope  and  the  affection  of  his  heart 
were  left  in  abeyance  all  this  time.  No  human  issue 
was  apparent. 

But  God  was  now  about  to  manifest  Himself  under 
the  name  of  Jehovah.  He  had  put  Himself  in  re- 
lation with  the  fathers  under  the  name  of  God 
Almighty.  That  was  what  they  wanted,  and  this  was 
His  glory  in  their  pilgrimage.  Now  He  takes  a  name 
in  relationship  with  His  people,  which  implies  constant 
relationship  with  them ;  and  in  which,  being  estab- 
lished with  Him  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever.  He  accomplishes  in  faithfulness  what  He 
has  begun  in  grace  and  promise,  all  the  while  shewing 
what  He  is  in  patience  and  in  holiness  in  His  govern- 
ment in  the  midst  of  His  people.  For  us  He  calls 
Himself  Father,  and  acts  towards  us  according  to  the 
power  of  that  blessed  name  to  our  souls.* 

But  Jehovah  is  not  the  first  name  He  takes  in  His 
communications  with  the  people  through  the  mediation 
of  Moses.  He  first  presents  Himself  as  interested  in 
them  for  their  fathers'  sakes,  whose  God  He  was.  He 
tells  them  their  cry  had  come  up  to  Him ;  He  had  seen 
their  affliction,  and  was  come  down  to  deliver  them. 
Touching  expression  of  the  grace  of  God  !  Upon  this 
He  sends  Moses  to  Pharaoh,  to  lead  them  up  out  of 
Egypt. 

But,  alas !  obedience,  when  there  is  only  that,  and 
when  carnal  energy  does  not  mix  itself  with  it,  is  but 
a  poor  thing  for  the  human  heart.  The  fleshly  energy 
with  which  Moses  had  slain  the  Egyptian  was  now 

*  Compare  Matthew  v.  and  John  xvii.  His  millennial  name 
is  Most  High.  See  the  interesting  connection  of  three  of  these 
names  in  Psalm  xei.  That  of  Father  is  not  found  in  the  psahns : 
the  Son  has  revealed  it.  The  other  three  connect  themselves 
with  the  earth  and  the  government  of  the  world.  Father  puts 
us  in  the  place  of  sons  with  God,  in  the  same  relationship  with 
God  in  which  Christ  Himself  is,  and,  when  the  time  comes,  to 
be  like  Him  and  to  be  heirs  of  God. 

III. 


72  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

gone;  and  when  God  calls  upon  Moses  to  go  into  Egypt 
for  the  deliverance  of  His  people,  Moses  raises  difficul- 
ties. God  gives  thereupon  a  sign,  in  token  that  He 
will  be  with  him,  but  a  sign  which  was  to  be  fulfilled 
after  the  obedience  of  Moses,  and  was  to  strengthen 
him  and  to  rejoice  him  when  he  had  already  obeyed. 

Moses  still  makes  difficulties,  to  which  God  answers 
in  grace,  until  they  cease  to  be  weakness,  and  become 
rather  the  working  of  self  in  unbelief.  For  thither 
self-indulgence  in  weakness  tends.  In  the  mission 
which  God  thus  confided  to  Moses,  He  declares  His 
name  "I  Am."  At  the  same  time,  while  declaring 
that  He  is  that  He  is.  He  takes  for  ever,  as  His  name 
upon  the  earth,  the  name  of  the  God  of  Abraham,  of 
Isaac,  and  of  Jacob :  an  important  principle,  as  regards 
God's  ways.  "  I  Am"  is  His  own  essential  name,  if  He 
reveals  Himself;  but  as  regards  His  government  of, 
and  relationship  with,  the  earth.  His  name,  that  by 
which  He  is  to  be  remembered  to  all  generations,  is 
the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  This 
gave  Israel,  now  visited  and  taken  up  of  God  under 
this  name,  a  very  peculiar  place. 

In  Abraham  first  God  had  called  any  out,  first  to  him 
given  any  promises.  He  first  had  been  publicly  called 
apart  from  the  world,  so  that  God  called  Himself  his 
God.  He  never  calls  Himself  God  of  Abel  or  of  Noah, 
though  in  a  general  sense  He  is  the  God,  of  course,  of 
every  saint.  Faith  itself  is  first  here  pointed  out  as 
the  way  of  righteousness.  In  Eden,  God,  in  judging 
the  serpent,  had  announced  the  fibial  victory  of  the 
promised  Seed ;  in  Abel,  He  had  shewn  what  acceptable 
sacrifice  from  a  sinner  was — not  the  fruits  of  his  labour 
under  judgment,  but  the  blood  God's  grace  had  given 
to  him,  which  answered  his  need ;  and  this  established 
a  righteousness  in  which  he  who  came  to  God  through 
the  offered  sacrifice  stood,  and  of  which  he  had  him- 
self the  witness,  and  which  was  measured  by  his  gift, 


EXODUS.  73 

that  is  by  Christ  Himself;*  in  Enoch,  clear  and 
absolute  victory  over  death,  and  removal  from  earth, 
God  taking  him ;  in  Noah,  deliverance  through  judg- 
ments, when  the  world  was  judged.  Then  a  new  world 
began,  and  a  ceasing,  through  the  sweet  savour  of 
sacrifice,  to  curse  the  earth,  and  a  covenant  for  its 
preservation  from  any  future  destruction  by  water. 
But  in  Abraham  we  have,  after  the  judgment  of  Babel, 
one  called  out  from  the  world — now  worshipping  other 
gods — brought  into  separate  and  immediate  comiection 
with  God,  and  promises  given  to  him — a  person  called 
to  be  the  object  and  depositary  of  God's  promises. 
This  gave  him  a  very  peculiar  place.  God  was  his 
God.  He  had  a  separate  place  from  all  the  world  with 
Him  as  heir  of  the,  promises.  He  is  the  root  of  all  the 
heirs  of  them.  Christ  Himself  comes  as  seed  of  Abraham, 
who  is  the  father  also  of  the  faithful  as  to  the  earth. 
Israel  is  the  promised  nation  under  this  title.  As  re- 
gards election,  they  are  beloved  for  the  fathers'  sakes. 
In  this  name,  consequently,  as  His  eternal  memorial, 
God  would  now  deliver  them.  At  the  same  time,  God 
foretells  that  Pharaoh  will  not  let  the  people  go ;  but 
takes  clearly  the  ground  of  His  authority  and  of  His 
right  over  His  people,  and  of  authoritative  demand 
upon  Pharaoh  that  he  should  recognise  them.  Upon 
his  refusal  to  do  so,  he  would  be  judged  by  the  power 
of  God. 

Moses  still  raises  difficulties,  and  God  gives  him  again 
signs,  remarkable  signs.  The  two  first  seem  to  me  in 
their  character — types,  the  first,  of  sin  and  of  its 
healing ;  the  second,  of  power,  which,  having  become 
Satanic,  is  taken  back,  and  becomes  the  rod  of  God ; 
and  then  presents  that  which  refreshes,  coming  from 
God,  as  having  become  judgment  and  death.  But  we 
must  note  here  the  difierence  of  what  was  then  given 

*  Note  in  Hebrews  xi.  it  is  not  the  divine  gift  of  Christ  for 
us,  but  the  coming  in  faith  by  Him  to  God. 

IV. 


74  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

to  Moses,  and  what  occurred  in  Egypt.  Here  in  the 
two  personal  signs,  there  is  first  restoration  (the  leprosy- 
is  healed),  and  then  power  from  which  Moses  fled 
becomes  the  rod  of  God  in  his  hand.  The  water  be- 
coming blood  is  simple  judgment.  In  Egypt  the  first 
is  not  found,  he  acted  for  God  there,  but  there  was 
a  much  larger  development  of  the  two  last  signs.  The 
personal  healing,  that  is,  and  removal  of  sin  there  was 
nothing  of.  But  power  completely  destroys  all  mani- 
festation of  Satanic  power,  and  the  worshipped  source 
of  wealth  for  the  flesh  and  the  world  became  death 
and  judgment  to  it.  But  Moses  refuses  still,  and  the 
wrath  of  God  is  kindled  agamst  him ;  yet  He  acts  in 
mercy,  in  a  way,  however,  humbling  to  Moses,  with 
whom  he  now  joins  Aaron  his  brother  whom  He  had 
already  prepared  for  that,  and  who  had  come  out  of 
Egypt  to  meet  him ;  for  the  folly  of  His  children,  while 
it  is  to  their  shame  and  to  their  loss,  accomplishes  the 
purposes  of  God. 

Whatever  may  be  the  power  of  Him  that  delivers, 
it  is  necessary  that  circumcision  should  be  found  in 
him  who  is  interested  in,  and  who  is  used  as  an  instru- 
ment of,  the  deliverance,  for  the  Saviour-God  is  a  God 
of  holiness ;  it  is  in  holiness,  and  in  judging  sin,  that 
He  delivers :  and  acting  in  holiness.  He  does  not  suffer 
sin  in  those  who  are  co-workers  for  Him,  with  whom 
He  is  in  contact;  for  He  comes  out  of  His  place  in 
judgment.  For  us  the  question  is  of  being  dead  to  sin, 
the  true  circumcision ;  our  Moses  is  a  bloody  husband 
to  her  who  has  to  do  with  him.  God  cannot  use  the 
flesh  in  the  fight  against  Satan.  He  cannot  suffer  it 
Himself,  for  He  is  in  His  place  in  judgment.  Satan 
also  would  have  power  over  it,  and  of  right;  God  there- 
fore puts  it  to  death  Himself,  and  this  is  done  for 
us  on  the  cross,  where  He  who  knew  no  sin  was  made 
sin  for  us.  (Compare  Rom.  viii.  3.)  And  He  wills  that 
this  should  be  accomplished  in  us  also.   This  is  true  of 


EXODUS  75 

those  who  compose  the  assembly ;  but  they  can  reckon 
themselves  dead.  We  bear  about  in  the  body  the 
dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus.*  It  will  be  true  in  one  way 
more  evidently,  in  judgment  at  the  last  day,  when  the 
Lord  pleads  with  all  flesh,  and  identifies  Himself  with 
those  who  have  not  taken  part  spiritually  in  the  fellow- 
ship of  Christ's  sufferings,  the  Christian's  place.  God 
will  purge  Jerusalem  by  the  spirit  of  burning. 

At  the  news  of  the  goodness  of  God,  the  people 
adore  Him ;  but  the  struggle  against  the  power  of  evil 
is  another  matter.  Satan  will  not  let  the  people  go,, 
and  God  permits  this  resistance,  for  the  exercise  of 
faith,  and  for  the  discipline  of  His  people,  and  for  the 
brilliant  display  of  His  power  where  Satan  had  reigned. 
We  have  to  learn,  and  perhaps  painfully,  that  we  are 
in  the  flesh  and  under  Satan's  power;  and  that  we 
have  no  power  to  efiect  our  own  deliverance,  even  with 
the  help  of  God.  It  is  the  redemption  of  God  in 
Christ's  death  and  resurrection,  realised  in  the  power 
of  the  Spirit,  given  when  He  had  accomplished  that 
redemption  and  had  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  in  the  heavens,  that  delivers ;  for  forgive- 
ness, and  escape  from  judgment,  is  not  deliverance. 
One  refers  to  sins  and  God's  righteously  passing  over 
them,  the  other  to  sin  and  its  power. 

Before  the  deliverance,  when  the  hopes  of  the  people 
are  now  awakened,  the  oppression  becomes  heavier 
than  ever,  and  the  people  would  have  preferred  being 
left  quiet  in  their  slavery.  But  the  rights  and  counsels 
of  God  are  in  question.  The  people  must  be  thoroughly 
detached  from  these  Gentiles,  who,  to  this  end,  are  now 
become  their  torment  under  God's  hand.   Moses  works 

*  In  Colossians  iii.  we  find  God's  judgment  of  him  in  whom 
Christ  is  (compare  Kom.  viii.  10) ;  in  Eomans  vi.  faith  reckons 
it  so ;  in  2  Corinthians  iv.  it  is  practically  realised.  And  God 
proves  the  faith,  but  to  confirm  the  soul  in  it.  See  2  Coiinthian* 
i.  and  iv. 

V.-XII. 


76  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

signs.  The  magicians  imitate  them  by  the  power  of 
Satan,  in  order  to  harden  Pharaoh's  heart.  But  when 
the  question  is  of  creating  life,  they  are  forced  to  re- 
cognise the  hand  of  God. 

At  last  God  executes  His  judgment,  taking  the  first- 
born as  representatives  of  all  the  people.  We  have 
thus  two  parts  in  the  deliverance  of  the  people;  in 
one,  God  appears  as  Judge,  but  satisfied  through  the 
blood  that  is  before  Him  ;  in  the  other.  He  manifests 
Himself  as  Deliverer.  Up  to  this  last,  the  people  are 
still  in  Egypt.  In  the  first,  the  expiatory  blood  of  re- 
demption bars  the  way  to  Him  as  Judge,  and  it  secures 
the  people  infallibly ;  but  God  does  not  enter  within — 
its  value  is  to  secure  them  from  judgment.* 

The  people,  their  loins  girded,  having  eaten  in  haste, 
with  the  bitter  herbs  of  repentance,  begin  their 
journey ;  but  they  do  so  in  Egypt :  yet  now  God  can 
be,  and  He  is,  with  them.  Here  it  is  well  to  distin- 
guish these  two  judgments,  that  of  the  firstborn,  and 
that  of  the  Red  Sea.  As  matters  of  chastisement,  the 
one  was  the  firstfruits  of  the  other,  and  ought  to  have 
deterred  Pharaoh  from  his  rash  pursuit. 

But  the  blood,  which  kept  the  people  from  God's 
judgment,  meant  something  far  deeper  and  far  more 
serious  than  even  the  Red  Sea,  though  judgment  was 


*  Note  here  the  expression,  "  When  I  see  the  blood,  I  will 
pass  over."  It  is  not  said,  when  you  see  it,  but  when  I  see  it. 
The  soul  of  an  awakened  person  often  rests,  not  on  its  own  right- 
eousness, but  on  the  way  in  which  it  sees  the  blood.  Now, 
precious  as  it  is  to  have  the  heart  deeply  impressed  with  it,  this 
is  not  the  ground  of  peace.  Peace  is  founded  on  God's  seeing  it. 
He  cannot  fail  to  estimate  it  at  its  full  and  perfect  value  as  putting 
away  sin.  It  is  He  that  abhors  and  has  been  offended  by  sin ; 
He  sees  the  value  of  the  blood  as  putting  it  away.  It  may  be 
«aid,  But  must  I  not  have  faith  in  its  value  ?  This  is  faith  in  its 
value,  seeing  that  God  looks  at  it  as  putting  away  sin ;  your  value 
for  it  looks  at  it  as  a  question  of  the  measure  of  your  feelings. 
Faith  looks  at  God's  thoughts. 


EXODUS.  77 

executed  there  too.*  What  happened  at  the  Red  Sea 
was,  it  is  true,  the  manifestation  of  the  illustrious 
power  of  God,  who  destroyed  with  the  breath  of  His 
mouth  the  enemy  who  stood  in  rebellion  against  Him 
— final  and  destructive  judgment  in  its  character,  no 
doubt,  and  which  affected  the  deliverance  of  His 
people  by  His  power.  But  the  blood  signified  the 
moral  judgment  of  God,  and  the  full  and  entire  satis- 
faction of  all  that  was  in  His  being.  God,  such  as  He 
was,  in  His  justice.  His  holiness,  and  His  truth,  could 
not  touch  those  who  were  sheltered  by  that  blood.-|* 
Was  there  sin  ?  His  love  towards  His  people  had 
found  the  means  of  satisfying  the  requirements  of  His 
justice;  and  at  the  sight  of  that  blood,  which  answered 
everything  that  was  perfect  in  His  being,  He  passed 
over  it  consistently  with  His  justice  and  even  His 


*  As  a  figure  this  may  be  looked  at  as  final  judgment  accord- 
ing to  the  estimate  of  sin  in  the  death  and  resurrection  of  the 
Lord  Jesus ;  for  the  people  were  brought  to  God,  and  the  evil 
enemies  come  under  death  and  judgment  which,  as  accomphshed 
in  Christ,  save  us.  But  as  the  secret  of  God's  dealings  experi- 
mentally known  in  our  souls,  it  has  another  sense  ;  it  begins  the 
desert  journey,  though  that  has  its  full  character  only  from  Sinai. 
The  path  in  the  wilderness  forming  no  part  of  the  counsels,  but 
only  of  the  ways  of  God,  it  may  as  to  redemption  be  dropped ;  but 
then  Jordan  and  the  Ked  Sea  coalesce.  The  Ked  Sea  is  Christ's 
death  and  resurrection  for  us ;  Jordan  our  death  and  resurrection 
with  Him,  but  here  we  have  got  into  what  is  experimental. 

t  There  is  further  a  difference  between  the  passover  and  the 
great  day  of  atonement.  Here  the  blood  met  the  eye  of  God 
passing  through  the  land  in  judgment.  On  the  great  day  of 
atonement  it  purified  His  habitation  from  our  defilements,  and, 
we  can  say,  opened  up  the  way  to  God's  throne  and  presence ; 
gave  us  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  a  new  and  living 
way.  In  the  passover  was  added,  as  it  had  the  character  of 
first  deliverance  and  forgiveness,  the  bitter  herbs  of  judgment  of 
sin  in  ourselves,  and  feeding  on  the  slain  Lamb,  with  loins 
girded  and  shoes  on  our  feet,  to  leave  the  place  of  sin  and  judg- 
ment irom  which  as  the  consequence  of  sin  we  had  been  fully 
sheltered. 

XII. 


78  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

truth.  Nevertheless  God,  even  in  passing  over,  is  seen 
as  Judge ;  hence,  so  long  as  the  soul  is  on  this  ground, 
its  peace  is  uncertain  though  the  ground  of  it  be  sure 
— its  way  in  Egypt,  being  all  the  while  truly  con- 
verted— because  God  has  still  the  character  of  Judge 
to  it,  and  the  power  of  the  enemy  is  still  there. 

At  the  Red  Sea  God  acts  in  power  according  to  the 
purposes  of  His  love ;  consequently  the  enemy,  who 
was  closely  pursuing  His  people,  is  destroyed  without 
resource.  This  is  what  will  happen  to  the  people  at 
the  last  day,  already  in  reality — to  the  eye  of  God — 
sheltered  through  the  blood. 

As  a  moral  type,  the  Red  Sea  is  evidently  the  death 
and  resurrection  of  Jesus,  so  far  as  the  real  effecting 
of  the  work  goes  in  its  own  efficacy,  as  deliverance  by 
redemption,  and  of  His  people  as  seen  in  Him ;  God 
acting  in  it,  to  bring  them,  through  death,  out  of  sin 
and  the  flesh,  giving  absolute  deliverance  from  them 
by*  death,  into  which  Christ  had  gone,  and  conse- 

*  Jordan  adds  our  death  with  Christ,  and,  as  to  our  state  sub- 
jectively, our  resurrection  with  Him — analogous  to  the  forty 
days  He  passed  on  earth.  To  this  the  teaching  of  Colossians 
answers.  Hence  heaven  is  in  hope.  Bomans  iii.  20  to  v.  11 
gives  Christ's  death  for  sins,  and  resurrection  for  our  justification ; 
thence  to  the  end  of  chapter  viii.,  death  to  sin.  Sin  in  the  flesh 
is  not  forgiven,  but  condemned  (Bom.  viii.  3)  ;  but  we  as  having 
died  are  not  in  the  flesh  at  all,  we  are  alive  imto  God  through, 
or  rather  in,  Jesus  Christ.  This  takes  us  no  farther  than  the 
wilderness,  though  passing  through  it  as  alive  to  God  in  Christ. 
In  Bomans  we  are  not  risen  with  Christ.  That  involves,  as  a 
consequence,  our  being  identified  with  Him  where  He  is,  and  so 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  when  we  are  sealed,  union.  In  Colossians 
we  are  risen  with  Him,  but  not  in  heavenly  places.  Colossians 
treats  of  life,  with  a  hope  laid  up  for  us  in  heavenly  places ;  not 
at  all  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  Ephesians  ii.  we  are  risen  with 
Him  and  sitting  in  heavenly  places  in  Him,  and  then  begins 
the  conflict  with  spiritual  wickedness  in  heavenly  places,  and 
testimony  according  to  what  is  heavenly ;  so  far  this  is  Jordan 
and  Canaan,  and  here  the  seahng  and  ^  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
fully  spoken  of,  and  our  relationship  with  the  Father  and  with 


EXODUS.  79 

quently  from  all  the  power  of  the  enemy.  As  to  our 
standing  and  acceptance  we  are  brought  to  God :  our 
actual  place  is  thus  in  the  world,  become  the  wilderness 
on  our  way  to  glory.  We  are  made  partakers  of  it 
already  through  faith.  Sheltered  from  the  judgment 
of  God  by  the  blood,  we  are  delivered,  by  His  power 
which  acts  for  us,  from  the  power  of  Satan,  the  prince 
of  this  world.  The  blood  keeping  us  from  the  judg- 
ment of  God  was  the  beginning.  The  power  which 
has  made  us  alive  in  Christ,  who  has  gone  down  into 
death  for  us,  has  made  us  free  from  the  whole  power 
of  Satan  who  followed  us,  and,  as  to  conscience,  from 
all  his  attacks  and  accusations.  We  have  done  with 
the  flesh  as  our  standing,  and  Satan's  power,  and, 
brought  to  God,  are  in  the  world  with  Him.  The 
world,  who  will  follow  that  way,*  is  swallowed  up 
in  it. 

Considered  as  the  historical  type  of  God's  ways  to- 
wards Israel,  the  Red  Sea  terminates  the  sequel  of 
events ;  and  so  for  us.    We  are  brought  to  God.    Thus 

Christ,  as  sons,  and  as  body  and  bride.  Only  Ephesians  begins 
with  our  being  dead  in  sins,  so  that  it  is  a  new  creation ;  it  is  not 
death  to  sin.  The  blood-shedding,  however,  in  one  respect,  has 
a  more  glorious  character.  God  is  glorified  in  it,  though  by 
crossing  Jordan  we  are  experimentally  placed  higher.  That  too 
is  the  fruit  of  the  blood-shedding,  in  which  there  is  not  only  the 
bearing  of  sins  to  meet  our  responsibility,  but  a  glorifying  of  God, 
so  as  to  bring  us  withal  into  God's  glory  with  Him,  which  is 
beyond  all  questions  of  responsibihty. 

*  This  is  a  solemn  warning;  for  the  worldlings,  who  call 
themselves  Christians,  do  take  the  ground  of  judgment  to  come, 
and  the  need  of  righteousness,  but  not  according  to  God.  The 
Christian  goes  through  it  in  Christ,  knowing  himself  otherwise 
lost  and  hopeless ;  the  worldling  in  his  own  strength,  and  is 
swallowed  up.  Israel  saw  the  Bed  Sea  in  its  strength,  and  thought 
escape  was  hopeless :  so  an  awakened  conscience,  death  and 
judgment.  But  Christ  has  died  and  borne  judgment  for  us,  and 
we  are  secured  and  dehvered  by  what  we  dreaded  in  itself.  The 
worldling,  seeing  this,  adopts  the  truth  in  his  own  strength,  as 
\f  there  were  no  danger,  and  is  lost  in  his  false  confidence. 
XIII.,   XIV. 


80  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

the  forgiven  thief  could  go  straight  to  Paradise. 
As  a  moral  type,  it  is  the  beginning  of  the  christian 
path,  properly  so  called ;  that  is  to  say,  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  redemption*  by  which  the  soul  begins  its 
christian  course,  but  is  viewed  as  in  the  world,  and  the 
world  become  the  wilderness  of  its  pilgrimage ;  we 
are  not  in  the  flesh. 

Hereupon  we  enter  the  desert.  They  sing  (chap. 
XV.)  the  song  of  triumph.  God  has  led  them  by  His 
power  to  His  holy  habitation.  But  they  are  on  this 
journey,  not  in  Canaan.  He  will  lead  them  into  the 
place  which  He  has  made,  which  His  hands  have 
established.  Their  enemies  shall  be  unable  to  oppose 
themselves  to  this.  So  with  us.  There  is  a  third 
thing  which  is  found  in  this  beautiful  song — the  desire 
to  build  a  tabernacle  for  Jehovah.  This  is  one  of  the 
great  privileges  which  are  the  result  of  redemption. 
God  did  not  dwell  with  Adam  innocent,  nor  with  Abra- 
ham, vessel  of  promise  and  root  of  the  enjoyment  of 
it.  But  when  redemption  was  accomplished,  on  the 
one  hand,  God  was  fully  revealed ;  and,  on  the  other, 
man  perfectly  redeemed.  Then  God  naturally,  so  to 
speak,  comes  to  dwell  with  men  as  amongst  them.  (Ex. 
xxix.  46.)  Here  it  is  an  external  deliverance ;  for  us  an 
eternal ;  but  the  principle,  a  blessed  and  important  one, 
is  clearly  brought  out.     And  note  this  desire  is  not 

*  In  itself,  it  is  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  But  that  is 
not  only  meeting  the  holiness  of  God's  nature,  which  is  the  blood - 
shedding,  but  entering  into  the  whole  power  of  evil  that  was 
against  us  and  making  it  null.  Hence,  though  it  be  not  our 
reahsing  death  and  resurrection  so  as  to  be  in  heavenly  places, 
we  are  owned  as  having  died  in  Him,  and  He  our  hfe,  so  that 
we  have  left  our  old  standing  altogether.  In  Colossians,  we  are 
risen  with  Him  ;  in  Ephesians,  also  sitting  in  Him  in  heavenly 
places.  Colossians  is  the  risen  man  still  on  earth,  the  subjective 
state,  what  refers  to  heaven  but  is  not  there,  as  Christ  Himself 
for  forty  days — Jordan  crossed,  but  not  Canaan  taken  posses- 
sion of. 


EXODUS.  81 

our  dwelling  with  God,  though  the  thoughts  are  linked 
one  with  another,  but  His  dwelling  with  us ;  and  the 
heart's  desire  is  that  He  should  so,  down  here.  It  will 
never  really  be  effectually  so,  till  verse  17  be  accom- 
plished ;  but  the  desire  is  good,  like  David's,  and  we 
are  now  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God 
through  the  Spirit.  There  are  the  three  things :  we 
are  brought  to  God's  holy  habitation;  there  is  the 
desire  to  prepare  Him  one ;  and,  then,  that  which  He 
has  prepared.  The  tabernacle  belonged  to  the  wil- 
derness; what  they  sing  is  the  deliverance  effected 
already  by  the  power  of  God,  and  the  hope  of  enter- 
ing into  the  sanctuary  which  the  hands  of  Jehovah 
have  made.* 

The  deliverance,  then,  of  the  people  is  accompanied 
by  a  full  and  entire  joy,  which,  having  the  conscious- 
ness of  this  complete  deliverance  by  the  power  of  God, 
grasps  the  whole  extent  of  His  intentions  towards 
them,  and  knows  how  to  apply  this  same  power  to  the 
destruction  of  all  the  power  of  the  enemy.-|-  They 
sing  the  deliverance  of  God,  note,  before  a  step  has 
been  taken  in  the  desert.  The  soul,  in  connection  with 
Egypt  (that  is  in  the  flesh  on  the  ground  of  a  child  of 
Adam), not  only  is  responsible,  but  its  position  with  God, 

*  It  is  practically  important  to  see  that  the  wilderness  is  no 
part  of  God's  purpose  ;  of  His  ways,  a  most  important  part. 
They  were  brought  to  God  by  redemption — Christ's  death  and 
resurrection — ^but  not  in  Canaan.  The  thief  went  straight  to  Para- 
dise with  Christ.  He  has  made  us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  in- 
heritance of  the  saints  in  hght.  See  Exodus  iii.,  vi.,  and  xv. 
where  there  is  no  question  of  the  wilderness  ;  see  on  the  other 
hand,  Deuteronomy  viii.,  where  it  is  reviewed  when  through  it. 
For  the  difference  of  our  spiritual  judgment  of  ourselves,  and 
God's  judgment  of  us,  see  Deuteronomy  ix.  and  Numbers 
xxiii.  21. 

t  The  wilderness  formed  no  part  of  the  counsel  of  God  as  we 
have  seen,  and  the  song  does  not  refer  to  it,  to  its  sorrows  or  its 
joys,  nor  the  provision  for  it.  That,  as  far  as  revealed  here, 
belongs  to  the  book  of  Numbers. 

VOL.  L  XV.  G 


82  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

dependent  on  its  acting  up  to  this  responsibility,  is  still 
uncertain  and  in  fear.  The  desert  may  be  never  so 
bitter  and  trying ;  but  we  are  free  and  with  God  there 
(brought  to  His  holy  habitation),  through  the  redemp- 
tion and  deliverance  of  God.  But  the  redeemed  one  is 
looked  at  still  as  on  the  way  to  glory,  not  yet  in  pos- 
session of  the  promised  dwelling-place  of  God.  We 
are  come  to  God's  habitation,  to  God  Himself,  but  the 
prepared  place  is  future.  Edom  and  Moab  will  be  still 
as  a  stone,  but  the  people  have  yet  to  pass  over.  This 
difference  is  important  to  notice.  However,  the  re- 
deemed soul  is  looked  at  in  both  ways ;  as  in  Christ, 
where  as  to  acceptance  all  is  settled — "  as  he  is  so  are 
we  in  this  world"  giving  boldness  for  the  day  of  judg- 
ment (1  John  iv.  17) ;  and  as  in  the  wilderness,  where 
faith  is  put  to  the  test.  For  the  wilderness  is  what 
the  world  is  for  the  new  man. 

Remark  here  too  some  other  important  elements  of 
the  position  of  the  people.  First,  it  is  a  people.  This 
till  then  there  had  never  been :  just  men  by  grace,  be- 
lievers, called  ones,  there  had  been;  now,  though  ac- 
cording to  the  flesh,  these  are  a  people  of  God  on  the 
earth.  This  was  based  on  redemption  wrought  by  God. 
Further,  God,  as  we  have  seen,  dwells  amongst  His 
people  on  earth  when  redemption  is  accomplished. 
That  is  the  distinct  fruit  of  redemption  ;*  He  had  not 
dwelt  with  innocent  Adam ;  He  had  not  with  called 
Abraham  ;  He  does  with  redeemed  Israel.-f-  But 
thirdly,  this  dwelling  of  God,  His  presence,  brings  in 
the  definite  claim  of  holiness.  Holiness  becomes  His 
house  for  ever.  We  do  not  find  holiness  mentioned  in 
Genesis,  if  it  be  not  sanctifying  the  sabbath  day.  The 
moment  redemption  is  accomplished,  He  is  glorious  in 
holiness,  and  there  is  a  holy  habitation.  All  these  are 
important  principles. 

'1   See  page  80.  f  Exodus  xxix.  4G. 


EXODUS.  83 

But  now  the  difficulties  of  the  way  arrive.  They 
travel  three  days  without  water — a  sad  effect,  in  ap- 
pearance, of  such  a  deliverance ;  and  then  the  water  is 
bitter  when  they  find  it.  If  death  has  delivered  them 
from  the  power  of  the  enemy,  it  must  become  known 
in  its  application  to  themselves ;  bitter  to  the  soul,  it 
is  true,  but,  through  grace,  refreshment  and  life,  for 
"in  all  these  things  is  the  life  of  the  spirit."  It  is 
death  and  the  application  of  the  cross  to  the  flesh 
practically,  after  the  deliverance  ;  but  the  wood — 
Christ's  part  on  the  cross,  I  doubt  not — makes  it  sweet, 
and  refreshment  too.  Thereupon  we  have  the  twelve 
wells  and  seventy  palm-trees* — types,  it  seems  to  me, 
of  those  living  springs  and  of  that  shelter  which  have 
been  provided,  through  instruments  chosen  of  God,  for 
the  consolation  of  His  people. 

Here  we  have  the  principle  of  the  people's  respon- 
sibility and  their  obedience,  put  as  a  condition  of  their 
well-being  under  God's  government.  Still,  however, 
the  part  of  the  history  from  the  Red  Sea  to  Sinai 
is  always  grace.  The  Sabbath — rest  of  the  people — 
is  established  in  connection  with  Christ,  the  true  bread 
of  life,  who  gives  it.  Then  comes  the  Spirit — living 
waters  which  come  out  of  the  rock ;  but  with  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Holy  Ghost  comes  conflict,  and  not  rest. 
Yet  Christ,  typified  here  by  Joshua,  of  whom  mention 
is  now  made  for  the  first  time,  places  Himself  spiritu- 
ally at  the  head  of  His  people.  True  rest  is  by  Christ, 
the  bread  come  down  from  heaven,  and  this  comes 
first,  before  conflict,  though  man  could  not  really  enjoy 
it  by  that  bread  alone,  that  is  Christ  incarnate,  with- 
out death  and  redemption  coming  in.  Unless  we  eat 
the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood,  there  is  no  life  to  taste 
and  enjoy  the  bread.  But,  as  yet,  the  people  are  charac- 
terised by  redemption,  and  their  exercises  and  bless- 

*  The  Lord  adopted  this  number  in  His  two  closing  missions 
of  the  disciples  to  Israel. 

XVI.,  XVII. 


84  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

ings  are  under  grace.  The  question  of  direct  access  to 
God  is  not  yet  brought  before  us.  The  rock  indeed  is 
smitten — as  it  must  be  to  have  the  living  water  at  all ; 
but  this  is  the  figure  of  what  is  historical,  the  event  of 
Christ's  death,  not  the  figure  of  access  to  God  within 
the  veil.  It  is  all  the  earthly  part  of  God's  ways,  even 
in  grace. 

However  sure  of  victory  they  may  be  in  fighting 
the  Lord's  battles,  the  entire  dependence  of  the  people, 
at  every  moment,  on  the  divine  blessing,  is  presented 
to  us  in  this,  that  if  Moses  (who  with  the  rod  of  God 
represents  to  us  His  authority  on  high)  keeps  not  his 
hands  lifted  up,  the  people  are  beaten  by  their  enemies. 
Nevertheless,  Aaron  the  high  priest,  and  Hur  (purity  ?) 
maintain  the  blessing,  and  Israel  prevails.  The  cause 
was  a  hidden  one.  Sincerity,  valiant  efibrts,  the  fact 
that  the  battle  was  God's  battle,  were,  though  right,  of 
no  avail — all  depended  upon  God's  blessing  from  on 
high.  One  would  have  thought,  indeed,  that  if  God 
made  war,  and  unfurled  the  banner,  it  would  soon  be 
over ;  but  no  !  from  generation  to  generation  He  would 
make  war  upon  Amalek.  For,  if  it  was  the  war  of 
God,  it  was  in  the  midst  of  His  people. 

Up  to  this  all  was  grace,  though  there  were  depend- 
ence and  conflict.  The  murmurs  of  the  people  had 
only  served  to  shew  the  riches  of  the  grace  of  God, 
who  displayed  His  sovereignty  in  giving  them  all  they 
could  desire;  which  appears  so  much  the  more  striking, 
because  afterwards  the  same  desires,  under  the  law, 
brought  very  bitter  chastisements.  At  length,  after 
this  reign  of  grace,  follows  the  order  of  divine  govern- 
ment, what  will  be  realised  in  the  millennium  (chap, 
xviii.),  where  the  king  in  Jeshurun  judges  in  righteous- 
ness, establishes  order  and  government,  the  Gentiles 
eat  and  offer  sacrifices  with  Israel,  and  acknowledge 
that  the  God  of  the  Jews  is  exalted  above  all  gods. 
All  this  was  the  acting  of  God's  grace  and  power. 


EXODUS.  86 

During  the  days  of  the  deliverance  of  Israel  Moses's 
wife  had  been  sent  away,  as  the  church  during  the 
tribulation,  and  as  the  church  will  appear  in  the  joy 
of  Israel's  deliverance,  so  now  Zipporah  appears  again 
upon  the  scene,  and  we  have  not  only  Gershom,  "  a  pil- 
grim in  a  foreign  land,"  but  a  second  son,  Eliezer; 
"  for,"  Moses  said,  "  the  God  of  my  fathers  was  mine 
help,  and  delivered  me  from  the  sword  of  Pharaoh." 
The  application  of  this  to  the  future  deliverance  of 
Israel  is  too  evident  to  require  any  lengthened  ex- 
planation. 

But  having  thus  terminated  the  course  of  grace,  the 
scene  changes  entirely.  They  do  not  keep  the  feast  on 
the  mountain,  whither  God,  as  He  had  promised,  had 
led  them — had  "brought  them,  bearing  them,  as  on 
eagles'  wings,  to  himself."  He  proposes  a  condition  to 
them :  If  they  obeyed  His  voice,  they  should  be  His 
people.  The  people — instead  of  knowing  themselves, 
and  saying, "  We  dare  not,  though  bound  to  obey,  place 
ourselves  under  such  a  condition,  and  risk  our  blessing, 
yea,  make  sure  of  losing  it " — undertake  to  do  all  that 
the  Lord  had  spoken.  The  blessing  now  took  the  form 
of  dependence,  like  Adam's,  on  the  faithfulness  of  man 
as  well  as  of  God.  Still  farther  was  it  from  being, 
as  ours,  based  on  a  fulfilled  and  accomplished  re- 
demption; it  was  not  even  based  on  an  uncondi- 
tional promise,  as  in  the  case  of  Abraham.*  The 
people,  however,  are  not  permitted  to  approach  God, 
who  hid  Himself  in  the  darkness.  In  fact  they 
undertook  obedience  far  from  God,  in  a  state  in 
which  they  could  not  approach  Him  in  that  majesty 
to  which  obedience  was  due.  Nevertheless  God  gave 
all  possible  solemnity  to  the  communication   of   His 

*  It  is  important  for  us  to  see  that  our  standing  before  God 
does  not  rest  on  promise,  but  on  accomplished  redemption.    All 
that  concerned  that  and  the  basis  of  our  assurance  of  faith  is  ac- 
complished promise.     Glory  is  in  hope. 
XVIII.-XXIII. 


86  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

law,  and  sees  it  good  that  the  people  should  fear  before 
Him ;  but  what  can  fear  do  towards  giving  poiver  at  a 
distance  from  Him  ?  The  feeling  may,  peril aps,  be 
proper;  but  it  is  not  proper  to  undertake  to  obey  in 
such  a  state.  Terror,  and  the  condition  of  obedience 
when  the  people  are  far  from  God — such  is  the  cha- 
racter of  the  law,  a  rule  sent  out  to  man,  taken  in  its 
largest  character,  when  man  cannot  approach  God,  but 
a  barrier  is  set  up,  and  the  question  of  righteousness 
as  the  way  of  life  raised  and  claimed  from  man  when 
man  is  a  sinner. 

Moses,  when  God  had  spoken  to  the  people,  and  the 
people  dared  no  more  to  hearken,  drew  near  to  the 
thick  darkness,  and  received  the  instructions  of  God 
for  the  people — moral  and  general  instructions — re- 
lating to  their  possession  of  the  land,  in  case  they 
should  enter  upon  it  according  to  the  covenant  of  the 
law.  Two  things  are  pointed  out  as  to  worship — the 
work  of  man,  and  his  order,  in  which  his  nakedness 
will  certainly  be  made  manifest ;  and  they  are  equally 
and  together  prohibited  by  God. 

We  have  (as  we  may  observe  by  the  way)  a  beauti- 
ful type  (chap,  xxi.)  of  the  devotedness  of  Christ  to 
the  church  and  to  His  Father,  and  His  love  to  us. 
Having  served  already  faithfully  His  full  service  as 
man,  during  His  lifetime,  He  would  remain  a  servant 
even  in  death  for  the  sake  of  the  Father,  the  church, 
and  His  people.  He  made  Himself  a  servant  for  ever. 
(Compare  John  xiii.  for  the  present  time,  and  Luke 
xii.  even  for  glory.) 

This  covenant,  made  on  condition  of  the  obedience 
of  the  people,  was  confirmed  by  blood.*  (Chap,  xxiv.) 
The  blood  being  shed,  death  having  thus  come  in  as 
God's  judgment,  the  elders  go  up  to  enter  into  relation- 

*  Death  was  the  penal  sanction,  as  it  was  also,  because  suoh* 
the  delivering  power  in  grace. 


EXODUS.  87 

ship  with  God.  They  see  His  glory,  and  continue 
their  human  and  terrestrial  life ;  they  eat  and  drink. 

But  Moses  is  called  near  to  God,  to  see  the  patterns 
of  things  more  excellent,  of  heavenly  things — of  things 
which  make  provision  indeed  for  the  faults  and  the 
failures  of  God's  people,  but  reveal  to  them  the  perfec- 
tion and  varied  glories  of  Him  whom  they  approach  as 
His  people.  Only  they  still  carry  the  stamp  of  the 
dispensation  to  which  they  belong,  as  is  true  of  every- 
thing which  is  not  founded  on,  and  characterised 
by,  association  with  a  glorified  Christ,  the  fruit  of 
eternal  redemption,  the  eternal  expression  of  the 
counsels  of  God.  That  however  in  which  the  figures 
do  not  answer  to  the  antitypes,  as  we  know  them,  is 
not  in  the  things  themselves,  but  in  the  liberty  of  ac- 
cess, and  the  way  that  has  been  opened,  and  we  admit- 
ted to  them,  things  connected  withal  with  far  higher 
privileges.*  The  form  of  realisation  was  dependent 
on  the  actual  state  of  things.  Priesthood  there  was, 
but  many  priests  because  they  were  mortal;  we,  but  one, 
because  He  dies  not.  The  veil,  behind  which  God  was 
and  which  barred  the  way  to  God,  is  for  us  rent, 
and  the  way  into  the  holiest  open,  so  that  the  holy 
and  the  most  holy  place  are  for  us  in  spirit  thrown 
together.  Still  the  general  figure  remains,  and  it  does 
not  appear  that  there  will  be  a  rent  veil  in  the  millen- 
nium, though  all  the  blessing  depends  on  Christ's  death. 
Our  place  is  peculiar;  associated  with  Christ  as  sons 
with  the  Father,  and  as  members  of  His  body;  also 
heavenly  in  our  hope  and  calling,  as  belonging  to  the 
new  creation. 

The  glories  in  every  way  of  Christ  the  Mediator  are 
presented  in  the  tabernacle ;  not  precisely,  as  yet,  the 
unity  of  His  people,  considered  as  His  body,  but  in 

'^  Hence  in  Hebrews  you  never  have  the   Father  and  our 
relationship  with  Him,  nor  with  Christ,  and,  in  what  is  there 
found  there  is  more  contrast  than  comparison. 
XXIV. 


88  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

every  manner  in  which  the  ways  and  the  perfections  of 
God  are  manifested  through  Him,  whether  in  the  full 
extent  of  the  creation,  in  His  people,  or  in  His  Person. 
The  scene  of  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God, 
His  house,  His  domain,  in  which  He  displays  His  being 
(in  so  far  as  it  can  be  seen) ;  the  ways  of  His  grace 
and  His  glory;  and  His  relationship  through  Christ 
with  us — poor  and  feeble  creatures,  but  who  draw  nigh 
unto  Him — are  unfolded  to  us  in  it,  but  still  with  a 
veil  over  His  presence,  and  with  God,  not  the  Father.* 
The  question  is,  How  is  man  with  God — can  he  ap- 
proach ?  not  love  coming  out  to  seek,  and  reception  by 
the  Father.  God  is  on  the  throne  justly  requiring  right- 
eousness and  holiness  according  to  His  own  nature,  not 
in  sovereign  love  seeking  men  when  in  a  state  con- 
trary to  it.  This,  and  the  relationship  of  sons,  make 
the  whole  basis  different  as  to  the  relationship  with 
God.  But  the  moral  ground  of  its  possibility  is  found 
in  these  types,  with  the  contrast  already  mentioned. 

Thus  the  tabernacle  had  two  aspects — the  glory 
which  was  His  own,  and  the  means  of  the  relationship 
of  God  with  His  people.  This  is  true  even  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  I  can  view  His  cross  in  its  absolute  per- 
fectness,  according  to  the  thoughts  and  the  heart  of 
God ;  I  can  also  find  there  that  which  answers  all  my 
wants  and  failures. 

It  would  lead  me  too  far  to  enter  into  the  details  of 
the  construction  of  the  tabernacle  and  its  utensils,  but 
I  will  make  some  general  remarks.  There  is  a  certain 
appearance  of  disorder  in  the  description,  in  that  it  is 
interrupted  by  the  description  of  the  vesture,  and  of 
the  order  of  consecration,  of  Aaron.  Thus  the  altar 
of  burnt  offering  comes  before  the  priests'  vesture  and 

*  We  see  the  glory  unveiled  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  and 
approach  boldly,  because  the  glory  in  His  face  is  the  proof  ot 
redemption  and  the  perfect  putting  away  of  our  sins,  for  He  who 
bore  them  has  them  not  on  Him  in  the  glory. 


EXODUS.  89 

consecration,  the  laver  after.  But  this  arises  from 
what  I  have  just  said.  There  are  things  which  are  the 
manifestation  of  God,  the  place  of  meeting  with  Him 
and  what  belongs  to  it,  others  which  refer  to  the  pre- 
sentation of  man  to  God,  and  his  service  in  these  places; 
these  things  are  linked  together,  for  there  are  some 
manifestations  of  God  which  are  the  points  and  means 
of  the  approach  of  man,  as  the  cross ;  for  there  indeed 
man  in  the  height  of  his  sin,  and  God  in  infinite  love 
and  laying  the  ground  of  righteousness,  and  righteous- 
ness for  us,  meet.  It  is  the  central  point  in  all  moral 
history,  where  every  issue  of  good  and  evil  was  settled 
for  eternity ;  and  while  it  is  the  point  at  which  man 
draws  nigh,  there  is  something  there  besides  the  act  of 
drawing  near,  or  even  of  serving  God.* 

The  description  of  the  tabernacle  presents  to  us, 
first,  the  things  in  which  God  manifests  Himself,  as 
the  object,  however,  of  the  spiritual  knowledge  of 
human  intelligence  (by  faith  of  course) ;  and  then  the 
priesthood,  and  that  which  man  does  or  uses  in  drawing 
near  to  Him  who  thus  reveals  Himself. 

First,  then,  there  are  the  things  which  are  found  in 
the  holy  of  holies,  and  the  holy  place :  the  ark  of  the 
covenant,  the  table  of  the  shewbread,  and  the  candle- 
stick with  seven  branches.     This  is  what  God  had 

*  We  are  apt  to  consider  the  cross  simply  in  respect  of  our 
sins.  In  coming  to  God  it  is  the  only  right,  the  only  possible 
way.  But  when,  at  peace  with  God,  we  weigh  what  it  is,  we 
shall  find  every  moral  question  brought  to  an  issue  there ;  man 
in  absolute  wickedness,  that  is  rejecting  God  in  goodness  with 
scorn  and  hatred  ;  Satan's  full  and  universal  power  over  them ; 
man  in  perfectness  in  Christ — absolute  obedience  and  absolute 
love  to  the  Father;  God  in  righteousness  against  sin  in  the 
highest  way  ("it  became  Him"),  and  infinite  love  to  the 
sinner ;  all  is  brought  out  on  the  cross  in  Christ,  and  all  to  our 
blessing,  and  so  that  we  should  be  in  glory  with  Him,  and 
like  Him,  as  the  fruit  of  the  travail  of  His  soul — a  blessed 
portion. 

XXV. 


90  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

established  for  the  manifestation  of  Himself  within 
the  house  where  His  glory  dwelt,  where  those  who 
enter  into  His  presence  could  have  communion  with 
Him.  In  result  none  could  enter  into  the  most  holy 
place,  for  the  liigh  priest  only  went  in  to  place  the 
blood  on  the  mercy-seat,  and  not  for  communion  then, 
and  with  a  cloud  of  incense  that  he  might  not  die.* 
(See  Heb.  ix.)  But  it  was  in  itself  the  place  of  ap- 
proach to  God.  Then  we  have  the  arrangement  and 
structure  of  the  tabernacle  which  enclosed  all  these 
things,  and  which  was  divided  into  two  parts ;  and  then 
the  altar  of  burnt-oiferings,  and  the  court  where  it 
stood,  to  the  end  of  verse  19,  chapter  xxvii.  We  will 
consider  these  things  first.   It  is  there  the  first  part  ends. 

In  that  which  follows  there  is  what  regards  the 
action  of  man  therein — of  the  priests ;  and  God  orders 
certain  things  to  be  brought  in  for  that.  This  it  is 
which  consequently  introduces  the  priesthood,  which 
acted  in  it,  and  which  alone  could,  in  fact,  so  act. 
Hence  the  description  of  the  priesthood  interrupts  the 
description  of  the  various  parts  and  furniture  of  the 
tabernacle  ;  what  follows  it  refers  to  its  exercise. 

The  ark  of  the  covenant  was  the  throne  where  God 
manifested  Himself,  if  any  could  go  in  in  righteous- 
ness,-]- and  as  the  seat  of  His  sovereignty  over  every 

*  This  was  the  result  of  the  failure  of  the  priesthood,  in  the 
person  of  Nadab  and  Abihu,  which,  as  everything  placed  under 
man's  responsibility  (and  all,  save  of  course  actual  redemption, 
has  been  so)  was  immediate.  So  in  the  case  of  Adam,  Noah, 
the  law,  here  the  priesthood,  Solomon  son  of  David,  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, and  so,  as  Paul  testifies,  the  church. 

t  But  not,  I  think,  separate  from  holiness,  for  it  was  in  the 
hoHest,  and  could  not  be  if  God  was  there  as  His  dwelling,  and 
not  taking  merely  duty  as  the  measure  of  what  was  accepted. 
But,  while  God  Himself  was  to  be  approached  who  is  holy,  it  was  a 
throne,  and  judicial,  and  so  righteous  in  character.  Holiness  is 
the  character  of  a  nature  delighting  in  pm-ity,  and  which  repels 
evil.  Eighteousness  judges  it  with  authority.  It  was  not  merely 
man's  responsibility,  but  what  God  was. 


EXODUS  91 

living  man — the  God  of  the  whole  earth.  It  was  also, 
however,  the  tJirone  of  relationship  with  His  people. 
The  law — the  testimony  of  what  He  required  of  men 
— was  to  be  placed  there.  Over  it  was  the  mercy-seat, 
which  covered  it  in,  which  formed  the  throne,  or  rather 
the  basis  of  the  throne,  as  the  cherubim  (formed  of  the 
same  piece),  which  were  its  supporters,  did  its  sides. 
In  itself  it  seems  to  me  a  marvellous  connection  of  the 
human  and  divine  righteousness  in  the  Lord  Jesus. 
The  law  was  hid  in  it,  and,  in  divine  government  of 
man  on  earth,  this  formed  the  perfect  rule  ;  it  was  the 
measure  of  responsibility  of  man  as  a  child  of  Adam, 
in  its  abstract  foundations,  which  the  Lord  adduces — the 
perfection  of  creature  relationship  with  God ;  and  we 
know  that  the  law  was  in  Christ's  heart.  He  was 
perfect  in  human  obedience  and  love  to  His  Father. 
He  lived  perfectly  up  to  the  responsibility  of  man  ac- 
cording to  God  in  His  inner  man.*  But  He  also  glori- 
fied God — all  that  God  is  in  love,  divine  righteousness, 
truth,  majesty.  All  God  is  was  glorified  by  the  Son  of 
man,  and  not  only  the  Son  of  man  goes  righteously 
into  the  glory  of  God,  but  God  is  fully  revealed  as  the 
place  of  access  for  us  in  that  character :  righteousness 
is  proved  by  His  going  to  His  Father.  The  shittim- 
wood  and  the  tables  of  the  law  are  there,  but  all  is 
clothed  with  the  gold — God's  own  righteousness  is 
there  too.     It  is  with  this  communion  is,f  only  as  yet 

*  The  first  is  the  essence  of  creature  perfection,  adding  the 
place  of  Son.  The  second,  the  actual  responsibility  of  man's 
place  measured  by  that  place. 

t  Only  now,  as  already  noticed,  there  is  another  relationship 
entered  into  with  the  Father.  This  is  relationship,  not  nature, 
though  of  course  that  nature  is  necessarily  involved  in  it.  Hence, 
but  only  after  His  resurrection,  Christ  says,  I  go  to  my  Father 
and  your  Father,  my  God  and  your  God.  There  is  that  with 
God  according  to  the  character  here  spoken  of,  but  there  is  that 
with  the  Father  in  the  relationship  and  liberty  in  which  Christ 
Himself  is,  and  into  which  we  are  adopted.  This  difference  of 
XXV. 


92  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  veil  hid  it  within.  The  character  as  yet  was  a 
judicial  throne.  At  that  time  man  (save  Moses  owned 
in  grace)  could  not  go  in,  and  God  did  not  come  out. 
Now  He  has  come  out  in  grace,  clothing  Himself  in 
humiliation  that  He  in  perfect  grace  may  be  with  us ; 
and  man  is  gone  into  the  glory  according  to  the  title 
of  an  accomplished  redemption. 

The  cherubim,  throughout  the  Old  Testament,  where- 
ever  they  act,  are  connected  with  the  judicial  power  of 
God,  or  are  the  executors  of  the  will  of  that  power; 
and  in  the  Apocalypse  they  are  generally  connected 
with  providential  judgments,  and  belong  to  the  throne, 
but  the  seraphic  character  is  connected  with  them 
there,  so  that  the  throne  judges,  not  merely  in  present 
governmental  judgment,  but  finally  according  to  God's 
nature. 

Here,  then,  God  manifested  Himself  as  the  Supreme 
God  in  His  moral  being,  armed  with  power  to  enforce 
respect  to  His  laws,  and  to  keep  account  of  all  that 
was  done.  This  character  of  God  in  Himself  also  is 
why  the  blood — witness  of  all  that  had  been  done  for 
those  who  were  thus  responsible,  and  satisfying  all  the 
moral  nature  of  Him  who  sat  there — was  put  upon 
the  mercy-seat,  but  every  year,  a  witness  that  the 
work  which  did  that  was  yet  undone.*     Nor  was  it 

nature  and  relationship  is  strikingly  brought  out  in  John's 
writings — grace,  and  what  the  divine  nature  makes  necessary. 
See  John  iv.  as  to  worshippers,  and  1  John  i.  The  Father  could 
not  be  revealed  but  by  the  Son.  But  also  the  veil  was  rent  in 
the  cross,  and  we  are  before  God  in  divine  righteousness  accord- 
ing to  what  He  is  as  such.  In  the  full  character  of  this  as  to 
both,  we  are  in  Him.  Elsewhere  I  have  touched  on  the  difference 
of  the  sense  of  relationship  with  God  as  sons,  and  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Father  as  such,  personally  revealed  in  the  Son.  The 
first  is  Paul's  ground,  and  he  seldom  goes  beyond  it ;  the  latter, 
John's.  The  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  gives  direct  access  to  God 
in  the  holiest,  but  the  Father  is  not  found  in  it. 
*  Hence  there  was  still  an  unrent  veil. 


EXODUS.  93 

exactly  there  that  God  was  directly  in  connection  with 
His  people ;  but  thence  came  forth  the  communications 
which  were  to  be  made  to  them:  "And  there  will  I 
meet  with  thee,"  said  God  to  Moses,  "  and  I  will  com- 
mune with  thee  from  above  the  mercy-seat,  from  be- 
tween the  two  cherubim  which  are  upon  the  ark  of 
the  testimony,  of  all  the  things  which  I  will  give  thee 
in  commandment  unto  the  children  of  Israel."  Moses, 
who  receives  the  thoughts  of  God  for  the  people,  was 
there  to  have  his  intercourse  with  Jehovah,  and  that 
without  veil.* 

It  was,  then,  the  most  intimate  and  most  immediate 
manifestation  of  God,  and  that  which  came  nearest  to 
His  very  nature,  which  does  not  thus  manifest  itself. 
But  it  was  a  manifestation  of  Himself  in  judgment 
and  in  government  ;-|-  it  was  not  as  yet  in  man,  neither 
according  to  man,  but  within  the  veil.  In  Christ  we 
find  Him  thus,  and  then  it  is  in  perfect  grace  and 
divine  righteousness,  proved  by  man's  place,  and  the 


*  The  communications  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  all  that 
belongs  to  the  law  come  du-ectly  from  God,  but  do  not  belong  to 
a  system  which  gives  direct  access  to  Him. 

t  This  is  true ;  but,  in  its  typical  (or  perhaps  I  should  say 
spiritual)  appUcation,  not  in  the  letter,  but  in  the  spirit,  there 
was  another  important  element  of  truth  in  it.  It  was  the  place 
where  God  was  approached,  not  where  He  dealt  with  man's  re- 
sponsibility as  man.  This  was  at  the  brazen  altar,  the  place  oi 
sacrifice,  the  first  thing  met,  when  man  had  to  come  as  a  sinner, 
when  consequently  what  man  ought  to  be  was  in  question,  what 
he  ought  to  be  for  God  sm-ely,  still  what  man  ought  to  be  as 
man.  In  coming  to  the  mercy-seat  in  the  holiest  of  all,  what 
God  is  was  in  question.  Man  has  to  be  meet  for  God's  own 
presence,  then,  in  the  holiest.  And  in  truth  the  rest  was  only 
testing  man.  He  was  not  innocent  in  Paradise,  and  as  a  sinner 
could  not  come  to  God,  according  to  what  God  is,  being  a  sinner. 
It  is  only  through  the  rent  veil  in  a  heavenly  Paradise  he  can 
have  to  say  to  Him ;  though  on  the  ground  of  the  work  then 
accomplished  He  will  have  an  earthly  people  also,  in  whose 
heart  the  law  will  be  written. 

XXV. 


94  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

latter  only  when  the  veil  has  been  rent;  till  then 
Christ  remained  alone,  for  grace  was  rejected  as  well 
as  law  broken. 

Outside  the  veil  was  the  table  with  its  twelve  loaves 
and  the  golden  candlestick.  Twelve  is  administrative 
perfection  in  man — seven,  spiritual  completeness, 
whether  in  good  or  evil.  The  two  are  found  outside 
the  veil,  inside  which  was  the  most  immediate  mani- 
festation of  God,  the  Supreme,  but  who  hid  Himself, 
as  it  were,  yet,  in  darkness.  Here  was  light  and 
nourishment :  God  in  power  manifested  in  man ;  ad- 
ministrative power  revealed  amongst  men,  and,  in 
historical  fact,  in  connection  with  the  twelve  tribes. 
But  faith  recognises  both  in  Christ,  and  the  light  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  makes  us  know  it,  if  priests,  to  enter 
into  the  holy  place,  before  it  is  actually  revealed  in 
power,  while  all  is  otherwise  darkness,  and  God  is 
giving  the  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost.* 

The  twelve  tribes  were,  for  the  time  being,  that 
which  answered  externally  to  this  manifestation.  It 
is  found  in  the  new  Jerusalem.  The  primary  idea  was 
the  manifestation  of  God  in  the  holy  place  in  man,  and 
by  the  Spirit. 

Next  we  have  the  tabernacle  itself,  which  was  one, 
though  separated  into  two  parts.  There  were  (as  the 
word  teaches  us)  two  meanings  in  the  tabernacle  and 
in  its  form.  In  general  it  was  where  God  dwelt  and 
revealed  Himself,  hence,  the  heavens,  God's  tabernacle ; 
and  the  Person  of  Christ,  God's  dwelling.f  The 
heavenly  places  themselves,  says  the  apostle,  had  to  be 
purified  with  better  sacrifices.  (Heb.  ix.  23.)   So  Christ 

*  Therefore  it  is  that,  in  another  sense,  we  have  twelve 
apostles  attached  to  the  Lord  in  the  flesh,  and  seven  churches 
for  Him  who  has  the  seven  Spirits  of  God. 

+  We  may  add  Christians  :  "whose  house  are  we."  The  body 
is  never  the  subject  in  Hebrews :  we  are  pilgrims  here  walking 
by  faith.     Nor  is  the  Father. 


EXODUS.  95 

has  passed  through  the  heavens,  as  Aaron  up  to  the 
mercy-seat.  (Heb.  iv.  14.)  Again,  it  is  used  in  the 
same  sense  as  a  figure  of  the  created  universe  (Heb. 
iii.  3,  4),  where  it  is  also  used  as  a  whole  as  a  figure  of 
the  saints,  as  the  house  over  which  Christ  is  as  Son. 
The  veil  was,  we  know  on  the  same  divine  authority, 
the  flesh  of  Christ,  which  concealed  God  in  His  holi- 
ness of  judgment — in  His  perfectness  as  sovereign 
justice  itself,  but  manifested  Him  in  perfect  grace  to 
those  to  whom  His  presence  revealed  itself. 

The  tabernacle*  itself  was  formed  of  the  same  things 
as  the  veil ;  figurative,  I  doubt  not,  of  the  essential 
purity  of  Christ  as  a  man,  and  of  all  the  divine  graces 
embroidered,  as  it  were,  thereon.  To  this  was  also 
added  cherubim,  the  figure,  as  we  have  seen,  of  judicial 
power,-f-  conferred,  as  we  know,  on  Christ  as  man: 
God  "will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by  that 
man  whom  he  hath  ordained :"  and  again,  "  The  Father 
judge th  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto 
the  Son  .  .  .  and  hath  given  him  authority  to  execute 
judgment  also,  because  he  is  the  Son  of  man." 

*  If  we  examine  the  details  more  closely,  it  will  be  found  that 
in  the  tent  and  veil  there  was  no  gold,  but  there  were  cherubim ;  in 
the  ephod  gold,  but  no  cherubim ;  in  the  hangings  before  the  holy 
place  neither.  Within,  in  both  holy  place  and  holy  of  holies,  all 
was  gold.  So  Christ  as  man  (and  the  veil  we  know  was  His  flesh) 
had  the  judicial  authority,  and  will  have  it  as  man,  not  only  in 
government  but  in  final  divine  judgment;  but  He  was  man,  and 
walked  as  man ;  within  all  was  divine.  The  priesthood  in  its 
Aaronic  character  could  not  have  the  cherubim,  that  is  judicial 
authority  in  heaven,  but  His  presence  there  is  identified  with 
divine  righteousness.  As  He  appeared  outside  down  here  all  was 
perfect  grace,  but  in  outward  appearance  He  took  neither. 

t  When  fully  depicted,  the  cherubim  shewed  the  powers  ol 
creation,  and  God's  attributes  as  displayed  in  the  throne,  in  the 
fom*  heads  of  the  earthly  creation :  man,  cattle,  wild  beasts,  and 
birds ;  intelligence,  stability,  power,  and  rapidity  of  judgment. 
Man  had  made  gods  and  idols  of  them ;  they  formed  the  throne 
on  which  God  sat. 

XXVI. 


96  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  other  coverings  point  to 
Him  also:  that  of  the  goat-skins  to  His  positive  purity, 
or  rather  to  that  severity  of  separation  from  the  evil 
that  was  around  Him,  which  gave  Him  the  character 
of  prophet — severity,  not  in  His  ways  towards  poor 
sinners,  but  in  separation  from  sinners,  the  uncompro- 
misingness  as  to  Himself,  which  kept  Him  apart,  and 
gave  Him  His  moral  authority,  that  moral  cloth  of 
hair  which  distinguished  the  prophet ;  that  of  the 
ram-skins  dyed  red  points  to  His  perfect  devotedness 
to  God,*  His  consecration  to  God  (may  God  enable  us 
to  imitate  Him !) ;  and  that  of  the  badger-skin  to  the 
vigilant  holiness,  both  of  walk  and  in  external  re- 
lationship, which  preserved  Him,  and  perfectly  so,  from 
the  evil  that  surrounded  Him.  "  By  the  word  of  thy 
lips  I  have  kept  me  from  the  paths  of  the  destroyer." 
"  He  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  himself,  and  that 
wicked  one  toucheth  him  not."  Besides  what  may  be 
called  His  Person,  these  things  correspond  to  the  new 
nature  in  us,  the  new  man,  and  of  Him,  so  far  as  bom 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  at  His  incarnation — His  birth  in 
the  flesh  in  which  He  was  the  perfect  expression  of  it; 
but  I  speak  of  the  thing  itself  in  practice,  or  what  is 
produced  by  the  Spirit  in  us,  and  by  the  word. 

In  the  court  God  meets  the  world  (I  do  not  speak  of 
the  world  itself  through  which  we  walk  :f  this  was 
the  desert)  ;  but  it  is  where  those  coming  up  out  of  the 
world  draw  near  to  God,  where  His  people  (not  as 
priests  or  as  saints,  but  as  sinful  men)  draw  near  to 


*  This  is  drawn  from  the  occasions  on  which  the  ram  was 
used  in  the  sacrifices. 

t  This  would  he  the  grace  of  Christianity,  the  seeking  and 
saving  what  is  lost.  The  figures  of  the  tahernacle  have  to  say 
to  our  coming  to  Gdd,  not  to  His  coming  to  us.  This  is  proper 
to  Christianity.  Hebrews  takes  up  the  figures  we  are  speaking 
of,  only  with  the  changes  introduced  by  Christianity  even  in 
these. 


EXODUS.  97 

Him.  But  in  coming  out  of  the  world,  it  is  an  en- 
closure of  God's,  who  is  known  only  to  those  who 
enter  therein.  There  the  altar  of  burnt- offerings  was 
first  found,  God  manifested  in  justice  as  to  sin,  but  in 
grace  to  the  sinner,  in  His  relationship  with  men,  in 
the  midst  of  them,  such  as  they  were.  True,  it  was 
the  judgment  of  sin,  for  without  this  God  could  not  be 
in  relationship  with  men ;  but  yet  it  was  Christ  in  the 
perfection  of  the  Spirit  of  God  who  ofi'ered  Himself  a 
sacrifice,  according  to  that  justice,  for  sin,  to  put  sinners 
in  relationship  with  God.  He  has  been  lifted  up  from 
the  earth.  Upon  earth  the  question  was  as  to  the  pos- 
sibility of  men's  relationship  with  Him  who  is  holy 
and  living:  that  could  not  be.  On  the  cross  He  is  lifted 
up  from  the  earth,  rejected  by  the  world ;  nevertheless 
He  does  not  enter  into  heaven.  Upon  the  cross  Christ 
has  been  raised  from  this  world — has  left  it ;  but  He 
still  remains  presented  to  it,  the  object  of  faith  as  a 
full  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God,  as  well  as  the 
witness  of  His  love,  of  the  love  withal  of  Him  who 
has  glorified  all  that  God  is  in  this  act.  He  is  the 
object  still,  I  say,  to  the  eyes  of  the  world,  though  no 
longer  on  it,  if,  through  grace,  one  goes  there  and 
separates  from  this  world,  while  God  in  justice  (for 
where  has  this  been  glorified  as  in  the  cross  of 
Jesus?)  can  receive  according  to  His  glory,  and  even 
be  glorified  there,  by  the  most  wretched  of  sin- 
ners. As  regards  the  approaching  sinner,  it  was 
for  his  guilt  and  positive  sins.  In  itself  the  sacrifice 
went  much  further,  a  sweet  savour  to  God,  glorifying 
Him. 

It  is  here  then  that  the  altar  of  burnt-offerings  is 
found,  the  brazen  altar :  God  manifested  in  righteous 
judgment  of  sin  (meeting  however  the  sinner  in  love 
by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ) ;  not  in  His  being  (spiritual 
and  sovereign  object  of  the  adoration  of  saints),  but  in 
His  relation  with  sinners  according  to  His  righteous- 
VOL.  I.  XXVII.  H 


98  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

ness,  measured*  by  what  their  sins  were  in  His  sight ; 
but  where  withal  sinners  present  themselves  to  Him 
by  that  work  in  which,  by  the  mighty  operation  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  Christ  has  offered  Himself  without  spot 
unto  Him,  has  satisfied  all  the  demands  of  His  right- 
eousness, and  more,  has  glorified  Him  in  all  that  He  is, 
and  has  become  that  sweet-smelling  savourf  (of  sacri- 

*  Here  we  must  remark  that  while  final  judgment  refers  to, 
and  is  measm-ed  by,  our  responsibility,  forgiveness  cannot  be 
separated  from  our  entrance  into  the  presence  of  God  (though  in 
experience  there  may  be  progress  as  to  this),  because  it  is  by  a 
work  of  Christ  in  which  the  veil  was  rent  and  God  fully  revealed. 
This  the  great  day  of  atonement  shewed,  for  there  the  blood  was 
brought  in  to  God,  and  yet  it  was  for  sins,  but  sins  as  defiling 
God's  presence,  as  well  as  their  being  all  carried  away.  But  at 
the  brazen  altar  there  was  both  the  love  that  gave  and  the  value 
of  the  sacrifice,  so  that  divine  favour  and  complacency  were 
brought  in,  "therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me."  Here  sin- 
offerings  and  burnt-offerings  were  offered,  but  they  both  referred 
to  acceptance,  negatively  and  positively,  not  simply  to  the  holiness 
of  God  as  the  blood  on  the  day  of  atonement.  We  have  re- 
demption by  His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  but  according  to 
the  riches  of  His  gi-ace. 

t  It  is  interesting  to  know  that  the  word  burn  is  not  at  all 
the  same  in  Hebrew  for  the  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  for  the  burnt- 
offering  :  in  the  case  of  the  latter,  it  is  the  same  as  for  the  burn- 
ing of  incense. 

I  add  here  a  word  upon  the  sacrifices.  In  the  sacrifice  for 
sin  burned  outside  the  camp,  God  came  out  of  His  place  to 
punish,  to  take  vengeance  for  sin.  Christ  has  put  Himself  in 
our  place,  has  borne  our  sins,  and  died  to  put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  Himself.  In  the  sacrifice  for  sin  His  blood  was 
shed,  our  sins  washed  away.  But  this  blood,  infinitely  precious, 
has  been  carried  by  the  high  priest  inside  the  holiest,  and  put 
upon  the  mercy-seat ;  and  thus  the  sure  foundation  of  all  our 
relationship  with  God  has  been  laid ;  since,  as  to  him  that 
comes,  sin  exists  no  longer  in  the  sight  of  God.  But  it  is  not 
only  that  God  has  fully  reached  sin  in  judgment  in  the  death  of 
Christ,  but  the  work  which  Christ  has  accomplished  has  been 
perfectly  agreeable  to  God.  "  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth." 
God  was  glorified  in  Him ;  and  God  owed  it,  in  justice  to 
Christ,  to  glorify  Him  with  His  own  self.    The  very  being  vif 


EXODUS.  99 

fice)  in  which,  in  coming  out  of  the  world,  we  draw 
near  to  God,  and  to  God  in  relation  with  those,  sinners 
in  themselves  and  owning  it,  who  draw  near  to  Him, 
but  find  their  sins  gone  through  the  cross  on  their 
way,  and,  besides  that,  come  in  this  savour  of  His  sac- 
rifice who  made  Himself  a  whole  burnt-offering.  It 
was  not  the  sacrifice  for  sin  burnt  outside  the  camp : 
there  no  one  approached.  Christ  was  made  sin  by  God, 
and  all  passed  between  God  and  Him ;  but  here  we 
draw  near  unto  God. 

All  the  manifestations  of    God  thus  arranged,  we 

God,  in  righteousness  and  in  love,  had  been  fully  glorified  (pub- 
licly before  the  universe)  though  the  eye  of  faith  alone  is  open 
to  see  it,  and  hence  it  was  the  part  of  this  very  righteousness  to 
place  Christ  in  a  position  that  corresponded  to  the  work.  The 
love  of  the  Father  towards  Him  surely  did  not  turn  from  this. 

Thus  it  was  not  only  that  the  holiness  which  takes  vengeance 
on  sin,  had  already  dealt  with  that  sin  in  the  death  of  Jesus, 
and  had  nothing  more  to  do  as  to  the  putting  of  it  away,  but 
(for  him  who  knows  that  in  his  Adam-nature  there  is  no  re- 
source, and  still  less  in  the  law)  there  is,  by  grace,  through  the 
faith  of  Jesus,  the  righteousness  of  God  Himself,  a  justifying 
righteousness — not  merely  the  putting  away  of  sins,  but  the 
positive  value  of  all  that  Christ  has  done  as  glorifying  God  in 
this.  We  are  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  God  must  raise  Christ 
in  consideration  of  that  which  He  had  done,  and  place  Hhn  at 
His  right  hand ;  and  we  are  cleared  from  our  sins  according  to 
the  perfectness  of  God,  between  whom  and  Christ  alone  this 
work  was  accomplished,  and.  He  being  entered  in  as  man  in 
virtue  of  that  work,  since  He  has  carried  His  blood  there,  we 
also — objects  of  that  work — are  in  virtue  of  it  accepted  as  He  is. 
Thus  then  the  sinner,  believing  in  God,  draws  near  to  the  brazen 
altar  where  the  sacrifice  is  offered  (the  way  being  open  to  him  by 
the  blood),  and  (now  we  can  add,  the  veil  being  rent)  draws 
near  unto  God  manifested  in  holiness,  but  according  to  the 
Bweet-smeUing  savour  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  an  expression 
inapphcable  to  the  sacrifice  for  sin  burnt  outside  the  camp  (there 
He  was  made  sin),  according  to  all  the  sweet- smelling  savour  of 
the  devotedness  and  obedience  of  Christ  upon  the  cross,  that  is 
to  say,  unto  death. 

Notice  that,  besides  this,  the  priests  draw  near  as  priests,  and 
€ven  into  the  holy  place.     But  of  this  more  hereafter. 
XXVII. 


100  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

come  now  to  the  services  that  were  rendered  to  Him 
in  the  courts,  and  in  the  places  where  He  manifested 
Himself.  (Chap,  xxvii.  20.)  The  priests  were  to  take 
care  that  the  light  of  the  candlestick  should  be  always 
shining  outside  the  veil,  which  hid  the  testimony  inside, 
and  during  the  night ;  it  was  the  light  of  the  grace 
and  of  the  power  of  God  hy  the  Spirit  that  manifested 
God  spiritually.  It  was  not  Himself  upon  the  throne, 
where  His  sovereign  being  was  keeping  the  treasure  of 
His  righteousness :  that  treasure  Christ  alone,  in  His 
Person  and  in  His  nature,  could  be  Himself;  nor  was 
it  righteousness  in  His  relationship  with  sinful  man 
outside  the  holy  place,  of  which  man's  duty  was  the 
measure,  and  for  which  the  law  of  God  gave  the  rule; 
but  it  was  a  light,  through  which  He  manifested  Him- 
self in  the  power  of  His  grace,  but  which  applied 
itself  to  His  relationship  with  man  viewed  as  holy  or 
set  apart  for  service  to  Him,  all  the  while  that  it  was 
the  manifestation  of  God.  Essentially  it  was  the  Holy 
Ghost.  This  we  see  in  the  Apocalypse ;  but  it  might 
rest  upon  Christ  as  man,  and  that  without  measure; 
or  it  might  act  as  from  Him,  and  by  His  grace  in 
others,  either  as  the  Spirit  of  prophecy,  exclusively  so 
before  He  came,  or  in  some  other  way  more  abundant 
and  complete,  as  was  the  case  after  His  resurrection 
and  glorifying,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself  came 
down.  But  whatever  these  manifestations  lq  men  may 
have  been  in  action,  the  thing  itself  was  there  before 
God,  to  manifest  Him  in  the  energy  of  the  Spirit 
Himself ;  but  the  priesthood  was  essential  here  for  us,* 

*  For  the  full  manifestation  of  it,  in  His  personal  and  free 
manifestation  down  here,  the  glorifying  of  man  (Christ)  accord- 
ing to  divine  righteousness  was  needed,  but  this  would  take  us 
out  of  our  present  subject.  I  must  again  recall  that  we  have 
only  the  shadow,  not  the  very  image  of  the  things.  What  is 
in  the  text  refers  to  man  under  God's  government  down  here  as 
vessel  of  the  Spirit.  The  priesthood  supposes  man  in  weakness 
here,  and  Christ,  another  Person  for  us  on  high. 


EXODUS.  101 

in  order  to  maintain  this  relation  between  the  energy 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  service  of  men  in  whom 
He  manifested  Himself,  in  order  that  the  light  might 
shine.  (Chap,  xxvii.  20,  21.)  We  find,  therefore,  im- 
mediately afterwards,  the  ordinance  for  the  establish-^ 
ment  of  the  priesthood. 

The  garments  were  composed  of  everything  that  is 
connected  with  the  Person  of  Christ  in  this  character 
of  priesthood;  the  breastplate,  the  ephod,  the  robe, 
the  broidered  coat,  the  curious  girdle,  and  the  mitre. 
The  ephod  was,  jpar  excellence,  the  priestly  garment ; 
made  of  the  same  things  as  the  veil,  only  that  there 
was  no  gold  in  the  latter,  and  there  were  cherubims 
(but  all  enclosed  inside  the  veil  was  gold,  for  God's 
government  and  judgment  were  in  Christ  as  Son  of 
man) :  in  the  ephod,  gold  but  no  cherubim,*  because  the 
priest  must  have  divine  righteousness,  but  was  not 
in  the  place  of  rule  and  government.  (Compare 
Num.  iv.)  It  signified  also  the  essential  purity 
and  the  graces  of  Christ.  The  girdle  was  the 
sign  of  service.  The  girdle  was  of  the  same 
materials  as  the  ephod  to  which  it  belonged.  Ar- 
rayed in  these  robes  of  glory  and  beauty,  the  high 
priest  bore  the  names  of  the  people  of  God  in  the  ful- 
ness of  their  order  before  God;  upon  his  shoulders, 
the  weight  of  their  government,  and  upon  the  breast- 
plate on  his  heart — breastplate  which  was  inseparable 
from  the  ephod,  that  is,  from  his  priesthood  and  ap- 
pearing before  God.  He  also  bare,  according  to  the 
perfections  of  God's  presence,  their  judgment  before 
Him.  He  maintained  them  in  judgment  before  God 
according  to  these  things.  They  therefore  looked  for 
answers  through  the  Urim  and  Thummim  that  were  in 
the  breastplate ;  for  the  wisdom  of  our  conduct  is  to 
be  according  to  this  position  before  God.     Upon  the 

*  See  note,  page  95. 
XXVIII. 


102  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

hem  of  the  robe  of  the  ephod*  there  was  the  desirable 
fruit,  and  the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
depended  on  the  priesthood.  I  think  that  Christ,  in 
entering  heaven,  made  Himself  heard  through  the 
0  Holy  Ghost  in  His  people — hem  of  His  garment  (com- 
pare Psalm  cxxxiii.) ;  and  He  will  make  Himself  heard 
through  His  gifts  when  He  comes  out  also.  Mean- 
while He  bears  within  also  the  iniquity  of  the  holy 
things  in  holiness  before  the  eternal  God.  (This  holi- 
ness is  upon  His  very  forehead.)  Not  only  His  people 
but  their  imperfect  services  are  presented  according  to 
the  divine  holiness  in  Him. 

The  sons  of  Aaron  were  also  clothed.  Their  natural 
nakedness  was  not  to  appear,  but  the  glory  and  the 
honour  with  which  God  clothed  them.  The  girdle  of 
service  also  distinguished  them. 

The  dress  of  the  high  priest  demands  a  little  further 
explanation.  That  which  characterised  him  in  service 
was  the  ephod,  to  which  was  inseparably  attached  the 
breastplate  in  which  the  Urim  and  Thummim  were 
placed.  With  the  ephod,  therefore,  the  description 
begins.  It  was  that  in  which,  as  thus  clothed,  he  was 
to  appear  before  God.  It  was  made  as  the  veil,  with 
the  addition  of  gold,  for  the  veil  was  Christ's  flesh,  the 
actings  of  which  could  not  be  separated  from  what 
was  divine ;  but  in  the  exercise  of  priesthood  He  ap- 
peared before  God  within  the  veil,  that  is,  figuratively, 
in  heaven  itself;  and  there  what  met,  and  had  the 
nature  and  integral  essence  of  (along  with  the  hea- 
venly grace  and  purity)  divine  righteousness  had  its 
place  and  its  part  as  found  in  Him ;  as  it  is  written, 
looking  at  Him  in  a  somewhat  different  aspect  but 
alike  as  to  this,f  "an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus 

*  This  was  all  of  blue  under  the  ephod ;  I  suppose  what  was 
essentially  heavenly,  not  the  display  of  purity  and  graces  in 
man. 
-   t  The  priesthood  in  Hebrews  is  not  for  sins,  save  once  in 


EXODUS.  108 

Christ  the  righteous."  The  groundwork  of  the  priest- 
hood, then,  was  absolute  personal  purity  in  man,  in  its 
highest  sense  as  a  nature  flowing  intelligently  from 
God,  and  in  the  priesthood  glorified,*  every  form  of 
grace  interwoven  with  it,  and  divine  righteousness.  It 
was  service,  and  the  priest  was  girded  for  it,  but  service 
before  God.  The  loins  were  girt,  but  the  garments 
otherwise  down  to  the  feet.  This  was  especially  the 
case  with  the  robe  all  of  blue. 

But  to  pursue  the  ephod  itself.  The  high  priest 
represented  all  the  people  before  God,  and  presented 
them  to  Him,  and  this  in  a  double  way.  First,  he 
bore  them  on  his  shoulders — carried  the  whole  weight 
and  burden  of  them  on  himself.  Their  names  were 
all  graven  upon  the  two  onyx  stones  which  united  the 
parts  of  the  ephod ;  there  was  no  wearing  the  ephod — 
that  is,  exercising  the  priesthood — without  carrying 
the  names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  on  his  shoulders.  So 
Christ  carries  ever  His  people. 

Next,  the  breastplate  was  attached  inseparably  to 
the  ephod,  never  to  be  detached.  There  also  he  carried 
the  names  of  his  people  before  the  Lord,  and  could 
not,  as  thus  dressed  in  the  high  priestly  robes,  be  there 
without  them.  As  it  is  expressed,  he  bore  them  on 
his  heart  before  Jehovah  continually.     They  shall  be 

chapter  ii.  to  make  propitiation,  because  they  are  all  put  away, 
and  we  have  no  more  conscience  of  them ;  it  is  for  grace  to  help 
that  we  may  not  sin. 

*  Compare  1  John  ii.  29,  iii.  1-3,  where  remark  how  the  Spirit 
passes  from  Godhead  to  manhood  and  manhood  to  Godhead  in 
one  person,  according  to  the  relationship  spoken  of.  This  is 
very  beautiful,  and  makes  us  know  what  the  new  nature  in  us 
is,  which  flows  fi'om  and  is  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  capable  of 
appreciating  Him.  He  that  sanctifieth  and  they  who  are  sancti- 
fied are  all  of  one.  So  practically  in  detail :  we  all  beholding 
with  unveiled  face  the  glory  of  the  Lord  are  changed  into  the 
same  image  (2  Cor.  iii.),  and  actually  we  shall  be  like  Him, 
for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is,  and  he  that  hath  this  hope  in 
Him  pm-ifieth  himself  as  He  is  pure. 
XXVIII. 


104  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

upon  Aaron's  heart  when  he  goeth  in  before  Jehovah. 
Thus  are  we  borne  ever  before  the  Lord  by  Christ. 
He  presents  us,  as  that  which  He  has  on  His  heart,  to 
God.  He  cannot  be  before  Him  without  doing  so ;  and 
whatever  claim  the  desire  and  wish  of  Christ's  heart 
has  to  draw  out  the  favour  of  God  it  operates  in 
drawing  out  that  favour  on  us.  The  light  and  favour 
of  the  sanctuary — God  as  dwelling  there — cannot 
shine  out  on  Him  without  shining  on  us,  and  that  as 
an  object  presented  by  Him  for  it. 

This  was  not,  however,  all.  The  Urim  and  Thum- 
mim  were  there — light  and  perfection.  The  high  priest 
bore  the  judgment  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  their 
present  ways  and  as  to  their  present  relationship* 
upon  his  heart  before  Jehovah,  and  this  according  to 
the  light  and  perfection  of  God.  This  we  need  to 
get  blessing.  Stood  we  before  God,  such  as  we  are, 
we  must  draw  down  judgment,  or  lose  the  effect  of 
this  light  and  perfection  of  God,  remaining  without. 
But,  Christ  bearing  our  judgment  according  to  these, 
our  presentation  to  God  is  according  to  the  perfection 
of  God  Himself — our  judgment  borne  ;  but  then  our 
position,  guidance,  light,  and  spiritual  intelligence  are 
according  to  this  same  divine  light  and  perfection. 
For  the  high  priest  inquired  and  had  answers  from 
God  according  to  the  Urim  and  Thummim.  This  is  a 
blessed  privilege.! 

Introduced  into  the  presence  of  God  according  to 

*  The  great  day  of  atonement  met  the  guilt. 

t  We  must  remember  that  all  this  is  not  children  with  a 
Father,  but  man  drawing  near  to  God,  only  with  Christ  there  for 
us.  We  are  seen  on  earth  (not  in  heavenly  places),  and  He 
appearing  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us,  securing  our  place  ac- 
cording to  God  (only  for  us  the  veil  is  rent,  a  very  great  differ- 
ence) ;  yet  we  are  here  on  earth  with  a  heavenly  calling.  Com- 
pare Hebrews.  There  note,  the  priesthood,  as  now  exercised  on 
high,  is  not  for  committed  sins,  but  for  grace  to  help  in  time  of 
need  that  we  may  not  sin.     The  sins  are  borne  and  put  away 


EXODUS.  105 

divine  righteousness  in  the  perfection  of  Christ,  our 
spiritual  light,  and  privileges,  and  walk,  are  according 
to  this  perfection.  The  presentation  in  divine  right- 
eousness gives  us  light,  accordiug  to  the  perfection  of 
Him  into  whose  presence  we  are  brought.  Hence  we 
are  said  (1  John  i.)  to  walk  in  the  light  as  He,  God,  is 
in  the  light — a  solemn  thought  for  the  conscience, 
however  joyful  a  one  for  the  heart,  telling  us  what  our 
conversation  ought  to  be  in  holiness.*  Christ  bearing 
our  judgment  takes  away  all  imputative  character 
from  sin,  and  turns  the  light  which  would  have  con- 
demned it  and  us,  into  a  purifying  enlightening  cha- 
racter, according  to  that  very  perfection  which  looks  on 
us.  This  breastplate  was  fastened  to  the  onyx  stones 
of  the  shoulder  above,  and  to  the  ephod  above  the 
girdle  below.  It  was  the  perpetual  position  of  the 
people,  inseparable  from  the  exercise  of  the  high 
priesthood  as  thus  going  before  the  Lord.  What  was 
divine  and  heavenly  secured  it — the  chains  of  gold 
above,  and  the  rings  of  gold  with  lace  of  blue  to  the 
ephod  above  the  girdle  beneath.  Exercised  in  humanity, 
the  priesthood,  and  the  connection  of  the  people  with 
it,  rests  on  an  immutable,  a  divine,  and  heavenly  basis. 
Such  was  the  priestly  presentation  of  the  high  priest. 
Beneath  this  official  robe  he  had  a  personal  one  all  of 
blue. 

The  character  of  Christ  too,  as  such,  is  perfectly  and 
entirely  heavenly.  The  sanctuary  was  the  place  of 
its  exercise.  So  the  heavenly  Priest  must  Himself  be 
a  heavenly  man ;  and  it  is  to  this  character  of  Christ, 

once  and  for  ever  as  the  basis  of  priesthood.  See  chapters  ix.,  x. 
and  viii.  1,  and  i.  3.  Advocacy  with  the  Father  applies  when 
we  have  to  restore  communion.  Compare  John  xiii.  and 
Numbers  xix. 

*  Dispensationally  all  was  dark ;  God  not  revealed,  the  veil 
not  rent ;  but  I  speak  in  the  text  of  what  was  figured  in  the 
high  priest's  dress. 

XXVIII. 


106  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

as  here  in  the  high  priest,  that  the  fruits  and  testimony 
of  the  Spirit  are  attached — the  bells  and  the  pome- 
granates. It  is  from  Christ  in  His  heavenly  character 
that  they  flow ;  they  are  attached  to  the  hem  of  His 
garment  here  below.  His  sound  was  heard  when  He 
went  in  and  when  He  came  out ;  and  so  it  has  been 
and  will  be.  When  Christ  went  in,  the  gifts  of  the 
Spirit  were  manifested  in  the  sound  of  the  testimony; 
and  they  will  be  when  He  comes  out  again.  The 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  we  know,  were  also  in  the  saints.* 

But  not  only  were  there  fruits  and  gifts.  Worship 
and  service — the  presenting  of  offerings  to  God — was 
part  of  the  path  of  the  people  of  God.  Alas !  they 
also  were  defiled.  It  formed  thus  also  part  of  the 
priest's  office  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  their  holy  things. 

Thus  the  worship  of  God's  people  was  acceptable, 
in  spite  of  their  infirmity,  and  holiness  was  ever  before 
Jehovah  in  the  offerings  of  His  house — borne  on  the 
forehead  of  the  high  priest,  as  His  people  were  on  the 
one  hand  presented  to  Him,  and  on  the  other  directed 
by  Him,  according  to  His  own  perfections  through  the 
high  priest,  t 

The  coat  of  fine  linen  was  that  which  was  more 
proper  to  himself  and  personal,  what  was  within — per- 
sonal purity,  but  embroidered,  adorned  with  every 
grace.     Such  was,  and  indeed  is,  Christ. 

The  application  of  this  to  Christ  is  evident.  Only 
we  must  remember  the  remark  of  the  apostle,  that  is, 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  these  were  the  shadow  of 

*  The  colours  were  blue,  purple,  and  scarlet :  heavenly,  royal, 
and  earthly  glory.  These,  while  belonging  to  Christ  personally, 
were  hidden  when  He  went  in,  will  be  displayed  when  He  comes 
out.  We  ought  to  display  them  characteristically,  but  as  con- 
nected with  a  rejected  Christ  down  here,  bringing  in  the  cross 
as  the  way  to  the  crown. 

t  Our  relationship  with  God  is  more  immediate,  the  veil  being 
rent.  Still  our  high  priest  is  there  for  us,  only  set  down  on  the 
right  hand  of  God.    The  name  of  Father  does  not  come  in  here. 


EXODUS.  1U7 

good  things  to  come,  not  the  very  image  of  the  things. 
Our  High  Priest,  though  He  ever  liveth  to  make  inter- 
cession for  us,  is  set  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  in  the  heavens.  In  spirit  all  this  is  ours ;  He 
presents  us,  receives  grace  and  direction  for  us  through 
the  Spirit,  and  bears  the  iniquity  of  our  holy  things. 
All  our  service  is  accepted,  as  our  perAns,  in  Him.  In 
the  literal  fact,  the  high  priest  never  used  the  garments 
of  glory  and  Ijeauty  to  go  within  the  veil.  He  was  to 
use  them  for  going  into  the  sanctuary  ;*  but  this  was 
forbidden  after  Nadab  and  Abihu's  death,  save  on  the 
great  day  of  atonement,  and  then  he  went  in  in  other 
garments,  namely,  the  linen  ones.  So  death  and 
entrance  thereon  were  needed  for  us  in  Christ's  fulfil- 
ment of  the  type.  And,  as  regards  the  Jews,  He  is 
gone  in  in  this  last  way,  all  this  time  being  His  absence 
in  the  sanctuary;  and  they  must  wait,  till  He  come 
forth,  for  the  knowledge  of  the  acceptance  of  the  pre- 
sentation of  His  work:  we  know  it  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
sent  down  from  heaven ;  He  came  out  when  the  Lord 
went  in,  so  that  we  anticipate  in  spirit  the  glory  He  is 
in.  This  constitutes  essentially  the  Christian's  place. 
In  His  glorious  high  priest's  garments,  it  would  have 
been  the  intercourse  of  an  accepted  people  through 
the  high  priest.  Hence  we  have  it  in  spirit,  though 
this  be  not  the  whole  truth  as  regards  our  position.-|- 

*  Their  use  is  referred  to  going  into  the  holy  place  before  Je- 
hovah when  expressly  spoken  of,  except  the  golden  plate  on  the 
mitre  or  tiu'ban  (chap,  xxviii.  29,  30,  35) ;  and  for  the  golden 
plate,  see  verse  38.  This  characteristic  use  was  forbidden  :  see 
Leviticus  xvi. 

t  We  must  always  remember  that  we  have  only  the  shadow 
of  good  things  to  come.  The  great  principles  of  the  heavenly 
scenes  are  depicted,  but  not  the  change  by  the  rending  of  the 
veil  through  which  we  enter  om-selves  boldly  into  the  holiest, 
Christ  being  in  glory  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  that  through 
an  eternal  redemption.  Also,  as  noticed  already,  the  Son  not 
being  come,  the  Father's  name  and  relationship  does  not  come 
in. 

XXVIII. 


108  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

For  their  consecration  they  were  all  washed.  Aaron 
and  his  sons  together  always  represent  the  church,  not 
as  gathered  in  a  body  (a  thing  hidden  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment), but  in  varied  positions  sustained  individually 
before  God.  There  is  only  one  sanctification  for  all — 
divine  life.  Christ  is  the  spring  and  the  expression  of  it. 
We  are  made  p^takers  of  it,  but  it  is  one.*  Both  He 
that  sanctifieth  and  they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of 
one.  But  Aaron  is  first  anointed  separately  without 
sacrifice,  without  blood.  But  his  sons  are  then  brought 
and  with  him  are  sprinkled  with  blood  upon  the  ear, 
the  thumb  of  the  right  hand,  the  great  toe  of  the 
right  foot;t  obedience,  action,  and  walk,  being  measured 

*  Aaron  is  always  united  to  his  sons  in  such  types,  for  Christ 
cannot  be  separated  from  His  own  or  they  would  become  nought. 
But  he  had  been  anointed  personally  without  blood,  a  thing  that 
has  been  verified  in  Christ's  history.  He  was  anointed  while  on 
earth ;  His  disciples  after  His  death.  He  received  the  Spirit  for 
the  church  in  a  new  way  (Acts  ii.  33),  when  He  was  risen  from 
among  the  dead  in  the  power  of  the  blood  of  the  eternal  coven- 
ant :  for  it  is  according  to  the  efficacy  of  that  blood  in  behalf  of 
His  people,  that  He  has  been  raised  as  their  Head.  In  Christ's 
anointing  on  earth  the  Holy  Ghost  was  witness  to  Christ's  own 
personal  righteousness  and  sonship ;  in  ours  He  is  the  witness 
of  our  being  clean  through  His  blood,  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  Him,  and  sons  by  adoption. 

f  Aaron  is  first  simply  anointed  with  the  anointing  oil  poured 
upon  his  head.  (Chap.  xxix.  7.)  Then  the  sons  are  brought,  and 
the  ram  of  consecration  brought,  and  some  of  its  blood  put 
upon  Aaron's  ear,  and  then  on  the  tip  of  the  ear  of  his  sons, 
their  right  thumb  and  the  great  toe  of  the  right  foot.  It  might 
be  supposed  that  it  was  only  on  Aaron's  ear,  but  comparing  with 
Leviticus  viii.  23  it  would  seem  that  "  their,"  in  verse  20  here, 
includes  Aaron.  The  great  principle  is  our  association  with  the 
blessed  Lord ;  but  He  was  obedient  unto  death,  and  no  act  or 
walk  needed  to  be  purified.  The  great  principle  for  us  is,  that 
nothing  should  pass  into  the  thought,  no  act  be  done,  nothing 
occur  in  our  walk  which  is  not  according  to  the  perfection  of 
consecration  in  Christ's  sacrifice  :  we  have  its  value  upon  us  as 
to  imputation,  but  here  it  is  consecration,  for  both  are  in  His 
blood. 


EXODUS.  109 

and  guarded,  both  through  the  price,  and  according  to 
the  perfection  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  And  then  they 
were  sprinkled  with  blood  and  with  the  oil  of  con- 
secration, that  is  to  say,  set  apart  by  the  blood  and  by 
the  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  washing  is  the 
Spirit's  work  in  the  sanctifying  power  of  the  word; 
the  anointing,  His  personal  presence  and  energy  in 
intelligence  and  power — God  working  in  us. 

And  it  is  important  to  remark  here  that  the  seal  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  follows  on  the  sprinkling  with  the 
blood,  not  on  the  washing  with  the  water.  That  was 
needed.  We  must  be  born  again,  but  it  is  not  that 
cleansing  which,  by  itself,  puts  us  in  a  state  God  can 
seal :  the  blood  of  Christ  does.  We  are  thereby  per- 
fectly cleansed  as  white  as  snow,  and  the  Spirit  comes 
as  the  witness  of  God's  estimate  of  the  value  of  that 
blood-shedding.  Hence,  too,  all  were  sprinkled  with 
Aaron.  The  blood  of  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
have  set  us  in  association  with  Christ,  where  He  is  ac- 
cording to  the  acceptableness  of  that  perfect  sacrifice 
(it  was  the  ram  of  consecration),  and  the  presence, 
liberty,  and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

All  the  sacrifices  were  ofiered.  That  for  sin,  the 
bumt-ofi'ering  of  a  sweet-smelling  savour,  the  ram  of 
consecration  (which  had  the  character  of  a  peace-offer- 
ing), accompanied  by  the  meat-off'ering.  These  sacrifices 
have  been  explained  elsewhere,  and  I  only  recall  their 
import :  Christ  made  sin  for  us,  bearing  our  sins  in 
His  own  body  on  the  tree,  first  need  of  the  soul,  the 
sin-offering;  Christ  obedient  unto  death,  devoting 
Himself  to  the  glory  of  His  Father — but  according  to 
God's  nature,  and  the  existence  of  sin,  and  that  in  us — 
and  to  us  as  belonging  to  the  Father,  the  burnt-offer- 
ing; the  communion  of  God,  of  the  Saviour,  of  the 
worshipper,  and  of  the  whole  church,  the  peace-offer- 
ing; and  Christ  devoted  in  holiness  of  life  upon  the 
earth,  but  proved  even  to  death,  the  meat-offering. 
XXIX 


110  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that,  when  Aaron  and  his  sons 
were  sprinkled  and  anointed,  the  sons  were  anointed 
with  him,  and  their  garments  also,  and  not  he  with 
them.  Everything  is  connected  with  the  Head.  Aaron 
and  his  sons  ate  the  things  with  which  the  atonement 
had  been  made.  Such  is  our  portion  in  Christ,  the  food 
of  God  whereby  we  dwell  in  Christ  and  Christ  in  us. 

Then,  connected  with  this  priesthood,  comes  the  per- 
petual sweet-smelling  savour  of  the  burnt-offering, 
in  which  the  people  present  themselves  before  God 
— sweet-smelling  savour  which  is  found  there,  as 
it  were  in  the  midst  of  the  people,  according  to  the 
efficacy  of  which  they  stand  in  His  presence  round 
about.  There  God  met  the  people.  With  the  mediator 
He  met  above  the  ark  without  veil,  and  gave  him 
commandment  for  the  people  according  to  His  own 
perfection.  Here  He  puts  Himself  on  a  level  with  the 
people,  though  speaking  with  the  mediator.  The 
dwelling  of  God  in  the  midst  of  the  people  is  sancti- 
fied by  His  glory.  The  tabernacle,  the  altar,  the  priests, 
are  sanctified,  and  He  dwells  in  the  midst  of  the  people 
surrounding  Him.  For  this  purpose  had  He  brought 
them  out  of  Egypt  (ver.  46)  :  a  blessed  picture  of  how, 
in  a  far  higher  and  better  way,  God  dwells  in  the  midst 
of  us.*  He  never  dwelt  with  man,  we  may  moreover 
remark,  till  redemption,  was  accomplished :  not  with 
Adam  innocent,  nor  with  Abraham,  or  others  ;  but,  so 
soon  as  redemption  is  accomplished,  He  says,  "  They 
shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah  their  God,  who  brought 
them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  that  I  may 
dwell  among  them."  (Chap.  xxix.  46.) 

Having  thus  established  the  priesthood,  and  the  re- 

*  He  dwells  in  us  both  individually  and  collectively  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  Christ  being  gone  up  on  high  as  man ;  so  that  the 
body  of  the  sealed  saint  is  a  temple,  and  we  are  builded  together 
for  a  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit.  The  last  runs  out 
now  to  all  Christendom, 


EXODUS.  in 

lationship  of  the  people  with  God  who  dwelt  in  the 
midst  of  them,  the  intercession  of  Christ  in  grace  (all 
that  was  in  Him  ascending  as  a  sweet  savour  to  Jeho- 
vah), is  presented  (chap.  xxx.  1-10) ;  and  His  service 
in  making  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the  Spirit 
shine  forth.  (Ver.  7.)  The  people  were  identified  with 
this  service  through  redemption.  (Vers.  11-16.)  They 
could  neither  be  there,  nor  serve  ;*  but  they  were  all 
represented  as  redeemed.  We  then  have  the  laver  be- 
tween the  brazen  altar  and  the  tabernacle — purifica- 
tionf  for  communion  with  God,  and  for  service  to  Him 


*  The  places  were  seen  ;  but  not  our  entrance  into  them,  with 
all  the  rent  veil  brings  with  it. 

t  It  was  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word,  the  purification 
of  the  worshipper  (first,  of  the  heart)  to  constitute  him  one  by 
being  born  again  of  the  word.  But  this  was  not  the  laver.  The 
priests  had  their  bodies  washed  first  to  be  such,  but  it  is  not  said 
this  was  in  the  laver.  There  they  washed  their  hands  and  their 
feet,  when  they  had  come  into  priestly  service  by  the  sacrifices, 
being  already  washed  as  to  their  bodies.  That  is,  they  were  priests 
already  when  they  washed  their  hands  and  feet  in  the  laver ;  their 
bodies  had  been  washed,  and  the  consecrating  sacrifices  offered ; 
and  then  in  respect  of  practice,  according  to  the  purity  of  divine 
life  by  the  Spirit,  there  was  the  washing  through  the  word,  and 
especially  if  they  had  failed.  (Compare  John  xiii.)  For  commu- 
nion requires  not  only  acceptance  but  pimfication.  Without  this 
the  presence  of  God  acts  on  the  conscience,  not  in  giving 
communion,  but  in  shewing  the  defilement.  Christ,  even  as  a 
man,  was  pure  by  nature,  and  He  kept  Himself  by  the  words 
of  God's  lips.  With  us,  this  purity  is  received  from  Him; 
and  we  must  also  use  the  word  to  purify  ourselves.  The  idea 
and  measure  of  the  purity  are  the  same  for  Christ  and  for  us : 
*'  he  that  saith  he  abideth  in  him  ought  himself  also  so  to 
walk,  even  as  he  walked  " — "  to  purify  himself,  even  as  he  is 
pure."  For  the  ordinary  relationship  of  the  people,  looked  at 
as  worshippers,  it  was  the  red  heifer  (Num.  xix.) ;  its  ashes, 
which  typified  this  purification  on  failure,  were  put  mto  running 
water  ;  that  is,  the  Holy  Spirit  applied,  by  the  word,  to  tlie  heart 
and  conscience,  the  sufferings  of  Christ  for  sin  to  purify  man ; 
sufferings  which  could  have  all  their  moral  and  purifying  power, 
since  the  ashes  of  separation  shewed  forth  that  sin  had  been 

XXIX.,  xxx. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

therein :  the  hands  and  feet  (for  us  only  the  feet,  as 
our  walk  alone  is  concerned),  every  time  they  took 
part  in  it. 

Finally,  we  have  the  oil  and  the  incense,  the  fragrant 
oil,  which  were  for  priests  only :  the  nature  of  man, 
as  man,  or  his  natural  condition  in  the  flesh  could  not 
partake  of  it.  The  incense  typifies  the  precious  per- 
fume of  the  graces  of  Christ,  the  savour  of  divine 
graces  manifested,  and  a  sweet  odour  in  the  world  in 
man.  He  alone  answers  to  it,  though  we  may  seek  of 
and  from  Him  to  walk  in  them. 

The  institution  and  obligation  of  the  sabbath  was 
associated  with  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  as 
a  sign,  as  it  had  been  with  every  form  of  relationship 
between  God  and  His  people :  for  to  be  made  partakers 
of  God's  rest  is  what  distinguishes  His  people. 

In  fine,  God  gave  Moses  the  two  tables  of  the  law. 

Whilst  God  was  thus  preparing  the  precious  things 
connected  with  His  relationship  with  His  people,*  the 

consumed  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  Himself  for  sin,  as  to  impu- 
tation, by  the  fire  of  the  judgment  of  God.  The  blood  of  the 
heifer  had  been  sprinkled  seven  times  before  the  door  of  the 
tabernacle — the  place  where  we  have  just  seen  God  met  the 
people;  but  to  worship  and  serve  there  must  be  the  actual 
purification  according  to  the  standard  of  Christ :  at  least  as  far 
as  realised,  so  that  the  conscience  be  not  bad.  This  being  in 
His  presence,  and  the  judgment  of  failure,  is  the  means  of 
progress  also.  Note,  the  rules  as  to  the  red  heifer,  shew  that 
however  it  came  (for  there  were  cases  viewed  merely  humanly 
which  were  inevitable,  but,  they  shew  that  however  it  came), 
God  could  not  have  impurity  in  His  presence. 

*  The  tabernacle  had  a  double  character.  It  was  the  manifes- 
tation of  the  heavenly  things,  and  a  provision  for  a  sinful  people 
to  be  brought  near  again  to  God  there.  It  is  interesting  to  con- 
sider the  tabernacle  under  another  aspect ;  for,  as  a  pattern  of 
heavenly  things,  it  is  of  the  highest  interest.  First,  it  signifies 
the  heavens  themselves ;  for  Christ  is  not  entered  into  the 
tabernacle,  but  into  heaven  itself.  In  a  certain  sense,  even 
the  universe  is  the  house  of  God;  but,  moreover,  the  unity 
of  the  church  as  a  heavenly  building  is  presented  by  it :  we  are 


EXODUS.  113 

people,  only  thinking  of  what  they  saw  in  the  huiiian 
instrument  of  their  deliverance,  completely  abandon 
Jehovah :  a  sad  and  early,  but  sure  fruit  of  having 
undertaken  obedience  to  the  law  as  a  condition,  in 
order  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  promises.  Aaron  falls 
with  them. 

Such  being  the  state  of  the  people,  God  tells  Moses 
to  go  down ;  and  now  everything  begins  to  be  put  on 
another  footing.  God,  in  His  counsels  of  grace,  has 
not  only  seen  the  people  when  they  were  in  affliction, 
but  in  their  ways.  They  were  a  stifFnecked  people. 
He  tells  Moses  to  let  Him  alone,  and  that  He  would 
destroy  them,  and  make  of  Moses  a  great  nation. 
Moses  takes  the  place  of  mediator,  and,  true  to  his 
love  for  the  people  as  God's  people,  and  to  the  glory  of 
God  in  them,  with  a  self-denial  which  cared  only  for 
this  glory,  sacrificing  every  thought  of  self,  intercedes 
in  that  magnificent  pleading  which  appeals  to  what 
that  glory  necessitates,  and  to  the  unconditional  pro- 

His  house,  the  tabernacle  of  God  in  Spirit.  These  two  meanings 
are  closely  connected  in  the  beginning  of  Hebrews  iii. — Christ, 
God,  has  built  all  things,  and  we  are  His  house.  He  fills  all  in 
all,  but  He  dwells  in  the  church ;  it  is  a  concentric  circle,  although 
quite  different  in  its  nature.  Compare  the  prayer  in  Ephesians  i., 
which  also  connects  these  two  things  under  the  headship  of 
Christ,  and  still  more  distinctly  in  Ephesians  iii. ;  Ephesians  i. 
being  headship,  not  dwelling,  though  the  relationship  be  the 
same.  Compare  Ephesians  iv.  4-6,  though  there  it  is  in  the 
form  of  Spu'it,  Lord,  and  God,  that  is,  not  simply  dwelling  in. 
What  most  fully  answers  is  the  prayer  of  Ephesians  iii.,  where, 
note,  "height,"  &c.,  is  not  of  the  love,  but  of  the  whole  scene  of 
God's  glory,  we  being  at  the  centre  to  look  out  into  it  all, 
because  Christ,  who  is  the  centre,  dwells  in  us.  In  another 
point  of  view,  the  person  and  the  fulness  of  Christ  Himself  are 
there ;  for  God  was  in  Him,  and  thus  the  rending  of  the  veil  is 
appHed  by  the  apostle  to  the  flesh  of  Christ,  or,  if  you  please, 
the  veil  itself;  "  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh."  It 
is  evident  that  the  dwelling-place  of  God  is  the  central 
idea  of  these  things,  just  as  a  man  lives  in  his  house,  in  his 
property,  &c. 

VOL.  I.  XXXII.  I 


114  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

mises  made  to  the  fathers.*  And  Jehovah  repented. 
The  character  of  Moses  shines  in  all  its  beauty  here, 
and  is  remarkable  amongst  those  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  taken  pleasure  in  delineating,  according  to  the 
precious  grace  of  God,  who  loves  to  describe  the  ex- 
ploits of  His  people,  and  the  fruit  they  have  borne, 
though  He  Himself  is  the  source  of  them. 

But  it  was  all  over  with  the  covenant  of  the  law ; 
the  first  and  fundamental  link — that  of  having  no 
other  gods — was  broken  on  the  part  of  the  people. 
The  tables  of  the  covenant  never  even  came  into  the 
camp  on  the  simple  ground  of  law.  The  people  had 
made  a  complete  separation  between  themselves  and 
God.  Moses,  who  had  not  asked  God  what  was  to  be 
done  with  the  law,  comes  down.  His  exercised  ear, 
quick  to  discern  how  matters  stood  with  the  people, 
hears  their  light  and  profane  joy.  Soon  after  he  sees 
the  golden  calf,  which  had  even  preceded  the  tabernacle 
of  God  in  the  camp,  and  he  breaks  the  tables  at  the 
foot  of  the  mount ;  and,  zealous  on  high  for  the  people 
towards  God  because  of  His  glory,  he  is  below  on 
earth  zealous  for  God  towards  the  people  because  of 
that  same  glory.  For  faith  does  more  than  see  that 
God  is  glorious  (every  reasonable  person  would  own 
that) ;  it  connects  the  glory  of  God  and  His  people, 
and  hence  counts  on  God  to  bless  them  in  every  state 
of  things,  as  in  the  interest  of  His  glory,  and  insists 
on  holiness  in  them,  at  all  cost,  in  conformity  with 
that  glory,  that  it  may  not  be  blasphemed  in  those 
who  are  identified  with  it. 

Levi,  responding  to  Moses's  call,  says  to  his  brethren, 
the  children  of  his  mother,  "  I  have  not  known  you  ;" 
and  consecrates  himself  to  Jehovah.      Moses  now,  full 

*  This  is  a  "universal  principle,  where  the  full  restoration  of 
Israel  is  in  question.  Solomon,  Nehemiah,  and  Daniel  only  go 
hack  to  Moses;  an  important  remark  as  to  the  fulfilment  of 
(God's  ways  towards  Israel. 


EXODUS.  115 

of  zeal  thouo'li  not  according  to  knowledo-e,  hut  which 
was  permitted  of  God  for  our  instruction,  proposes  to 
the  people  his  going  up,  and  " peradventure"  he  shall 
make  an  atonement  for  this  sin.  And  he  asks  God  to 
blot  him  out  of  His  book  rather  than  that  the  people 
should  not  be  forgiven.  God  refuses  him  ;  and,  while 
sparing  them  through  his  mediation,  and  placing  them 
under  the  government  of  His  patience  and  long-suffer- 
ing, puts  each  one  of  them  under  responsibility  to 
Himself — that  is,  under  the  law,  declaring  that  the 
soul  that  sinned  He  would  blot  out  of  His  book. 

Thus  the  mediation  of  Moses  was  available  for  for- 
giveness, as  regards  government,  and  to  put  them 
under  a  government,  the  principles  of  which  we  shall 
see  by-and-by;  but  it  was  useless  as  regards  any  atone- 
ment which  would  protect  them  from  the  final  effect 
of  their  sin  (its  effect  as  regarded  their  eternal  relation- 
ship with  God),  and  withdraw  them  from  under  the 
judgment  of  the  law.*  God  spares  them  and  com- 
mands Moses  to  lead  the  people  to  the  place  of  which 
He  had  spoken,  and  His  angel  should  go  before  him. 

What  a  contrast  do  we  here  remark,  in  passing,  with 
the  work  of  our  precious  Saviour !  He  comes  down 
from  above — from  His  dwelling-place  in  the  glory  of 
the  Father — to  do  His  will,  and  did  it  perfectly ;  and 
(instead  of  destroying  the  tables,  the  signs  of  this 
covenant,  the  requirements  of  which  man  was  unable 
to  meet).  He  Himself  bears  the  penalty  of  its  infringe- 
ment, bearing  its  curse ;  and,  having  accomplished  the 
atonement  before  returning  above,  instead  of  going  up 
with  a  cheerless  "  peradventure  "  in  His  mouth,  which 
the  holiness  of   God  instantly  nullified.  He  ascends, 

*  Hence  it  is  that  this  revelation  of  God,  though  the  character 
proclaimed  be  so  abundant  in  goodness,  is  called  by  the  apostle 
(2  Cor.  iii.)  the  ministration  of  death  and  condemnation.  For 
if  the  people  were  still  under  the  law,  the  more  gracious  God 
was,  the  more  guilty  they  were. 

XXXII. 


Il6  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

with  the  sign  of  the  accomplishment  of  the  atonement, 
and  of  the  confirmation  of  the  new  covenant,  with 
His  precious  blood,  the  value  of  which  was  anything 
but  doubtful  to  that  God  before  whom  He  presented 
it.  Alas !  the  church  has  but  too  faithfully  reflected 
the  conduct  of  Israel  during  the  absence  of  the  true 
Moses,  and  attributed  to  providence  what  she  had 
fashioned  with  her  own  hands,  because  she  would  see 
something. 

We  have  now  to  examine  a  little  what  was  taking 
place  among  the  people,  and  on  Moses's  part,  the  faith- 
ful and  zealous  witness,  as  a  servant  of  God  in  His 
house;  for  we  shall  find  a  new  mediation  going  on 
peacefully,  if  one  may  so  speak,  and  holily,  weighing 
by  faith,  these  relationships  where  the  mercy  and  the 
justice  of  God  meet  in  their  application  to  His  govern- 
ment. It  is  not  the  indignation  of  holy  wrath,  which 
had  indeed  its  place  at  the  sight  of  the  evil,  while  it 
knew  not  what  to  do — for  how  put  the  law  of  God 
beside  the  golden  calf?  Jehovah  says  that  He  will 
send  an  angel,  and  that  He  will  not  go  in  the  midst  of 
the  people,  seeing  it  is  stiffnecked,  lest  He  should 
destroy  them  by  the  way.  But  I  will  state  succinctly, 
the  facts  connected  with  this  new  intercession,  which 
are  of  touching  interest. 

God  had  first  said  that  He  would  come  up  in  a 
moment  in  the  midst  of  them  to  destroy  them.  This 
present  excision  of  the  people  in  judgment,  Moses's  in- 
tercession had  averted,  and  Jehovah  calls  upon  Israel 
now  to  put  off  their  ornaments,  that  He  might  know 
what  to  do  unto  them.  Holy  grace  of  God !  who,  if 
He  sees  the  insolence  of  sin  before  His  eyes,  must 
strike,  but  wills  that  the  people  should  at  least  strip 
themselves  of  that,  and  that  He  may  have  time  (to 
s]3eak  the  language  of  men)  to  reflect  as  to  what  He 
should  do  with  the  sin  of  a  people  now  humbled  for 
having  forsaken  Him. 


EXODUS.  117 

However,  God  does  not  forsake  the  people.  Moses 
enters  holily,  and  by  the  just  judgment  of  conscience, 
into  the  mind  of  God  by  the  Spirit ;  and,  before  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation  was  pitched,  he  entirely 
leaves  the  camp,  and  makes  a  place  for  God  outside 
the  camp,  afar  off  from  the  camp,  which  had  put  a 
false  god  in  His  place,  and  changed  their  glory  into 
the  similitude  of  an  ox  which  eateth  grass.  He  calls 
it  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation — the  meeting- 
place  between  God  and  those  who  sought  Him.  This 
name  is  in  itself  important,  because  it  is  no  longer 
simply  God  in  the  midst  of  a  recognised  assembly, 
which  was  one  of  the  characters  we  have  already 
observed  connected  with  the  tabernacle.*  Moses  being 
outside  the  camp,  God  now  declares  that  He  will  not 
go  up  in  the  midst  of  them,  lest  He  should  destroy 
them  by  the  way,  as  He  had  threatened.  Moses  begins 
his  intercession,  having  taken  an  individual  position, 
the  only  one  now  of  faithfulness  to  God ;  but  his  con- 
nection with  the  people  being  so  much  the  stronger  by 
his  being  nearer  to  God,  more  separated  unto  Him. 
This  is  the  effect  of  faithful  separation  when  it  is  for 
God's  glory,  and  one  is  brought  near  to  God  in  it. 

It  must  be  remarked  here,  that  God  had  taken  the 
people  at  their  word.    They  had  said,  acting  according 

*  He  anticipates  by  faith,  jealous  of  God's  glory,  the  tabernacle 
which  was  to  be  set  up  accorclmg  to  the  thoughts  and  command- 
ments of  God,  which  he  had  seen  in  communion  with  Jehovah. 
That  was  indeed  the  principal  thing;  but  it  was  without  the 
camp,  and  a  sort  of  disorder  in  the  eyes  of  men,  and  was  with- 
out the  ornaments  and  the  forms  commanded  of  God  in  the 
tabernacle,  and  there  was  not  one  express  word  of  God  for  it  to 
be  done.  Nevertheless,  the  presence  of  God  was  there,  and  the 
main  thing  for  faith  was  there ;  that  is,  a  tent  where  God  was 
seen,  and  where  He  might  be  sought,  even  in  a  manner  in  which 
faith  was  more  manifest  than  when  the  tabernacle  was  regularly 
set  up.  Then  the  pillar  came  down  as  a  blessed  testimony  to 
the  faith  of  Moses. 

XXXIIl. 


118  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

to  their  faith,  or  rather  to  their  want  of  faith,  "  This 
Moses  that  brought  us  up  out  of  Egypt."  God  says, 
"Thy  people,  which  thou  broughtest  out  of  Egypt, 
have  corrupted  themselves."  Hence  God  says  to 
Moses,  "Thou,"  addressing  Himself  to  the  mediator. 
Moses  says  to  God,  "  Thy  people."  This  earnest  power 
of  faith  does  not,  though  separating  from  evil,  loose 
God  from  this  blessed  claim.  (Chap,  xxxii.  1,  7, 12-34.) 
Afterwards,  however,  the  people  having  stripped  them- 
selves of  their  ornaments,  and  Moses  being  in  the  posi- 
tion of  mediator,  God  says  (chap,  xxxiii.  1),  "Thou 
and  the  people  which  thou  hast  brought  up."*  Every- 
thing now  hangs  upon  the  mediator. 

Moses  having  taken  his  place  outside  the  camp,  God 
reveals  Himself  to  him  as  He  never  had  done  before. 
The  people  see  God  standing  at  the  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle which  Moses  had  pitched;  and  they  worship, 
every  man  at  his  tent  door.  Jehovah  speaks  unto 
Moses  face  to  face,  as  a  man  speaks  unto  his  friend. 
We  shall  see  that  it  is  to  these  communications  that 
God  alludes  when  He  speaks  of  the  glory  of  Moses 
(Num.  xii.  8),  and  not  to  those  on  Mount  Sinai. 
Moses,  as  mediator  in  the  way  of  testimony,  goes  into 
the  camp ;  but  Joshua,  the  spiritual  chief  of  the  people 
(Christ  in  Spirit),  does  not  depart  out  of  the  taber- 
nacle, f  Moses  now  recognises  what  God  had  told  him, 
that  he  has  to  bring  up  the  people ;  he  is  there  as  the 
mediator  on  whom  everything  depends.  But  he  dares 
not  entertain  the  thought  of  going  up  alone,  of  going 
up  without  knowing  who  would  be  with  him.  God 
has  fully  acknowledged  him  in  grace,  and  he  desires  to 
know  who  will  go  before  him.  He  therefore  asks, 
since  he  has  found  grace  (for  so  God  had  told  him), 

*  And  Moses  really  represents  Christ  here,  not  Christ  outside 
the  camp. 

t  This  is  the  place  we  have  in  spirit,  but  it  is  sometimes  hard 
to  connect  the  two. 


EXODUS.  119 

that  he  may  know  His  way,  the  way  of  God ;  not 
only  to  have  a  way  for  him  (Moses)  to  get  to  Canaan, 
but  "  thy  way;"  thus  will  he  know  God,  and  in  His  path 
and  conduct,  will  find  grace  in  His  sight.  God  replies 
that  His  presence  shall  go,  and  He  will  give  rest  to 
Moses :  the  two  things  he  perfectly  needed  as  crossing 
the  wilderness.  Moses  then  brings  in  the  people,  and 
says,  "  Carry  us  not  up  hence,"  and  that  "  we  have 
found  grace,  I  and  thy  people."  This  also  is  granted 
of  Jehovah  ;  and  now  he  desires  for  himself  to  see  the 
glory  of  Jehovah ;  but  that  face  which  is  to  go  and 
lead  Moses  and  the  people,  God  cannot  shew  unto 
Moses.  He  will  hide  him  while  He  passes  by,  and 
Moses  shall  see  His  l)ack  parts.  We  cannot  meet  God 
on  His  way  as  independent  of  Him.  After  He  has 
passed  by,  one  sees  all  the  beauty  of  His  ways.  Who 
could  have  been  beforehand  in  proposing  such  a  thing 
as  the  cross  ?  After  God  of  Himself  has  done  it,  then 
all  the  perfectness  of  God  in  it  overflows  the  heart. 

God  then  lays  down  two  principles :  His  sovereignty, 
which  allows  Him  to  act  in  goodness  towards  the 
wicked — into  this  He  retreats  that  any  may  be  saved 
— for  in  justice  He  would  have  cut  off  the  whole 
people :  and  the  conditions  of  His  government  under 
which  He  was  putting  the  people,  His  character  such 
as  it  is  manifested  in  His  ways  towards  them.  Hid 
whilst  He  passes  by,  Moses  bows  down  at  the  voice  of 
God,  who  proclaims  His  name  and  reveals  what  He  is 
as  JEHOVAH.  These  words  give  the  principles  con- 
tained in  the  character  of  God  Himself  in  connection 
with  the  Jewish  people — principles  which  form  the 
basis  of  His  government.  It  is  not  at  all  the  name  of 
His  relationship  with  the  sinner  for  his  justification, 
but  with  Israel  for  His  government.  Mercy,  holiness, 
and  patience,  mark  His  ways  with  them ;  but  He  does 
not  clear  the  guilty.  Moses,  ever  bearing  the  people 
of  God  on  his  heart,  beseeches  God,  according  to  the 

XXXIII. 


120  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

favour  in  which  he  stands  as  mediator,  that  the  Lord 
Himself,  thus  revealed,  may  go  up  in  their  midst ;  and 
this,  because  they  were  a  stiifnecked  people.  How 
should  he  bring  such  a  people  safe  through  without 
Him? 

The  relationship  between  Moses  personally  and  God 
was  fully  established,  so  that  he  could  present  the 
people  such  as  they  were,  because  of  his  (Moses's  own) 
position,  and,  consequently,  make  of  the  difficulty  and 
sin  of  the  people  a  reason  for  the  presence  of  God,  ac- 
cording to  the  character  He  had  revealed.  It  is  the 
proper  effect  of  mediation ;  but  it  is  exceedingly  beau- 
tiful to  see,  grace  having  thus  come  in,  the  reason  God 
had  given  for  the  destruction  of  the  people,  or  at  the 
very  least  for  His  absence,  becoming  the  motive  for 
His  presence.*  It,  no  doubt,  supposed  forgiveness  as 
well.  This  Moses  asks  for,  and  adds,  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  blessing  of  the  name  and  being  of  God, 
"Take  us  for  thine  inheritance."  In  answer  to  this 
prayer,  God  establishes  a  new  covenant  with  the  people. 
The  basis  of  it  is  complete  separation  from  the  nations 
which  God  was  going  to  drive  out  from  before  the 
people.  It  supposes  the  entrance  of  the  people  into 
Canaan  in  virtue  of  the  mediation  of  Moses,  and  the 
presence  of  God  with  the  people  consequent  upon  his 
intercession.  He  is  commanded  to  maintain  their  re- 
lationship with  Him  in  the  solemn  feasts  under  the 
blessing  and  safeguard  of  God. 

*  We  know  this  ourselves ;  my  sinfulness  in  itself  would  be 
the  reason  for  God's  giving  me  up.  But  now  I  am  in  grace,  I 
can  plead  it  with  God  as  a  reason,  blessed  be  His  name,  for 
His  going  with  me  ;  never  should  I  overcome  and  get  safe  across 
the  wilderness,  if  He  was  not  with  me.  Surely  the  flesh  is 
there.  But  it  is  wondrous  grace.  Nothing  shews  more  clearly 
the  difference  between  justifying  forgiveness,  and  governmental 
mercy,  than  this  part  of  Israel's  history.  God  forgives,  bnt  does 
not  clear  the  guilty — atonement  was  not  made  :  no  doubt,  even 
in  possibility  of  government  all  was  based  on  it. 


EXODUS.  121 

It  is  well  to  have  the  order  of  facts  clear  here 
as  to  Moses's  position.  He  broke  the  tables ;  the 
Levites  at  his  summons  slay  their  friends  and  re- 
lations ;  and  then  he  pitches  the  tabernacle  far  off 
from  the  camp.  There  the  cloud  comes  down. 
(Chap,  xxxiii.  9.)  There  the  basis  of  all  was  laid, 
first  in  absolute  sovereign  grace,  and  then  in  the 
character  of  Moses's  personal  relationship.  This  was 
at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  outside  the  camp.  Then 
chapter  xxxiv.  he  goes  up  again,  and  there,  he  being  in 
this  relationship,  quite  a  new  governmental  covenant  is 
made,  founded  on  God's  character  mediatorially,  and 
the  law  put  into  the  ark.  They  were  put  back  in 
principle  under  law ;  real  atonement  could  not  be  made, 
of  course,  by  Moses.  (Chap,  xxxiv.  10-17.)  But  Israel 
was  never  directly  and  properly  under  the  covenant  of 
the  law,  but  mediatorially  under  chapter  xxxiv.  5-10 ; 
though  the  commandments  were,  of  course,  before 
them  as  their  rule.  But  this  new  covenant  of  chapter 
xxxiv.  was  what  they  were  under  as  to  the  law ;  and 
hence  they,  as  under  the  law,  were  apostate  and  left  of 
God  before  they  got  it,  and  Moses  and  the  cloud  of 
God's  presence  outside  the  camp.  People  sought  the 
Lord  and  went  there.  Utter  separation  from  all  mix- 
ture with  the  idolatrous  people,  and  consecration, 
characterises  the  new  covenant  of  chapter  xxxiv.  In 
chapter  xxiii.  they  were  told  to  destroy  their  altars 
and  serve  Jehovah  who  would  cut  these  nations  off*. 
But  the  covenant  is  not  so  characterised.  It  is  of  moment 
to  see  that  God  retreats  into  His  own  sovereign  grace 
to  spare  them.  But  this  was  at  the  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle and  with  Moses  alone ;  the  covenant  of  gracious 
government  was  based  on  it.  That  was  on  the  mount. 
The  people  were  only  on  that  ground.  There  was 
no  real  basis  of  relationship ;  the  law,  which  would 
have  been  one,  broken,  and  no  atonement  made, 
nor   could    be.      Moses   had   a   special   revelation   of 

XXXIV. 


122  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

grace.     But   this   seems  to  have  been  personal  and 
unrecorded. 

I  have  rather  enlarged  upon  these  conversations  of 
Moses  with  the  people,  because  (and  it  is  very  im- 
portant to  remark  it)  Israel  never  entered  the  land 
under  the  Sinai  covenant,  that  is,  under  simple  law 
(for  all  this  passed  under  Mount  Sinai) ;  it  had  been 
immediately  broken.  It  is  under  the  mediation  of 
Moses  that  they  were  able  to  find  again  the  way  of 
entering  it.  However,  they  are  placed  again  under 
the  law,  but  the  government  of  patience  and  grace  is 
added  to  it.  In  Deuteronomy  x.  1  we  see  there  is  no 
longer  question  of  introducing  the  law  openly  into  the 
camp  where  God  had  been  dishonoured.  It  was  to  be 
put  into  the  ark,  according  to  the  predetermined  plans 
of  God,*  arranged  to  enable  the  people,  miserable  as 
they  were,  to  draw  near  unto  Him,  though  only 
outside  unto  the  brazen  altar.  Moses  abides  there 
ivith  Jehovah.  There  was  enough  in  the  contempla- 
tion of  what  God  was,  as  He  had  revealed  Himself,  to 
occupy  him.  He  had  not  now  to  be  occupied  with  the 
instructionst  God  was  giving  him  on  the  details  of  the 


*  Thus  Christ  was  in  reserve,  though  at  the  same  time  fore- 
ordained, even  from  eternity.  He  was  only  manifested  as  the 
true  propitiation  when  the  law  had  been  presented,  and  man 
had  failed  under  it.  Its  only  existence  now  is,  as  giving  great 
recognised  principles  of  the  righteousness  requked  from  man  (in 
its  highest  elements  we  may  add  from  the  creature),  but  hidden 
and  buried  in  Him  who  gives  His  character  to  the  throne  of  God. 
But  it  was  necessary  to  break  or  hide  those  tables  (terrible  to 
man)  of  the  perfect  but  inflexible  law  of  God.  God  will  write 
them  on  the  heart  of  once  disobedient  Israel  in  the  latter  day. 

t  The  little  that  was  said  to  Moses  in  the  covenant  was  pro- 
hibitory of  all  association  with  the  nations  strangers  to  Jehovah, 
and  the  establishment  of  links  with  Him,  consecration  to  Him 
in  everything  as  redeemed,  absence  of  leaven,  and  I  think  the 
prohibition  of  what  was  devilishly  against  nature.  What  was 
of  nature  as  of  God,  was  not  to  be  violated.  There  was  redemp- 


EXODUS.  123 

tabernacle,  but  with  God  according  to  the  revelation 
He  had  made  of  Himself ;  he  neither  ate  nor  drank ; 
he  was  in  a  state  above  nature,  where  the  flesh  could 
not  intermeddle,  in  some  sort  apart  from  humanity.* 
The  Lord  writes  His  law  anew  on  the  tables  which 
Moses  had  prepared.  But  the  effect  of  this  communion 
v/ith  God  was  i;Qanifest;  the  skin  of  his  face  shone 
when  he  came  down.  However,  here  it  was  a  glory  as 
it  were  external  and  legal,  not  like  that  of  Jehovah 
Himself  in  the  Person  of  Jesus.  Thus  Israel  could  not 
behold  it.  We  are  in  quite  a  different  position :  for  us, 
there  is  no  longer  a  veil;  and  we  behold  with  open 
(that  is  unveiled)  face  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  For  the 
glory  now  is  not  applied  to  make  good  the  law  in  the 
conscience ;  for  the  glory  in  the  face  of  Moses  did  this, 
only  the  people  consequently  could  not  bear  it,"f-  nor 
consequently  understand  the  figures  of  grace:  the  law 
(as  rule  of  human  righteousness)  being  broken  and  gone 
as  ground  of  relationship  with  God,  and  laid  up  in  the 
ark,  they  turned  the  figures  of  grace  into  law,  as  men 
do.     The  glory  we  see  is  the  proof   of   the  putting 

tion,  as  the  key  to  all  connected  with  the  judgment  of  evil,  but 
also  the  firstfruits  of  nature  were  to  be  consecrated  to  God,  and 
the  relationship  of  nature  not  violated. 

*  Here,  however,  is  seen  the  excellency  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
who  in  all  things  must  have  the  pre-eminence.  Moses,  naturally 
far  off,  is  separated  from  his  natural  state,  in  order  to  draw  near 
unto  God.  Christ  was  naturally  near  there,  and  more  than 
near ;  He  separates  Hhnself  from  nature  to  meet  the  adversary 
on  the  behalf  of  man. 

t  It  had  the  character  of  claim  on  them  coming  with  the  law 
from  above,  and  thus  they  could  not  see  the  prefigurement  of 
Christ,  when  it  came  out  either.  (See  2  Cor.  iii.)  The  whole 
position  is  of  all  importance.  On  the  ground  of  law,  that  is,  man's 
responsibility,  all  being  gone,  God  retreated  into  His  own 
sovereignty  (Moses  pleading  as  to  Israel  God's  unconditional 
promises),  and  Israel  were  placed  under  the  governmental 
name  and  dealings  of  God  as  they  are  to  this  day,  only  having 
since  rejected  Christ  and  promise  and  grace. 
XXXIV. 


124  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

away  of  sins  and  divine  righteousness,  for  it  is  seen  in 
Him  who  bore  our  sins  and  is  that  righteousness  for 
us.  We  are  rather  in  the  position  of  Moses  when  he 
entered  into  the  most  holy  place. 

Besides  the  separation  of  Israel  from  the  inhabitants 
of  the  land  wherein  they  were  to  dwell,  which  is  found 
in  chapter  xxxiv.,  there  is  in  chapter  xxxv.  another 
part  of  the  instructions  of  Moses  which  he  gave  when 
he  came  down.  It  is  not  now  the  certainty  of  enter- 
ing, and  the  conduct  suited  to  those  who  have  found 
grace,  abstaining  from  all  that  might  tend  to  bring  sin 
back  when  they  were  enjoying  the  privileges  of  grace ; 
Moses  speaks  to  them  of  the  portion  of  the  people 
under  the  influence  of  that  communication  which  the 
mediator,  as  head  of  grace,  had  established.  The 
sabbath*  is  appointed ;  and,  moreover,  His  people 
(grace  thus  manifested)  are  encouraged  to  shew  their 
goodwill  and  their  liberality  in  everything  that  con- 
cerned the  service  of  God.  Consequently  we  find  the 
manifestation  of  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  of  gift  in 
service,  God  calling  specially  by  name  those  He  de- 
signed more  particularly  for  the  work.  This  was  done 
liberally :  they  brought  more  than  was  sufficient ;  and 
every  wise-hearted  man  worked,  each  the  things  for 
which  he  was  gifted ;  and  Moses  blessed  them. 

Thus  was  the  tabernacle  set  up,  and  everything  put 
into  its  place,  according  to  the  commandment  of  God. 

*  The  sabbath  is  always  found  whenever  there  is  any  principle 
whatever  of  relationship  established  between  the  people  and 
God  ;  it  is  the  result  proposed  in  every  relation  between  God  and 
His  people,  that  they  enter  into  His  rest.  It  is  to  be  noted  that, 
while  the  people  are  distinctly  put  under  law,  the  principle  of 
the  second  tables  was  law  after  present  forgiveness  and  mercy. 
This  is  exactly  the  ground  Christians  want  to  be  upon  now — to 
bring  in  law  after  grace  and  mercy.  But  this  it  is  Paul  calls  the 
ministration  of  death  and  condemnation.  For,  the  first  time  he 
went  up,  his  face  did  not  shine ;  and  it  is  to  that  the  apostle 
refers  in  2  Corinthians  iii. 


EXODUS.  125 

Thereupon  (which  we  might  have  remarked  before), 
the  whole  is  anointed  with  oil.  Christ  was  thus  con- 
secrated, anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with 
power;  and,  moreover,  Christ  having  made  peace  by 
His  blood,  having  all  things  to  reconcile  (being  the 
One  who  first  descended,  and  afterwards  ascended,  to 
fill  all  things  with  His  presence,  according  to  the 
power  of  redemption  in  righteousness  and  love  divine), 
the  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost  must  carry  the  efficacy 
of  this  power  in  redemption  everywhere.  Therefore 
had  the  tabernacle  been  sprinkled  with  blood.  It  is 
the  power  of  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is 
spoken  of,  not  being  born  again.  God  takes  possession 
of  the  tabernacle  by  His  glory,  and  the  cloud  of  His 
presence  and  of  His  protection  becomes  the  guide  of 
the  people  (now  forgiven),  happy,  and  so  greatly 
blessed,  in  being  under  the  government  and  guidance 
of  God,  and  at  the  same  time  His  habitation  and  His 
inheritance.  But  all  still  depended  on  human  obedience, 
the  people's  obedience,  nor  was  atonement,  though 
revealed  in  figure,  accomplished  in  fact. 


XXXV.-XL. 


LEVITICUS. 


The  Book  of  Leviticus  is  the  way  of  drawing  near  to 
God,  viewed  as  dwelling  in  the  sanctuary,  whether  in 
respect  of  the  means  of  doing  so,  or  of  the  state  in 
which  men  could ;  and  therewith,  consequently,  espe- 
cially the  subject  of  the  priesthood ;  that  is,  the  means 
established  of  God  for  those  outside  the  sanctuary 
drawing  near  unto  Him,  and  the  discernment  of  the 
defilements  unbecoming  those  who  were  thus  brought 
into  relationship  with  God ;  the  function  of  discerning 
these  being,  in  any  case  that  rendered  it  necessary,  a 
part  of  the  service  of  the  priesthood.  There  are  also 
in  Leviticus  the  several  convocations  of  the  people  in 
the  feasts  of  Jehovah,  which  presented  the  special 
circumstances  under  which  they  drew  near  unto  Him ; 
and,  lastly,  the  fatal  consequences  of  infringing  the 
principles  established  by  God  as  the  condition  of  these 
relationships  with  Him. 

Here  the  communications  of  God  are  consequent 
upon  His  presence  in  His  tabernacle,  which  is  the  basis 
of  all  the  relationships  we  are  speaking  of.  It  is  no 
longer  the  lawgiver  giving  regulations  from  above,  to 
constitute  a  state  of  things,  but  one  in  the  midst*  of 

*  This  is  the  character  in  which  God  puts  Himsel  thus  into 
relationship.  Consequently  most  of  the  dnections  given  suppose 
those  to  whom  they  apply  to  stand  already  in  the  relation  of  a 
people  recognised  of  Him  as  His  people.  But  the  people  being 
really  without,  and  the  tabernacle  presenting  the  position  in 
which  God  was  i^utting  Himself  in  order  to  be  approached,  the 
instructions  which  are  given  in  cases  supposing  the  people  or 
the  individual  to  be  thus  placed,  furnish  those  who  are  without 
with  the  means  of  drawing  near  to  God,  when  they  are  in  that 


LEVITICUS.  127 

the  people,  prescribing  the  conditions  of  their  relation- 
ship with  Him. 

But  whatever  be  the  nearness  and  the  privileges  of 
the  priestly  position,  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  ever  that 
which  establishes  the  possibility  and  forms  the  basis 
of  it.  Hence  the  book  begins  with  the  sacrifices  which 
represented  His  one  perfect  sacrifice.  As  presenting 
the  work  of  Christ  in  its  various  characters  and 
diverse  application  to  us,  these  typical  sacrifices  have 
an  interest  that  nothing  can  surpass.  We  will  consider 
them  with  some  little  detail. 


position,  though  no  previous  relationship  have  existed.  It  is 
very  unportant  to  observe  this :  it  is  the  basis  of  the  reasoning 
of  the  apostle,  in  Romans  iii.,  for  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles 
and  so  of  any  sinner  whomsoever.  It  is  true,  nevertheless,  that 
most  of  the  du'ections  apply  to  those  who  are  already  in  prox- 
imity with  the  throne.  Besides,  all,  in  spite  of  themselves,  have 
to  do  with  it,  although  they  do  not  approach  it,  and  especially 
now  that,  as  a  testimony  of  grace,  the  blood  is  on  the  mercy- 
seat,  and  the  revelation  and  testunony  of  glory  without  a  veil, 
the  result  of  grace  and  redemption,  gone  out.  The  conditions 
of  relationship  with  the  throne  that  God  establishes,  where  He 
condescends  to  be  approached  by  His  creatures,  are  presented, 
which  includes  the  details  of  those  He  sustains  with  His  jDeople. 
The  reader  will  remember,  as  regards  our  drawing  nigh  to 
God,  the  position  of  the  Christian  is  entirely  changed  from  that 
of  the  Jew.  Then  (Heb.  ix.)  the  way  into  the  holiest  was  not 
made  manifest,  and  no  one,  not  even  the  priests,  could  go  into 
the  presence  of  God  within  the  veil ;  and  the  services  were  a 
rememhrance  of  sins.  Now,  the  work  of  Christ  being  accom- 
plished, the  veil  is  rent.  It  is  not  a  people  in  a  certain  relation- 
ship with  God  yet  always  remaining  without,  drawing  near  to 
the  altar,  or,  at  best,  some  to  the  altar  of  incense.  It  is  fall 
grace  going  out  to  the  world  ;  and  then,  redemption  being  ac- 
complished, and  believers  righteous  before  God,  their  having  all 
perfect  boldness  to  enter  the  holiest.  Hence,  our  subject  is  not 
the  character  of  approach,  but  the  figures  of  the  means  by  which 
we  approach,  in  order  to  have  communion  with  God.  I  need 
hardly  add,  the  Father's  love  does  not  come  in  question.  It  was 
a  throne  of  judgment  which  was  in  the  sanctuaiy,  and  who 
could  approach  that  ? 


128  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

The  types  which  are  presented  to  us  in  the  scriptures 
are  of  different  characters ;  partly,  of  some  great 
principle  of  God's  dealings,  as  Sarah  and  Hagar  of  the 
two  covenants;  partly,  they  are  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Himself,  in  different  characters,  as  sacrifice,  priest,  &c. ; 
partly,  of  certain  dealings  of  God,  or  conduct  of  men, 
in  other  dispensations;  partly,  of  some  great  future 
acts  of  God's  government. 

Though  no  strict  rule  can  be  given,  we  can  say  in 
general  that  Genesis  furnishes  us  with  the  chief  ex- 
amples of  the  first  class;  Leviticus,  of  the  second, 
though  some  remarkable  ones  are  found  in  Exodus; 
Numbers,  of  the  third :  those  of  the  fourth  class  are 
more  dispersed. 

The  employment  of  types  in  the  word  of  God  is  a 
feature  in  this  blessed  revelation  not  to  be  passed  by. 
There  is  peculiar  grace  in  it.  That  which  is  most 
highly  elevated  in  our  relationship  with  God  almost 
surpasses,  in  the  reality  of  it,  our  capacities  and  our 
ken,  though  we  learn  to  know  God  Himself  in  it  and 
enjoy  this  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  itself,  indeed,  it  is 
needful  that  it  should  surpass  infinitely  our  capacities, 
because,  if  I  may  so  speak,  it  is  adapted  to  those  of 
God,  in  respect  of  whom  the  reality  takes  place,  and 
before  whom  it  must  be  effectual,  if  profitable  for  us. 
All  these  profoimd  and  infinite  objects  of  our  faith, 
infinite  in  their  value  before  God  or  in  the  demonstra- 
tion of  the  principles  on  which  He  deals  with  us,  be- 
come, by  means  of  types,  palpable  and  near  to  us.  The 
detail  of  all  the  mercies  and  excellences  which  are 
found  in  the  reality  or  antitype  are,  in  the  type,  pre- 
sented close  to  the  eye,  with  the  accuracy  of  Him  who 
judges  of  them  as  they  are  presented  to  His,  but  in  a 
manner  suited  to  ours ;  which  meets  our  capacity,  but 
for  the  purpose  of  elevating  us  to  the  thoughts  which 
occupy  Him.  Christ,  according  to  the  mind  of  God, 
in  all  His  glory,  is  the  picture  presented.     But  we 


LEVITICUS.  129 

have  all  the  lines  and  explanations  of  what  is  con- 
tained in  it,  in  that  which  we  hold  in  our  hand — of 
Him  who  composed  the  great  reality.  Blessed  be  His 
name ! 

To  apply  this  to  the  sacrifices  in  the  beginning  of 
Leviticus,  the  establishment  of  the  tabernacle  embraces 
two  points  quite  distinct, — the  display  of  the  plans 
of  God  in  grace,*  and  the  place  of  access  to  Him,  and 
also  the  means  of  meeting  the  necessity  and  sin  which 
gave  occasion  for  its  present  exercise.  All  its  structure 
was  according  to  a  pattern  given  in  the  mount — a  pat- 
tern of  heavenly  things  including  the  intercourse 
between  heaven  and  earth,  and  shews  forth  the  order 
which  finds  its  accomplishment  in  the  better  tabernacle 
not  made  with  hands.  But  the  economy  of  the  taber- 
nacle was  only  actually  set  up  after  the  sin  of  the 
golden  calf,  when  the  jealousy  of  God  against  sin  had 
already  broken  forth,  and  His  grace  was  ministered 
from  the  throne  in  the  sanctuary  by  offerings  which 
met  transgression,  and  transgression  which  in  result 
barred  the  entrance  of  the  priests  at  all  times  into  the 
sanctuary,  but  supplied  in  grace  all  that  met  the  need 
of  a  sinful  people. 

Hence  also  it  is  that  the  first  mention  we  have  of 
the  tabernacle  is  upon  the  occasion  of  the  sin  of  the 
golden  calf,  when  Moses's  anger  waxed  hot  against  the 
mad  impiety  which  had  rejected  God,  before  they  had 

*  My  impression  is  that  the  tabernacle  is  the  expression  of 
the  millennial  state  of  things,  save  as  to  royalty,  with  which  the 
temple  is  connected — the  throne  of  God,  in  the  boiiest.  I  do 
not  see  that  the  veil  will  then  be  rent  for  those  on  earth,  thoi^gh 
all  be  founded  on  the  sacrifice  of  Christ ;  but  the  high  priest  w  ill 
go  at  all  times  into  the  holy  place,  and  then  in  his  robes^  of 
glory  and  beauty.  The  shew-bread  and  the  seven -branche  d 
candlestick  represent  thus  Israel  in  connection  with  Christ,  as 
manifesting  government,  and  light  in  the  world,  but  in  the  place 
of  priesthood  with  God.  For  us  the  veil  is  rent,  and  we  enter 
with  boldness  into  the  holiest. 

VOL.  I.  K 


130  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

received  the  details  and  ordinances  of  the  law  of  Moses 
or  even  the  ten  words  from  the  mountain.  Moses  took 
the  tent,  and  pitched  it  without  the  camp,  far  off  from 
the  camp,  and  called  it  the  tabernacle  of  the  congrega- 
tion, though  that  really  was  not  yet  erected ;  and  all 
that  sought  Jehovah  went  forth  to  the  tabernacle  of 
the  congregation  without  the  camp.  It  was  a  place  of 
meeting  for  God  and  those  among  the  people  who 
sought  Him.  In  the  law  there  was  no  question  of 
seeking  God.  It  was  the  communication  of  God's  will 
to  a  people  already  assembled,  in  the  midst  of  whom 
God  manifested  Himself,  according  to  certain  demands 
of  His  holiness.  But  when  evil  had  come  in,  and  the 
people  as  a  body  had  apostatised  and  broken  the 
covenant,  then  the  place  of  assembly,  where  God  was 
to  be  sought,  was  set  up.  This  was  before  the  taber- 
nacle, as  regulated  according  to  the  pattern  shewn  in 
the  mount,  was  set  up  ;  but  it  established  the  principle 
on  which  it  was  founded  in  the  most  striking  manner. 

The  order  of  the  tabernacle  a^  originally  instituted 
was  never  carried  out,  as  the  law  in  its  original  cha- 
racter never  was  brought  in.  Nadab  and  Abihu  offered 
strange  fire  the  first  day,  and  Aaron  was  forbidden  the 
holiest  save  on  the  great  day  of  atonement  in  another 
way.  The  tabernacle  itself  was  set  up  according  to 
the  pattern,  but  the  entrance  to  the  inner  sanctuary 
was  closed.  What  was  done  referred  to  the  state  of 
sin,  and  was  provisional,  but  a  provision  for  sin,  only 
not  a  finished  work  as  we  have  it. 

This  meeting  of  Jehovah  with  the  people,  or  the 
mediator,  was  twofold:  apostolic,  or  sacrificial;  that 
is,  for  the  purpose  of  communicating  His  will ;  or  of 
receiving  the  people  in  their  worship,  their  failures,  or 
their  need,  even  as  Christ  Himself  is  the  Apostle  and 
High  Priest  of  our  profession — expressions  which 
allude  to  the  circumstances  of  which  we  treat.  Je- 
hovah's presence  in  the  tabernacle,  for  the  communica- 


LEVITICUS.  181 

tion  of  His  will  (with  which  we  have  to  do  only  inas- 
much as  what  occupies  us  is  an  example  of  it*),  is 
tl  lus  spoken  of  in  Exodus  xxv.,  xxix.  In  chapter 
XXV.,  after  describing  the  structure  of  the  ark  and  its 
appendages  in  the  most  holy  place,  it  is  said,  "And 
thou  shalt  put  the  mercy-seat  above  upon  the  ark; 
and  in  the  ark  thou  shalt  put  the  testimony  which  I 
will  give  thee.  And  there  I  will  meet  with  thee 
[Moses],  and  I  will  commune  with  thee  from  above  the 
mercy-seat,  from  between  the  two  cherubim  which  are 
upon  the  ark  of  the  testimony,  of  all  things  which  I 
will  give  thee  in  commandment  with  the  children  of 
Israel."  This  was  for  the  mediator  with  Jehovah  alone 
in  secret.  In  chapter  xxix.  we  read,  "A  continual 
burnt  offering  throughout  your  generations  at  the 
door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  before 
Jehovah :  where  I  will  meet  you,  to  speak  there  unto 
thee.  And  there  will  I  meet  with  the  children  of 
Israel."  That  is  where,  though  through  a  mediator,  as 
all  was  now  since  the  law  was  broken,  Jehovah  met 
the  people,  not  Moses  alone,  with  whom  He  communi- 
cated from  between  the  cherubim  in  the  most  holy 
place. 

On  this  ground  Leviticus  commences. 

God  speaks  not  from  Sinai,  but  out  of  the  taber- 
nacle, where  He  is  sought ;  where,  according  to  the 
pattern  of  His  glory,  but  according  also  to  the  need  of 
those  who  seek  His  presence,  He  is  in  relationship 
with  the  people  by  mediation  and  sacrifice.  In  Sinai, 
in  terrible  glory,  He  demanded,  and  proposed  terms  of, 
obedience,  and  thereupon  promised  His  favour.  In 
this  the  communication  was  direct,  but  the  people 
could  not  bear  it.  Here  He  is  accessible  to  the  sinner 
and  to  the  saint,  but  by  a  provided  mediation  and 
priesthood.     But  then  the  centre  and  ground  of  our 

*  For  prophecy  is  a  thing  apart. 
I. 


132  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

access  to  God  thus  is  Christ's  obedience  and  offering. 
This  therefore  is  first  presented  to  us  when  God  speaks 
in  the  tabernacle. 

The  order  of  these  sacrifices  is  first  to  be  remarked. 
The  order  of  their  application  is  uniformly  opposed  to 
the  order  of  their  institution.  There  are  four  great 
classes  of  offerings:  1,  The  burnt-offering;  2,  The 
meat-offering ;  3,  The  peace-offering ;  and  4,  The  sin- 
offering.  I  name  them  in  the  order  of  their  institu- 
tion, but,  in  their  application,  when  offered  together, 
the  sin-offerings  always  come  first,  for  there  it  is 
restoration  to  God;*  and,  in  approaching  God  by 
sacrifice,  man  must  approach  by  the  efficacy  of  that 
which  takes  away  his  sins,  in  that  they  have  been 
borne  by  another.  But  in  presenting  the  Lord  Jesus 
Himself  as  the  great  sacrifice,  His  being  made  sin  is  a 
consequence  of  His  offering  Himself  in  perfectness  to 
God,  and  though  as  made  sin  for  us  still  in  His  own 


*  As  to  acceptance,  the  Christian  has  no  more  conscience  of 
sins ;  but  the  Israelite  had  never  learnt  this ;  and  hence,  as  we 
have  seen,  his  way  of  approaching  served,  as  to  the  means,  to 
portray  the  sinner's  first  coming  to  God.  The  import  of  Christ's 
sacrifice  is  often  too  little  seen.  Man  must  come  as  a  sinner, 
and  about  and  owning  his  sins.  He  cannot  come  truly  other- 
wise, but  when  entered  in  peace  into  God's  presence,  feeble  as  we 
may  be,  we  view  it  from  God's  side,  and  daily  see  more  of  the 
reality  and  value  of  this  great  fact  which  stands  alone  in  the 
history  of  eternity,  and  on  which  all  and  eternal  blessing  is  im- 
mutably founded.  Every  point  and  power  of  good  and  evU  was 
there  brought  to  an  issue  ;  the  absolute  enmity  of  man's  heart 
against  God  revealed  in  gi-ace ;  Satan's  complete  power  over 
men ;  man  (Christ)  perfect  in  obedience  and  love  to  His  Father 
in  the  very  place  needed  when  He  was  made  sin  ;  God  perfect 
in  justice  against  sin  (it  became  Him),  and  perfect  in  love  to 
the  sinner.  And  this  being  accomplished,  the  perfect  ground  was 
laid  in  justice,  and  in  what  was  accomplished  and  immutable,  for 
the  display  of  God's  love  and  God's  counsels,  in  what  morally 
could  not  change. 


LEVITICUS.  133 

perfectness,  and  for  the  divine  glory,  we  say,  His 
Father's  glory;  this  is  a  great  but  blessed  mystery. 
He  gives  Himself  up,  coming  to  do  His  Father's  will, 
and  is  made  for  us  sin  who  knew  no  sin,  and  under- 
goes death. 

Furthermore,  our  sins  being  put  away,  the  source  of 
communion  is  thus  in  the  excellency  of  Christ  Him- 
self, and  in  His  offering,  who  offers  Himself  to  God 
without  spot,  glorifying  God  by  death  inasmuch  as  sin 
was  there  before  Him  and  death  by  sin,  and  He  gives 
Himself  wholly  up  to  God's  glory  in  respect  of  this 
state,*  and  then  our  presentation  according  to  the 
preciousness  of  this  on  high,  though  the  actual  bearing 
of  our  sins  be  of  absolute  necessity  to  introduce  us 
into  this  communion.  In  this  is  the  difference  of  the 
great  day  of  atonement.  Then  the  blood  was  put  on 
the  mercy-seat  in  the  holiest ;  but  this,  while  giving 

•  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  we  read  of  no  positive  sin-offerings 
before  the  law.  The  clothing  of  Adam  may  suppose  it,  and  Gene- 
sis iv.  7  may  be  taken  to  speak  of  it,  but  they  are  not  professedly 
offered;  burnt-offerings  frequently.  These  suppose  sin  and 
death,  and  no  coming  to  God  but  by  sacrifice  and  death,  and 
reconcihation  through  it.  But  the  sacrifice  is  viewed  in  the 
perfect  self-offering  of  Christ,  so  that  God  should  be  perfectly 
glorified  in  that  which  was  infinitely  precious  in  His  sight,  and 
all  He  was,  righteousness,  love,  majesty,  truth,  purpose,  all 
glorified  in  Christ's  death  so  that  He  could  freely  act  in  His 
grace.  Sin  is  supposed  in  it,  and  perfectness  of  self-sacrifice  to 
God  there  where  it  was ;  but  God  glorified  rather  than  indivi- 
duals' sins  borne.  Hence  worship  according  to  the  sweet  savour 
of  it  is  involved  in  it.  A  man  far  departed  from  God,  as  such  I 
cannot  come  to  God  at  all  but  on  this  ground,  and  it  will  remain 
valid  for  eternity  and  secure  all  things :  the  new  heaven  and 
earth  are  secured  as  the  dwelling-place  of  righteousness  by  it. 
But  my  actual  sins  being  put  away  is  another  thing.  In  one, 
the  whole  relationship  of  man,  indeed  of  all  things  with  God,  is 
in  question ;  in  the  other,  my  personal  sins.  Hence  all  accept- 
able sacrifice  was  of  the  former  kind :  sacrifices  for  sins  when 
the  relationship  of  a  people  with  God  was  established,  where 
every  act  referred  to  His  actual  presence. 

I. 


134  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

access  there  on  the  ground  of  perfect  cleansing  through 
an  offering  of  infinite  value,  was  in  respect  of  actual 
sins  and  defilement,  not  the  pure  sweet  savour  of  the 
ofiering  in  itself  to  God.  Yet  it  supposed  sin.  The 
offering  would  not  have  had  its  own  character  nor 
value  if  it  had  not.  Hence,  as  presenting  Christ,  and 
our  approach  to  God  when  sin  has  been  fully  dealt 
with  and  holiness  tested,  the  burnt-offering,  meat- 
offering, and  peace-offering  (in  which  latter  our  com- 
munion with  God  is  presented  to  us),  come  first,  and 
then  the  sin-offerings  apart ;  needful,  primarily 
needful  to  us,  but  not  the  expression  of  the  personal 
perfectness  of  Christ,  but  of  His  sin-bearing,  though 
perfectness  were  needed  for  that. 

It  is  evident,  from  what  I  have  said,  that  it  is  Christ 
we  are  to  consider  in  the  sacrifices  which  are  about  to 
engage  our  attention :  the  various  forms  of  value  and 
efficacy  which  attach  to  that  one  all-perfect  sacrifice. 
It  is  true,  we  may  consider  the  Christian  in  a  subordi- 
nate point  of  view  as  presented  to  us  here,  for  he 
should  present  his  body  a  living  sacrifice.  He,  by  the 
fruits  of  charity,  should  present  sacrifices  of  sweet 
savour,  acceptable  to  our  God  by  Jesus  Christ;  but 
our  object  now  is  to  consider  Christ  in  them. 

I  have  said  that  there  are  four  great  classes  presented 
to  us — burnt-offerings,  meat-offerings,  peace-offerings, 
and  offerings  for  sin.  These  may  be  seen  thus  classed 
in  chapter  x.  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  But 
then  there  is  a  very  essential  distinction  which  divides 
these  four  into  two  separate  classes — the  sin-offerings, 
and  all  the  others.  The  sin-offerings,  as  such,  were 
not  characterised  as  offerings  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet 
savour  unto  Jehovah  (although  the  fat  was  in  most  of 
them  burnt  on  the  altar  and  in  this  respect  the  sweet 
savour  was  there,  and  so  it  is  once  said,  chapter  iv.  31 ; 
for  indeed  the  perfection  of  Christ  was  there  though 
bearing  our  sins),  the  others  were  distinctly  so  charac- 


LEVITICUS.  135 

terised.  Positive  sins  were  seen  in  the  sin-ofFerings : 
they  were  charged  with  sins.  He  that  touched  those 
of  them  wliich  fully  bore  this  character,  as  being  for 
the  whole  people*  (Lev.  xvi.,  Num.  xix.),  was  defiled. 
But  in  the  case  of  the  burnt-offering,  though  not 
brought  for  positive  sins,  sin  is  supposed ;  there  blood 
was  shed,  and  it  was  for  propitiation,  but  burnt  on  the 
altar,  and  all  was  a  sweet  savour  to  God.  It  was 
Christ's  whole  sacrifice  of  Himself  to  God,  and  perfect 
as  an  offering  in  every  respect,  though  sin,  as  such, 
was  the  occasion  of  it.  By  this  sacrifice,  in  result,  sin 
will  be  put  away  out  of  God's  sight  for  ever — what 
joy  1  see  John  i.  29  and  Hebrews  ix.  26.  But  then  we 
brought  to  the  consciousness  of  our  state  of  sin  say, 
He  was  made  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  him.  This  is  a  consequence, 
but  the  basis  is  that,  besides  bearing  our  sins.  He  glori- 
fied God  perfectly  there  where  He  was  made  sin.  It 
was  as  in  the  place  of  sin  that  His  obedience  was  per- 
fect and  God  perfectly  glorified  in  all  He  is.  (John  xiii. 
and  xvii.)  Indeed  there  is  but  one  word  for  sin  and 
sin-oft'ering  in  the  original.  They  were  burnt,  but  not 
on  the  altar ;  the  fat,  save  in  one  case,  of  which  we 
may  speak  hereafter,  was.  (Chap,  iv.)  The  other 
offerings  were  offerings  made  by  fire  of  a  sweet  savour 
unto  Jehovah ;  they  present  Christ's  perfect  offering 
of  Himself  to  God,  not  the  imposition  of  sins  on  the 
substitute  by  the  Holy  One,  the  Judge. 

These  two  points  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  are  very 
distinct  and  very  precious.  God  has  made  Him  to  be 
sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin :  but  also  is  it  true,  that 
through  the  eternal  Spirit  He  offered  Himself  without 
spot  to  God.  Let  us  consider  this  latter,  as  first  in  the 
order  presented  in  Leviticus,  and  naturally  so. 

*  In  these  cases  the  burning  was  outside  the  camp.  It  was 
fche  same  as  to  the  scape-goat,  which  immediately  connected 
itself  with  the  rest  of  the  work. 


136  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

The  first  sort  of  sacrifice,  the  most  complete  and 
characteristic  of  those  characterised  by  being  offerings 
made  by  fire  of  a  sweet  savour,  was  the  burnt-offering. 
The  offerer  was  to  bring  his  offering,*  in  order  to  his 
acceptance  with  God,  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of 
the  congregation,  and  to  kill  it  before  Jehovah. 

First,  of  the  place,  the  whole  scene  of  the  taber- 
nacle ritual  consisted  of  three  parts :  first,  the  holiest 
of  all,  the  innermost  part  of  the  boarded  space  covered 
with  tents,  separated  from  the  rest  by  a  veil  which 
hung  before  it,  and  within  which  was  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  and  the  cherubim  overshadowing  the  mercy- 
seat,  and  NOTHING  ELSE.  This  was  the  throne  of  God, 
the  type  also  of  Christ,  in  whom  God  is  revealed,  the 
true  ark  of  the  covenant  with  the  mercy-seat  over  it. 

The  veil,  the  apostle  tells  us,  signified  that  the  way 
into  the  holiest  was  not  yet  made  manifest  while  the 
old  economy  subsisted.!  Immediately  outside  the  veil 
— its  efficacy,  however,  entering  within,  and  whence, 
indeed,  on  certain  occasions,  incense  was  taken  in  a 
censer  and  offered  within — stood  the  golden  altar  of 
incense.  In  the  same,  or  outer  chamber  of  the  taber- 
nacle, called  the  holy,  as  distinguished  from  the  most 
holy  place,  or  holy  of  holies,  stood,  on  either  side,  the 
shewbread  and  the  candlestick — types,  the  former  of 
Christ  incarnate,  the  true  bread  in  union  with  and 
head  of  the  twelve  tribes,  on  the  one  hand :  and  the 


*  The  burnt-offerings  as  snch  were  brought  voluntarily ;  still, 
it  seems  clear  that  this  is  not  the  sense  of  the  Hebrew  word 
"ratzon"  here,  but  for  his  acceptance,  to  be  in  divine  favour.  It 
remains,  just  the  same,  doctrinally  true  that  Christ,  through  the 
eternal  Spirit,  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God. 

t  This  is  a  signal  instance  that  the  order  set  up  in  the  wilder- 
ness was  not  the  image,  but  only  a  shadow  of  good  things  to 
come ;  for  the  veil  unrent  forbad  entrance,  the  rent  veil  gives 
us,  through  the  cross,  full  boldness  to  go  in.  So  tiiat  in  relation- 
ship to  God  there  was  contrast. 


LEVITICUS.  137 

latter,  of  the  perfection*  (still,  I  have  no  doubt,  in 
connection  with  Israel  in  the  latter  day)  of  the  Spirit, 
as  giving  light,  on  the  other.  The  church  owns  Christ 
thus,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  it,  but  what  cha- 
racterises it,  as  such,  is  the  knowledge  of  a  heavenly 
and  glorified  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  in  divine 
communications,  present  in  unity  in  it.  These  figures, 
on  the  other  hand,  give  us  Christ  in  His  earthly  rela- 
tion, and  the  Holy  Ghost  in  His  various  displays  of 
power,  when  God's  earthly  system  is  established. 
Compare  Zechariah  iv.,  and  Revelation  xi.  where  there  is 
the  testimony  to,  but  not  the  actual  perfection  of,  the 
candlestick;  God's  testimony  on  the  earth.  The  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  aflibrds  us  all  needed  light  as  to  how 
far  and  with  what  changes,  these  figures  can  be  ap- 
plied now.  But  that  epistle  never  speaks  of  the 
proper  relationships  and  privileges  of  the  church  and 
Christians.  These  are  viewed  as  pilgrims  on  earth, 
an  earthly  people.  There  is  no  union  with  Christ.  He 
is  in  heaven  and  we  in  need  on  earth ;  no  mention  of 
the  Father's  name,  but  only  so  much  the  more  precious 
as  to  our  access  to  God,  and  needed  supplies  of  grace 
for  our  path  down  here.  It  is  properly  Christian ;  we 
are  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling ;  but  it  may  reach 
out  and  give  what  is  available  for  the  remnant,  slain 
after  the  church  is  gone.  Into  the  holy  place  the 
body  of  the  priests,  and  not  merely  the  high  priest, 
entered  continually,  but  they  only.  We  know  who, 
and  who  alone,  can  now  thus  enter,  even  those  who  are 
made  kings  and  priests,  the  true  saints  of  God :  only, 
we  can  add,  that  the  veil  that  hid  the  holiest  and 
barred  the  entrance  is  rent  from  top  to  bottom,  not  to 
be  renewed  again  between  us  and  God.     We  have 

*  The  number  seven  is  the  number  of  perfection,  and  twelve 
also,  as  may  be  seen  in  many  passages  of  scripture  :  the  former, 
of  absolute  completeness  in  good  or  evil ;  the  latter,  of  complete- 
ness in  hmnan  administration. 

L 


138  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest.  The  veil  has  been 
rent  in  His  flesh.  He  is  not  merely  bread  from  heaven 
or  incarnate,  but  put  to  death,  denoted  by  flesh  and 
blood,  and  the  door  fully  opened  for  us  to  enter  in 
spirit  where  Christ  is.  Our  ordinary  privilege  and 
title  is  in  the  holy  place — type  of  the  created  heaven, 
as  the  most  holy  is  of  the  heaven  of  heavens,  as  it  is 
called.  In  a  certain  sense,  as  to  spiritual  approach  and 
intercourse,  the  veil  being  rent,  there  is  no  separation 
between  the  two,  though  in  the  light  which  no  man 
can  approach  unto  God  dwells  inaccessible.  In  the 
heavenly  places  we  now  are  as  priests,  though  only  in 
spirit. 

In  approaching  to  this  was  the  outside  court,  the 
court  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation.*  In 
entering  this  part,  the  first  thing  met  with  was  the 
altar  of  burnt-oflTering,  and  between  that  and  the 
tabernacle  the  laver,  where  the  priests  washedf  when 
they  entered  into  the  tabernacle,  or  were  occupied  at  the 
altar,  to  perform  their  service.  It  is  evident  that  we 
approach  solely  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  that  we 
must  be  washed  with  water  by  the  word  before  we  can 
serve  in  the  sanctuary.  We  have  need  also,  as  priests, 
of  having  our  feet,  at  least,  washed  by  our  Advo- 
cate on  high  for  our  continual  service  there.  (See 
John  xiii.)J 

'■'  The  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  is  not  simply 
the  veil  of  the  holy  place,  but  the  court  where  they  entered  from 
without.  The  altar  of  burnt-offering  was  at  the  door  of  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation. 

t  It  does  not  appear  that  the  washing  of  the  priests  for  their 
consecration  was  at  the  laver ;  that  was  according  to  what  was 
within  when  they  had  got  there.  But  it  is  always  the  word, 
which  is  figured  by  the  water. 

X  In  the  first  edition,  I  had  added  here  the  "renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  referring  to  Titus  iii.  But  though  the  Holy  Ghost 
surely  renews  the  heart  continually,  yet  I  doubt  the  justice  ol 
the  application  of  this  passage  here.     The  renewing  seems  more 


LEVITICUS.  189 

Christ  also  thus  approached,  but  it  was  in  the  per- 
fect offering  of  Himself,  not  by  the  offering  of  another. 
Nothing  can  be  more  touching,  or  more  worthy  of 
profound  attention,  than  the  manner  in  which  Jesus 
thus  voluntarily  presents  Himself,  that  God  may  be 
fully,  completely,  glorified  in  Him.  Silent  in  His 
sufferings,  we  see  that  His  silence  was  the  result  of  a 
profound  and  perfect  determination  to  give  Himself 
up,  in  obedience,  to  this  glory — a  service,  blessed  be 
His  name,  perfectly  accomplished,  so  that  the  Father 
rests  in  His  love  towards  us. 

This  devotedness  to  the  Father's  glory  could,  and 
indeed  did,  shew  itself  in  two  ways :  it  might  be  in 
service,  and  of  every  faculty  of  a  living  man  here,  in 
absolute  devotedness  to  God,  tested  by  fire  even  unto 
death;  or  in  the  giving  up  of  life  itself,  giving  up 
Himself — His  life  unto  death,  for  the  divine  glory,  sin 
being  there.  Of  this  latter  the  burnt-offering  speaks  ; 
of  the  former,  I  judge,  the  meat-offering:  while  both 
are  the  same  in  principle  as  entire  devotedness  of 
human  existence  to  God — one  of  the  living  acting 
man,  the  other  the  giving  up  of  life  unto  death. 

So  in  the  burnt-offering ;  he  who  offered,  offered  the 
victim  up  wholly  to  God  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  congregation.  Thus  Christ  presented  Himself 
for  the  accomplishment  of  the  purpose  and  glory  of 
God  where  sin  was.  In  the  type  the  victim  and  the 
offerer  were  necessarily  distinct,  but  Christ  was  both, 


absolute  there,  dvaKatvtbattog.  I  might  have  simply  left  it  out, 
perhaps,  but  that  I  would  call  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the 
fact  that  "regeneration"  is  not  the  same  word  as  being  "bom 
again."  It  is  TraXiyytvtaia,  not  dvaysvvTjaig.  It  is  only  found 
again,  to  denote  the  millennium,  in  Matthew  xix.  It  is  in  its 
import,  the  "washing  of  water,"  or  being  "  born  of  water,"  not 
the  reception  of  life  by  the  Spirit.  Water  is  a  change  of  con- 
dition of  what  exists,  not  in  itself  receiving  of  life,  which  is 
b'jing  "born  of  the  Spirit."     That  is  the  dvaKaivcjcig. 

I. 


140  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLR 

and  the  hands  of  the  offerer  were  laid  on  the  head  of 
the  victim  in  sign  of  identity. 

Let  us  cite  some  of  the  passages  which  thus  present 
Christ  to  us.  First,  in  general,  whether  for  life  or  for 
death,  thus  to  glorify  God ;  but  exactly  as  taking  the 
place  of  these  sacrifices,  the  Spirit  thus  speaks  of  the 
Lord,  in  Hebrews  x.,  citing  Psalm  xl. :  "  Then  said  I, 
Lo  I  come,  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of 
me,  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  God ;  yea,  thy  law  is 
within  my  heart."  Christ,  then,  giving  Himself  up 
entirely  to  the  will  of  God  is  what  replaces  these 
sacrifices,  the  antitype  of  the  shadows  of  good  things 
to  come.  But  of  His  life  itself  He  thus  speaks  (John 
X.  18):  "I  lay  it  down  of  myself,  no  one  taketh  it 
from  me.  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have 
power  to  take  it  again:  this  commai^lment  have  I  re- 
ceived of  my  Father."  It  was  obedience,  but  obedience 
in  the  sacrifice  of  Himself ;  and  so,  speaking  of  His 
death.  He  says,  "The  prince  of  this  world  [Satan] 
cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  me ;  but  that  the  world 
may  know  that  I  love  the  Father,  and  as  the  Father 
hath  given  me  commandment,  so  I  do."  So  we  read  in 
Luke  ix. :  "  And  it  came  to  pass  when  the  time  was 
come  that  he  should  be  received  up,  he  stedfastly  set 
his  face  to  go  to  Jerusalem."  '-'Through  the  eternal 
Spirit  he  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God."  (Heb. 
ix.  14) 

How  perfect  and  full  of  grace  is  this  way  of  the 
Lord !  as  constant  and  devoted  to  draw  near  when 
God  should  be  thus  glorified,  and  submit  to  the  con- 
sequences of  His  devotedness — consequences  imposed 
by  the  circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed — as  man 
was  to  depart  from  God  for  his  pleasure.  He  humbles 
Himself  to  death  that  the  majesty  and  the  love  of  God, 
His  truth  and  righteousness,  may  have  their  full  ac- 
complishment through  the  exercise  of  His  self-devot- 
ing love.     Thus  man,  in  His  person,  and  through  His 


LEVITICUS.  141 

work,  is  reconciled  to  God,  takes  the  true  and  due  re- 
lationship to  Him,  God  being  perfectly  glorified  in  Him 
as  to,  and  (wondrous  to  say)  in  the  place  of,  sin,  and 
that  according  to  all  the  value  of  what  Christ  has 
done  to  glorify  God.  It  was  in  the  place  of  sin,  as 
made  it  for  us,  for  there  it  was  God  had  to  be  glori- 
fied, and  there  all  He  is  came  out  as  nowhere  else,  and 
there  perfectly,  in  love,  light,  righteousness,  truth, 
majesty,  as  by  man's  sin  He  had  been  dishonoured ; 
only  that  now  it  was  infinite  in  value,  God  Himself,  not 
merely  human  defacing  of  God's  glory.  I  do  not  here 
say  men,  but  man.  And  the  blessed  result  was,  not 
merely  forgiveness,  but  introduction  into  the  glory  of 
God. 

The  sacrifice  was  to  be  without  blemish ;  the  appli- 
cation of  this  to  Christ  is  too  obvious  to  need  comment. 
He  was  the  Lamb  '•  without  blemish  and  without  spot." 
The  ofierer*  was  to  kill  the  bullock  before  Jehovah. 
This  completed  the  likeness  to  Christ,  for,  though 
evidently  He  could  not  kill  Himself,  He  laid  down  His 
life :  no  one  took  it  from  Him.  He  did  it  before  Je- 
hovah. This,  in  the  ritual  of  the  ofiering,  was  the 
offerer's  part,  the  individual's,  and  so  Christ's  as  man. 
Man  saw,  in  Christ's  death,  man's  judgment — the 
power  of  Caiaphas,  or  the  power  of  the  world.  But 
as  offered,  He  offered  Himself  before  Jehovah. 

And  now  comes  Jehovah's  and  the  priest's  part.  The 
offering  was  to  be  made  the  subject  of  the  fire  of  the 
altar  of  God ;  it  was  cut  in  pieces  and  washed,  given 
up,  according  to  the  purification  of  the  sanctuary,  to 
the  trial  of  the  judgment  of  God;  for  fire,  as  a  symbol, 
signifies  always  the  trial  of  the  judgment  of  God.  As 
to  the  washing  with  water,  it  made  the  sacrifice  typi- 
cally what  Christ  was  essentially — pure.      But  it  has 

•  That  is,  it  was  not  yet  the  priest's  part.  It  may  be  trans- 
lated, "  one  was  to  kill  him."  It  was  completing  the  offering, 
not  presenting  its  blood  in  a  priestly  way. 

I. 


142  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

this  importance,  that  the  sanctification  of  it  and  ours 
is  on  the  same  principle  and  on  the  same  standard. 
He  is  in  this  sense  our  sanctification.  We  are  sancti- 
fied unto  obedience.  He  came  to  do  the  will  of  His 
Father,  and  so,  perfect  from  the  beginning,  learns 
obedience  by  the  things  which  He  suffered ;  perfectly 
obedient  always,  but  His  obedience  put  ever  more 
thoroughly  to  the  test,  so  that  His  obedience  was  con- 
tinually deeper  and  more  complete,  though  always 
perfect.  He  learned  obedience,  what  it  was  to  obey, 
and  that  by  growing  sufferings  and  the  sense  of  what 
was  around  Him,  and  finally  by  the  cross.*  It  was  new 
to  Him  as  a  divine  Person — to  us  as  rebels  to  God — 
and  He  learned  it  in  all  its  extent. 

Furthermore,  this  washing  of  water,  in  our  case,  is 
by  the  word,  and  Christ  testifies  of  Himself  that  man 
should  live  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the 
mouth  of  God.  This  difference  evidently  and  neces- 
sarily exists,  that  as  Christ  had  life  in  Himself,  and 
was  the  life  (see  John  i.,  iv.;  1  John  i.  1, 2),  we,  on  th(3 
other  hand,  receive  this  life  from  Him  ;  and  while  ever 
obedient  to  the  written  word  Himself,  the  words  which 
flowed  from  His  lips  were  the  expression  of  His  life — 
the  direction  of  ours. 

We  may  pursue  the  use  of  this  water  of  cleansing 
yet  farther.  It  is  the  power  of  the  Spirit  also,  exer- 
cised as  by  the  word  and  will  of  God;*!*  so  even  the 
commencement  of  this  life  in  us :  "  Of  his  own  will 
begat  he  us  by  the  word  of  truth,  that  we  might  be  a 
kind  of  firstfruits  of  his  creatures."  (James  i.  18.) 
And  so  in  1  Peter  i.  23,  we  are  born  of  the  incorrup- 
tible seed  of  the  word.    But  then  this  finds  us  walking: 

*  Much  deep  instruction  is  connected  with  this,  but  its  develop- 
ment belongs  to  the  New  Testament.  See  Romans  xii.  and  vi., 
and  1  Peter. 

f  Water  thus  used  as  a  figure  signifies  the  word  in  the  present 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 


LEVITICUS.  148 

in  sins  and  living  in  them,  or,  in  another  aspect,  dead 
in  them.  These  are  really  the  same  thing,  for  being 
alive  in  sins  is  being  spiritually  dead  towards  God ; 
only  the  latter  sets  out  with  our  whole  state  discovered ; 
the  former  deals  with  our  responsibility.  In  Ephesians 
we  are  viewed  as  dead  in  sins;  in  Romans  alive  in 
them  ;  in  Colossians  chiefly  the  latter,  but  the  former 
is  touched  on.  The  cleansing  must  be,  therefore,  by  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  death  to  sin  and  life 
to  God  in  Him.  Hence,  on  His  death,  was  shed  forth 
out  of  His  side  water  and  blood,  cleansing  as  well  as 
expiating  power.  Death  then  is  the  only  cleanser  of 
sin  as  well  as  its  expiation.  "  He  that  is  dead  is  freed* 
from  sin,"  and  water  thus  became  the  sign  of  death,  for 
this  alone  cleansed.  This  truth  of  real  sanctification 
was  necessarily  hidden  under  the  law,  save  in  figures : 
for  the  law  applied  itself  to  man,  alive,  and  claimed 
his  obedience.  Christ's  death  revealed  it.  In  us — 
that  is,  in  our  flesh — good  does  not  dwell.  Hence,  in 
the  symbolical  use  of  water  in  baptism,  we  are  told 
that  as  many  of  us  as  are  baptised  unto  Christ,  are 
baptised  unto  His  death.  But  it  is  evident  that  we 
cannot  stop  at  death  in  itself.  In  us  it  would  be  the 
herald  and  witness  of  condemnation,  but,  having  life 
in  Christ,  death  in  Him.  is  death  to  the  life  of  sin  and 
guilt.  It  is  the  communication  of  the  life  of  Christ 
which  enables  us  thus  to  treat  the  old  man  as  dead, 
and  ourselves  as  having  been  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins.  The  body  is  dead  because  of  sin,  and  the  Spirit 
is  life  because  of  righteousness,  if  Christ  he  in  you. 
So  we  are  told  as  to  the  truth  of  our  natural  state  (it 
is  not  here  what  faith  holds  the  old  man  to  be  if 
Christ  be  in  us):  "  You,  being  dead  in  your  sins,  and  the 
uncircumcision  of  your  fiesh,  hath  he  quickened  to- 

*  Literally,  "justified."     You  cannot  accuse  a  dead  man  of 
sin.     And  note,  it  is  not  "  sins  "  here,  but  "  sin." 

I. 


144  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

gether  with  him."  When  we  were  dead  in  sin,  He  hath 
quickened  us  together  with  Him ;  and,  as  baptised  unto 
His  death,  it  is  added,  "  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised 
up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so 
we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life."  It  is  only  in 
the  power  of  a  new  life  that  we  can  hold  ourselves  to 
be  dead  to  sin.  And,  indeed,  it  is  only  by  known  re- 
demption we  can  say  so.  It  is  when  we  have  appre- 
hended the  power  of  Christ's  death  and  resurrection, 
and  know  that  we  are  in  Him  through  the  Holy  Ghost, 
that  we  can  say,  I  am  crucified  with  Him  ;  I  am  not  in 
the  flesh.  We  know,  then,  that  this  cleansing,  which 
was  apprehended  as  a  mere  moral  effect  in  Judaism,  is, 
by  the  communication  of  the  life  of  Christ  to  us,  that 
by  which  we  are  sanctified,  according  to  the  power  of 
His  death  and  resurrection,  and  sin  as  a  law  in  our 
members  is  judged.  The  first  Adam,  as  a  living  soul, 
corrupted  himself;  the  last,  as  a  quickening  Spirit, 
imparts  to  us  a  new  life. 

But,  if  it  is  the  communication  of  the  life  of  Christ 
which,  through  redemption,  is  the  starting-point  of 
this  judgment  of  sin,  it  is  evident  that  that  life  in  Him 
was  essentially  and  actually  pure;  in  us,  the  flesh  lusts 
against  the  Spirit.  He,  even  according  to  the  .flesh, 
was  born  of  God.  But  He  was  to  undergo  a  baptism, 
not  merely  to  fulfil  all  righteousness  as  living — though 
perfectly  pure — in  a  baptism  of  water,  but  a  trial  of 
all  that  was  in  Him  by  the  baptism  of  fire.  "  I  have," 
says  He, "  a  baptism  to  be  baptised  with,  and  how  am  I 
straitened  till  it  be  accomplished ! " 

Here,  then,  Christ,  completely  offered  up  to  God  for 
the  full  expression  of  His  glory,  undergoes  the  full 
trial  of  judgment.  The  fire  tries  what  He  is.  He  is 
salted  with  fire.  The  perfect  holiness  of  God,  in  the 
power  of  His  judgment,  tries  to  the  uttermost  all  that 
is  in  Him.  The  bloody  sweat,  and  affecting  supplica- 
tion in  the  garden,  the  deep  sorrow  of  the  cross,  in  the 


LEVITICUS.  145 

touching  consciousness  of  righteousness,  "  Why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me  ? " — as  to  any  lightening  of  the  trial, 
an  unheeded  cry — all  mark  the  full  trial  of  the  Son  of 
God.  Deep  answered  unto  deep, — all  Jehovah's  waves 
and  billows  passed  over  Him.  But  as  He  had  offered 
Himself  perfectly  to  the  thorough  trial,  this  consuming 
lire  and  trying  of  His  inmost  thoughts  did,  could, 
produce  nought  but  a  sweet  savour  to  God.  It  is  re- 
markable that  the  word  used  for  burning  the  burnt- 
offering  is  not  the  same  as  that  of  the  sin-offering,  but 
the  same  as  that  of  burning  incense. 

In  this  offering,  then,  we  have  Christ's  perfect  offer- 
ing up  of  Himself,  and  then  tried  in  His  inmost  parts 
by  fiery  trial  of  God's  judgment.  The  consuming  of 
His  life  was  a  sacrifice  of  a  sweet  savour,  all  infinitely 
agreeable  to  God — not  a  thought,  not  a  will,  but  was 
put  to  the  test — His  life  consumed  in  it ;  but  all,  with- 
out apparent  answer  to  sustain,  given  up  to  God ;  all 
was  purely  a  sweet  savour  to  Him.  But  there  was 
more  than  this.  The  greater  part  of  what  has  been 
said  would  apply  to  the  meat-ofi'ering.  But  the  burnt- 
offering  was  to  make  atonement,  an  expression  not 
used  in  chapter  ii.  There  the  personal  intrinsic  per- 
fectness  of  Christ  was  tested,  and  the  manner  of  His 
incarnation,  what  He  was  as  man  down  here,  unfolded, 
but  death  was  the  first  element  of  the  burnt-oftering, 
and  death  was  by  sin.  There  where  man  was  (other- 
wise for  him  it  could  not  be),  where  sin  was,  where 
Satan's  power  as  death  was,  where  God's  irreversible 
judgment  was,  Christ  had  to  glorify  God,  and  it  was  a 
glory  not  otherwise  to  be  displayed :  love,  righteous- 
ness, majesty,  in  the  place  of  sin  and  death.  Christ, 
who  knew  no  sin,  made  sin  for  us,  in  perfect  obedience 
and  love  to  His  Father  goes  down  to  death ;  and  God 
is  glorified  there,  Satan's  power  of  death  destroyed, 
God  glorified  in  man  according  to  all  He  is,  sin  being 
come  in.  in  obedience  and  love.  He  was  in  the  place 
VOL.  1.  I.  L 


146  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

of  sin,  and  God  glorified,  as  no  creation,  no  sinlessness, 
could.  All  was  a  sweet  savour  in  that  place,  and 
according  to  what  God  was  as  to  it  in  righteousness 
and  love. 

When  Noah  offered  his  burnt-offering,  it  is  said, 
"And  Jehovah  smelled  a  sweet  savour,  and  Jehovah 
said  in  his  heart,  I  will  no  more  curse  the  ground  for 
man's  sake,  for  the  imaginations  of  man's  heart  are 
only  evil  continually."  It  had  repented  Him  that  He 
had  made  man,  and  grieved  Him  at  His  heart ;  but 
now,  on  this  sweet  savour,  Jehovah  says  in  His  heart, 
"  I  will  no  more  curse."  Such  is  the  perfect  and  infinite 
acceptableness  of  CMst's  oflfering  up  of  Himself  to  God. 
It  is  not  in  the  sacrifice  we  are  considering  that  He 
has  the  imposition  of  sins  on  Him  (that  was  the  sin- 
offering),  but  the  perfectness,  purity,  and  self-devoted- 
ness  of  the  victim,  but  in  being  made  sin,  and  that 
ascending  in  sweet  savour  to  God.  In  this  accepta- 
bility— in  the  sweet  savour  of  this  sacrifice — we  are 
presented  to  God.  All  the  delight  which  God  finds  in 
the  odour  of  this  sacrifice — blessed  thought ! — we  are 
accepted  in.  Is  God  perfectly  glorified  in  this,  in  all 
that  He  is  ?  He  is  glorified  then  in  receiving  us.  He 
receives  us  as  the  fruit  and  testimony  of  that  in  which 
He  has  been  perfectly  glorified,  and  that  as  revealed  in 
redemption,  in  which  all  that  He  is  is  wrought  out  in 
revelation.  Does  He  delight  in  what  Christ  is,  in  this 
His  most  perfect  act  ?  He  so  delights  in  us.  Does 
this  rise  up  before  Him  a  memorial  for  ever,  in 
His  presence,  of  delight  ?  We,  also,  in  the  efficacy  of 
it,  are  presented  to  Him;  in  one  sense  we  are  that 
memorial.  It  is  not  merely  that  the  sins  have  been 
efifaced  by  the  expiatory  act ;  but  the  perfect  accepta- 
bility of  Him  who  accomplished  it  and  glorified  God 
perfectly  in  it,  the  sweet  savour  of  His  sinless  sacrifice, 
is  our  good  odour  of  delight  before  God,  and  is  ours ; 
its  acceptance,  even  Christ's,  is  ours. 


LEVITICUS.  147 

And  we  are  to  remark  that  though  distinct  from 
laying  our  sins  upon  Him,  yet  death  implied  sin,  and 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  as  burnt-offering,  had  the  cha- 
racter which  resulted  from  sin  being  in  question  before 
God,  namely,  death.  It  made  the  trial  and  suffering 
so  much  the  more  terrible.  His  obedience  was  tested 
before  God  in  the  place  of  sin,  and  He  was  obedient 
unto  death,  not  in  the  sense  of  bearing  sins  and 
putting  them  away,  though  in  the  same  act,  but  in  the 
perfection  of  His  offering  of  Himself  to  God,  and 
obedience  tested  by  God,  tested  by  being  dealt  with  as 
sin,  and  therein,  only,  and  a  perfect  sweet  savour. 
Hence  it  was  atonement ;  and,  in  one  sense,  of  a  deeper 
kind  than  the  bearing  of  sins,  that  is,  as  the  test  of 
obedience  and  glorifying  God  in  it.  If  we  have  found 
peace  in  forgiveness  we  cannot  too  much  study  the  burnt- 
offering.  It  is  that  one  act  in  the  history  of  eternity 
in  which  the  basis  of  all  that  in  which  God  has  glorified 
Himself  morally,  that  is  revealed  Himself  as  He  is, 
and  of  all  that  in  which  our  happiness  is  founded  (and 
its  sphere) — for  blessed  be  God  they  go  together — is  laid; 
and  laid  in  such  a  way  that  Christ  could  say,  therefore 
doth  my  Father  love  me,  and  that  in  total  self-sacri- 
iice  made  sin  before  God  (oh,  wondrous  thought !)  and 
for  us.  It  became  Him.  Where  is  God's  righteousness 
against  sin  known  ?  where  His  holiness  ?  where  His  in- 
finite love,  where  His  moral  majesty,  where  what  be- 
came Him  ?  where  His  truth  ?  where  man's  sin  ?  where 
his  perfectness  ?  and,  absolutely,  where  Satan's  powe^' 
but  its  nullity  too?  All  in  the  cross,  and  essentially 
in  the  burnt-offering.  It  is  not  as  bearing  sins,  but 
as  absolutely  offered  to  God  and  in  atonement — blood- 
shedding  about  sin. 

There  is  another  point  to  remark  in  this  sacrifice  dis- 
tinguishing it.  It  was  wholly  for  and  to  God ;  for  us 
no  doubt,  but  still  wholly  to  God.  Of  other  sacrifices 
(not  of  the  two  first,  for  sin — but  of  these  hereafter)  in 

I. 


148  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

some  form  or  other  men  partook,  of  this  not ;  it  was 
wholly  for  God  and  on  the  altar.  It  was  thus  the 
grand  absolute  essential  sacrifice ;  as  to  its  efiect,  con- 
nected with  us,  as  blood-shedding  was  (Heb.  ix.  26 
and  John  i.  29,  the  Lamb  of  God)  present  in  it.  (Com- 
pare Eph.  V.  2.)  Hence,  though  having  the  stamp 
of  sin  being  there  in  blood-shedding  and  propitiation, 
it  was  absolutely  and  wholly  sweet  savour,  wholly  to 
God. 

I  now  turn  to  the  meat-oftering.  This  presents  to  us 
the  humanity  of  Christ ;  His  grace  and  perfectness  as 
a  living  man,  but  still  as  ofl:ered  to  God  and  fully  tested. 
It  was  of  fine  flour  without  leaven,  mingled  with  oil 
and  frankincense.  The  oil  was  used  in  two  ways ;  it 
was  mingled  with  the  flour,  and  the  cake  was  anointed 
with  it.  The  presenting  (Christ's  presenting  Himself 
as  an  oflering  to  God)  even  unto  death,  and  His  actually 
undergoing  death,  and  shedding  blood,*  must  have  come 
first;  for,  without  the  perfectness  of  this  will  even 
unto  death,  and  that  shedding  of  blood  by  which  God 
was  perfectly  glorified  where  sin  was,  nothing  could 
have  been  accepted ;  yet  Christ's  perfectness  as  a  man 
down  here  had  to  be  proved,  and  that  by  the  test  of 
death  and  the  fire  of  God.  But  the  atoning  work  being 
wrought,  and  His  obedience  perfect  from  the  beginning 
(He  came  to  do  His  Father's  will),  all  the  life  was  per- 
fect and  acceptable  as  man,  a  sweet  savour  under  the 
trial  of  God — His  nature  as  man.-|-  Abel  was  accepted 


*  And  this  for  a  double  reason  :  He  came  to  meet  our  ease,  and 
we  were  in  sin,  and  the  basis  of  all  must  be  blood-shedding  in 
virtue  of  what  God  is,  and  His  obedience  all  through  must  have 
this  perfect  character — unto  death.  Hence,  too,  there  was  no 
eating  it.  Sin  being  there,  it  was  according  to  what  God  is,  and 
wholly  to  God.     Sin  was  before  Hitn  and  He  glorified  as  to  it. 

t  Thus  the  holocaust  gives  what  the  sinful  man's  state  accord- 
ing to  God's  glory  needed ;  the  meat-offering,  the  sinless  perfect 


LEVITICUS.  149 

by  blood ;  Cain,  who  came  in  the  way  of  nature,  offer- 
ing the  fruit  of  his  toil  and  labour,  was  rejected.  All 
that  we  can  offer  of  our  natural  hearts  is  "  the  sacrifice 
of  fools,"  and  is  founded  on  what  is  failure  in  the  spring 
of  any  good,  on  the  sin  of  hardness  of  heart,  which  does 
not  recognise  our  condition — our  sin  and  estrangement 
from  our  God.  What  could  be  a  greater  evidence  of 
hardness  of  heart  than,  under  the  effects  and  conse- 
quences of  sin,  driven  from  Eden,  to  come  and  offer 
offerings,  and  these  offerings  the  fruit  of  the  judicial 
toil  of  the  curse  consequent  on  sin,  as  if  nothing  at  all 
had  happened  ?  It  was  the  perfection  of  blind  hard- 
ness of  heart. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  Adam's  first  act,  when  in 
blessing,  was  to  seek  his  own  will  (and  hence  by  dis- 
obedience he  was,  with  his  posterity  such  as  he,  in  this 
world  of  misery,  alienated  from  God  in  state  and  will), 
Christ  was  in  this  world  of  misery,  devoting  Himself 
in  love,  devoting  Himself  to  do  His  Father's  will.  He 
came  here  emptying  Himself.  He  came  here  by  an 
act  of  devotedness  to  His  Father,  at  all  cost  to  Him- 
self, that  God  might  be  glorified.  He  was  in  the 
world,  the  obedient  man,  whose  will  was  to  do  His 
Father's  will,  the  first  grand  act  and  source  of  all 
human  obedience,  and  of  divine  glory  by  it.  This 
will  of  obedience,  and  devotedness  to  His  Father's 
glory,  stamped  a  sweet  savour  on  all  that  He  did :  all 
He  did  partook  of  this  fragrance. 

It  is  impossible  to  read  John's,*  or  indeed  any  of  the 
Gospels,  where  what  He  was,  His  Person,  specially 
shines  forth,  without  meeting,  at  every  moment,  this 
blessed  fragrance  of  loving  obedience  and  self-re- 
nouncement.    It  is  not  a  history — it  is  Himself,  whom 

man  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  obedience ;  for  His 
life  was  obedience  in  love. 

*  In  John,  the  divine  displayed  in  man,  specially  comes  out. 
Hence  his  Gospel  attracts  the  heart,  w«hile  it  offends  infidelity. 

II. 


150  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

one  cannot  avoid  seeing, — and  also  the  wickedness  of 
man,  which  violently  forced  its  way  through  the 
coverture  and  holy  hiding-place  which  love  had 
wrought  around  Him,  and  forced  into  view  Him  who 
was  clothed  with  humility — the  divine  Person  that 
passed  in  meekness  through  the  world  that  rejected 
Him :  but  it  was  only  to  give  all  its  force  and  blessed- 
ness to  the  self-abasement,  which  never  faltered,  even 
when  forced  to  confess  His  divinity.  It  was  "  I  am," 
but  in  the  lowliness  and  loneliness,  of  the  most  perfect 
and  self -abased  obedience ;  no  secret  desire  to  hold  His 
place  in  His  humiliation,  and  by  His  humiliation: 
His  Father's  glory  was  the  'perfect  desire  of  His  heart. 
It  was,  indeed,  "  I  am  "  that  was  there,  but  in  the  per- 
f  ectness  of  human  obedience.  This  reveals  itself  every- 
where. "  It  is  written,"  was  His  reply  to  the  enemy, 
"  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word 
that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  "It  is 
written  "  was  His  constant  reply.  "  Suffer  it  thus  far," 
says  He  to  John  the  Baptist,  "  thus  it  becometh  us  to 
fulfil  all  righteousness."  "That  give,"  says  He  to 
Peter,  though  the  cJiildren  he  free,  ''for  me  and  for 
thee."  This  historically.  In  John,  where,  as  we  have 
said,  His  Person  shines  more  forth,  it  is  more  directly 
expressed  by  His  mouth :  "  This  commandment  have  I 
received  of  my  Father,"  "and  I  know  that  his  com- 
mandment is  life  eternal."  "  As  the  Father  hath  given 
me  commandment,  so  I  do."  •'  The  Son  can  do  nothing 
of  himself,  but  what  he  seeth  the  Father  do."  "I 
have  kept,"  says  He,  "my  Father's  commandments, 
and  abide  in  his  love."  "  If  a  man  walk  in  the  day, 
he  stumbleth  not." 

Many  of  these  citations  are  on  occasions  where  the 
careful  eye  sees  through  the  blessed  humiliation  of  the 
Lord,  the  divine  nature — God — the  Son,  only  more 
bright  and  blessed  because  thus  hidden ;  as  the  sun,  on 
which  man's  eyes  cannot  gaze,  proves  the  power  of  its 


LEVITICUS.  151 

rays  in  giving  full  light  through  the  clouds  which  hide 
and  soften  its  power.  If  God  humbles  Himself,  He 
still  is  God  ;  it  is  always  He  who  does  it.  "  He  could 
not  be  hid."  This  absolute  obedience  gave  perfect 
grace  and  savour  to  all  He  did.  He  appeared  ever  as 
one  sent.  He  sought  the  glory  of  the  Father  that  sent 
Him.  He  saved  whoever  came  to  Him,  because  He 
came  not  to  do  His  own  will,  but  the  will  of  Him  that 
sent  Him :  and  as  they  would  not  come  without  the 
Father's  drawing,  their  coming  was  His  warrant  for 
saving  them,  for  He  was  to  do  implicitly  the  Father's 
will.  But  what  a  spirit  of  obedience  is  here  !  He  saves 
whom  ?  whomsoever  the  Father  gives  Him — the  servant 
of  His  will.  Does  He  promise  glory  ?  "  It  is  not 
mine  to  give,  but  to  those  for  whom  it  is  prepare:^,  of 
my  Father."  He  must  reward  according  to  the  Father's 
will.  He  is  nothing,  but  to  do  all,  to  accomplish  all, 
His  Father  pleased.  But  who  could  have  done  this, 
save  He  who  could,  and  He  who  at  the  same  time 
would,  in  such  obedience,  undertake  to  do  whatever  the 
Father  would  have  done  ?  The  infiniteness  of  the 
work,  and  capacity  for  it,  identify  themselves  with  the 
perfectness  of  obedience,  which  had  no  will  but  to  do 
that  of  another.  Yet  was  He  a  simple,  humble,  lowly 
man,  but  God's  Son,  in  whom  the  Father  was  well 
pleased. 

Let  us  now  see  the  fitting  of  this  humanity  in  grace 
for  this  work.  This  meat-offering  of  God,  taken  f^'om 
the  fruit  of  the  earth,  was  of  the  finest  wheat ;  that 
which  was  pure,  separate,  and  lovely  in  human  nature 
was  in  Jesus  under  all  its  sorrows,  but  in  all  its  ex- 
cellence, and  excellent  in  its  sorrows.  There  was  no 
unevenness  in  Jesus,  no  predominant  quality  to  pro- 
duce the  effect  of  giving  Him  a  distinctive  character. 
He  was,  though  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  the  per- 
fection of  human  nature.  The  sensibilities,  firmness, 
decision  (though  this  attached  itself  also  to  the  prin- 

II. 


152  THE   BOOKS   OF   TU^  BIBLE. 

ciple  of  obedience),  elevation,  and  calm  meekness 
which  belong  to  human  nature,  all  found  their  perfect 
place  in  Him.  In  a  Paul  I  find  energy  and  zeal ;  in  a 
Peter  ardent  affection ;  in  a  John  tender  sensibilities 
and  abstraction  of  thought,  united  to  a  desire  to  vindi- 
cate what  he  loved,  which  scarce  knew  limit.  But  the 
quality  we  have  observed  in  Peter  predominates,  and 
characterises  him.  In  a  Paul,  blessed  servant  though 
he  was,  he  does  not  repent,  though  he  had  repented. 
He  had  no  rest  in  his  spirit  when  he  found  not  Titus, 
his  brother.  He  goes  off  to  Macedonia,  though  a  door 
was  opened  in  Troas.  He  wist  not  that  it  was  the 
high  priest.  He  is  compelled  to  glory  of  himself.  In 
him,  in  whom  God  was  mighty  towards  the  circumci- 
sion, we  find  the  fear  of  man  break  through  the  faith- 
fulness of  his  zeal.  John,  who  would  have  vindicated 
Jesus  in  his  zeal,  knew  not  what  manner  of  spirit  he 
was  of,  and  would  have  forbidden  the  glory  of  God, 
if  a  man  walked  not  with  them.  Such  were  Paul,  and 
Peter,  and  John. 

But  in  Jesus,  even  as  man,  there  was  none  of  this 
unevenness.  There  was  nothing  salient  in  His  cha- 
racter, because  all  was  in  perfect  subjection  to  God  in 
His  humanity,  and  had  its  place,  and  did  exactly  its 
service,  and  then  disappeared.  God  was  glorified  in 
it,  and  all  was  in  harmony.  When  meekness  became 
Him,  He  was  meek;  when  indignation,  who  could 
stand  before  His  overwhelming  and  withering  rebuke  ? 
Tender  to  the  chief  of  sinners  in  the  time  of  o^race : 
unmoved  by  the  heartless  superiority  of  a  cold  Phari- 
see (curious  to  judge  who  He  was) ;  when  the  time  of 
judgment  is  come,  no  tears  of  those  who  wept  for 
Him  moved  Him  to  other  words  than,  "Weep  for 
yourselves  and  your  children," — words  of  deep  com- 
passion, but  of  deep  subjection  to  the  due  judgment 
of  God.  The  dry  tree  prepared  itself  to  be  burned. 
On  the  cross,  when  His  service  was  finished,  tender  to 


LEVITICUS.  153 

His  mother,  and  entrusting  her,  in  human  care,  to  one 
who,  so  to  speak,  had  been  His  friend,  and  leant  on 
His  bosom;  no  ear  to  recognise  her  word  or  claim  when 
His  service  occupied  Him  for  God ;  putting  both 
blessedly  in  their  place  when  He  woald  shew  that 
before  His  public  mission  He  was  still  the  Son  of  the 
Father,  and  though  such,  in  human  blessedness,  subject 
to  the  mother  that  bare  Him,  and  Joseph  His  father 
as  under  the  law ;  a  calmness  which  disconcerted  His 
adversaries  ;  and,  in  the  moral  power  which  dismayed 
them  by  times,  a  meekness  which  drew  out  the  hearts 
of  all  not  steeled  by  wilful  opposition.  What  keen- 
ness of  edge  to  separate  between  the  evil  and  the 
good! 

True,  the  power  of  the  Spirit  did  this  afterwards  in 
calling  men  out  together  in  open  confession,  but  the 
character  and  Person  of  Jesus  did  it  morally.  There 
was  a  vast  work  done  (I  speak  not  of  expiation)  by 
Him,  who,  as  to  outward  result,  laboured  in  vain. 
Wherever  there  was  an  ear  to  hear,  the  voice  of  God 
spoke,  by  what  Jesus  was  as  a  man,  to  the  heart  and 
conscience  of  His  sheep.  He  came  in  by  the  door,  and 
the  porter  opened,  and  the  sheep  heard  His  voice. 
The  perfect  humanity  of  Jesus,  expressed  in  all 
His  ways,  and  penetrating  by  the  will  of  God,  judged 
all  that  it  found  in  man  and  in  every  heart.  But 
this  blessed  subject  has  carried  us  beyond  our  direct 
object. 

In  a  word,  then,  His  humanity  was  perfect,  all  sub- 
ject to  God,  all  in  immediate  answer  to  His  will,  and 
the  expression  of  it,  and  so  necessarily  in  harmony. 
The  hand  that  struck  the  chord  found  all  in  tune :  all 
answered  to  the  mind  of  Him  whose  thoughts  of  grace 
and  holiness,  of  goodness,  yet  of  judgment  of  evil, 
whose  fulness  of  blessing  in  goodness  were  sounds  of 
sweetness  to  every  weary  ear,  and  found  in  Christ  their 
only  expression.     Every  element,  every  faculty  in  His 

II. 


154  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

humanity,  responded  to  the  impulse  which  the  divine 
will  gave  to  it,  and  then  ceased  in  a  tranquillity  in 
which  self  had  no  place.  Such  was  Christ  in  human 
nature.  While  firm  where  need  demanded,  meekness 
was  what  essentially  characterised  Him  as  to  contrast 
with  others,  because  He  was  in  the  presence  of  God, 
His  God,  and  all  that  in  the  midst  of  evil, — His  voice 
was  not  heard  in  the  street, — for  joy  can  break  forth 
in  louder  strains  when  all  shall  echo,  "  Praise  his  name, 
his  glory." 

But  this  faultlessness  of  the  human  nature  of  our 
Lord  attaches  itself  to  deeper  and  more  important 
sources,  which  are  presented  to  us  in  this  type  nega- 
tively and  positively.  If  every  faculty  thus  obeyed 
and  were  the  instrument  of  the  divine  impulse  in  its 
place,  it  is  evident  that  the  will  must  be  right — that 
the  spirit  and  principle  of  obedience  must  be  its  spring; 
for  it  is  the  action  of  an  independent  will  which  is 
the  principle  of  sin.  Christ,  as  a  divine  Person,  had 
the  title  of  an  independent  will.  "  The  Son  quickens 
whom  he  will ;"  but  He  came  to  do  His  Father's  will. 
His  will  was  obedience,  sinless  therefore,  and  perfect. 
Leaven,  in  the  word,  is  the  symbol  of  corruption — 
"  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness."  In  the  cake, 
therefore,  which  was  to  be  offered  as  a  sweet  savour  to 
God,  there  was  no  leaven :  where  leaven  was,  it  could 
not  be  offered  as  a  sweet  savour  to  God.  This  is 
thrown  into  relief  by  t^ie  converse :  there  were  cakes 
made  with  leaven,  and  it  was  forbidden  to  offer  them 
as  sweet  savour,  an  offering  made  by  fire.  This  oc- 
curred in  two  cases,  one  of  which,  the  most  important 
and  significative,  and  suflacing  to  establish  the  principle, 
is  noticed  in  this  chapter. 

When  the  firstfruits  were  offered,  two  cakes  were 
offered  baked  with  leaven,  but  not  for  an  offering  for 
a  sweet  savour.  Burnt-offerings  and  meat-offerings 
were  also  offered,  and  for  a  sweet  savour;  but  the 


LEVITICUS.  155 

offering  of  the  firstfruits — not.  (See  verse  12  of  this 
chapter,  and  Lev.  xxiii.)  And  what  were  these  first- 
fruits  ?  The  church,  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
For  this  feast  and  offering  of  the  firstfruits  was  the 
acknowledged  and  known  type  of  the  day  of  Pentecost 
— in  fact  was  the  day  of  Pentecost.  We  are,  says  the 
Apostle  James,  a  kind  of  firstfruits  of  His  creatures. 
It  will  be  seen  (Lev.  xxiii.)  that,  the  day  of  Christ's 
resurrection,  the  first  of  the  fruits  was  offered,  ears  of 
corn  unbroken,  unbruised.  Clearly  there  was  no  leaven 
there.  He  rose,  too,  without  seeing  corruption.  With 
this  no  sin-offering  was  offered,  but  with  the  leavened 
cakes  (which  represented  the  assembly  sanctified  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  God,  but  still  living  in  corrupted 
human  nature)  a  sin-offering  was  offered;  for  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ  for  us,  answered  for  and  puts  away 
in  God's  sight  the  leaven  of  our  corrupted  nature, 
overcome  (but  not  ceasing  to  exist)  by  the  operation  of 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  by  reason  of  which  nature,  in  itself 
corrupt,  we  could  not,  in  the  trial  of  God's  judgment, 
be  a  sweet  savour,  an  offering  made  by  firo ;  but,  by 
means  of  Christ's  sacrifice,  which  met  and  answered 
the  evil,  could  be  offered  to  God,  as  is  said  in  Komans, 
a  living  sacrifice.  Hence  it  is  said,  not  merely  that 
Christ  has  answered  for  our  sins,  but  that  "  what  the 
law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the 
fiesh,  God,  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of 
sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh." 
God  has  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  but  it  was  in 
Christ  as  for,  that  is  as  a  sacrifice  for,  sin  making 
atonement,  undergoing  the  judgment  due  to  it,  being- 
made  sin  for  us  because  of  it,  but  dying  in  doing  so,  so 
that  we  reckon  ourselves  dead.  The  condemnation  of 
the  sin  is  passed  in  His  death,  but  death  to  it 'is  therein 
come  to  us. 

It  is  important  for  a  troubled  but  tender  and  faith- 
ful conscience  to  remember  that  Christ  has  died,  not 

II. 


156  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

merely  for  our  sins,*  but  for  our  sin ;  for  surely  this 
troubles  a  faithful  conscience  much  more  than  many 
sins  past. 

As  the  cakes  then,  which  represent  the  church, 
were  baked  with  leaven,  and  could  not  be  offered 
for  a  sweet  savour,  so  the  cake,  which  represented 
Christ,  was  without  leaven,  a  sweet  savour,  and  offer- 
ing made  by  fire  unto  Jehovah.  The  trial  of  the 
Lord's  judgment  found  a  perfect  will,  and  the  ab- 
sence of  all  evil,  or  spirit  of  independence.  It  was 
"thy  will  be  done"  which  characterised  the  human 
nature  of  the  Lord,  filled  with  and  animated  by  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead,  but  the  man  Jesus,  the 
offering  of  God. 

There  is  another  example  of  the  converse  of  this 
which  I  may  notice  in  passing — the  peace-offerings. 
There  Christ  had  His  part,  man  also.  Hence  in  this 
were  found  cakes  made  with  leaven  along  with  the 
others  which  were  without  it.  That  offering,  which 
represented  the  communion  of  the  assembly  connected 
with  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  necessarily  brought  in 
man,  and  the  leaven  was  there — ordained  symbol  of 
that  leaven  which  is  ever  found  in  us.  The  assembly 
is  called  to  holiness ;  the  life  of  Christ  in  us  is  holiness 
to  the  Lord ;  but  it  remains  ever  true  that  in  us,  that 
is,  in  our  flesh,  dwells  no  good  thing. 

This  leads  us  to  another  great  principle  presented  to 
us  in  this  type :  namely,  the  cake  was  to  be  mingled 
with  oil.  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh ;  and 
in  ourselves,  born  simply  of  the  flesh,  we  are  naturally 
nothing  but  corrupted  and  fallen  flesh — "of  the  will 
of  the  flesh."  Though  we  are  born  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  this  does  not  uncreate  the  old  nature.  It  may 
attenuate  to  any  conceivable  degree  its  active  force, 

*  Judgment  in  the  last  day  is  according  to  works,  but  by  the 
state  of  sin  we  were  wholly  alienated  from  God  and  lost. 


LEVITICUS.  157 

and  control  altogether  its  operations  ;*  but  the  nature 
remains  unchanged.  The  nahtre  of  St.  Paul  was  as 
disposed  to  be  puffed  up  when  he  had  been  in  the 
third  heaven,  as  when  he  had  the  letter  of  the  chief 
priest  in  his  robe  to  destroy  the  name  of  Christ  if  he 
could.  I  do  not  say  the  disposition  had  the  same 
power,  but  the  disposition  was  as  bad  or  worse,  for  it 
was  in  the  presence  of  greater  good. 

But  the  will  of  the  flesh  had  no  part  whatever  in 
the  birth  of  Christ.  His  human  nature  flowed  as 
simply  from  the  divine  will  as  the  presence  of  the 
divine  upon  earth.  Mary,  bowing  in  single-eyed  and 
exquisite  obedience,  displays  with  touching  beauty  the 
submission  and  bowing  of  her  heart  and  understanding 
to  the  revelation  of  God.  "Behold  the  handmaid  of 
the  Lord  [Jehovah],  be  it  unto  me  according  to  thy 
word."  He  knew  no  sin ;  His  human  nature  itself  was 
conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  holy  thing  which 
was  born  of  the  virgin  was  to  be  called  the  Son  of 
God.  He  was  truly  and  thoroughly  man,  born  of 
Mary,  but  He  was  man  born  of  God.  So  I  see  this 
title.  Son  of  God,  applied  to  the  three  several  estates 
of  Christ:  Son  of  God,  Creator,  in  Colossians,  in 
Hebrews,  and  in  other  passages  which  allude  to  it; 
Son  of  God,  as  born  in  the  world ;  and  declared  Son 
of  God  with  power  as  risen  again  from  the  dead. 

The  cakef  was  made  mingled  with  oil,  just  as  the 

*  We  never  have  any  excuse  for  any  sin  of  act  or  thought, 
because  Christ's  grace  is  sufficient  for  us,  and  God  is  faithfiil  not 
to  suffer  us  to  be  tempted  above  that  which  we  are  able  to  bear. 
It  may  be  that  at  a  given  moment  we  may  not  have  power,  but 
then  there  has  been  neglect. 

f  This  was  in  various  forms,  but  all  bringing  out  the  two 
principles  noticed.  First,  the  great  general  truth  :  fine  flour, 
oil  poured  on  it,  and  frankincense ;  baken  in  the  oven,  cakes 
mingled,  or  wafers  anointed,  with  oil — of  course  unleavened; 
if  in  a  pan,  flour  unleavened  mingled  with  oil ;  if  in  the  frying- 
pan,  fine  flour  with  oil.     Thus  in  all  forms  in  which  Christ 

XL 


168  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

human  nature  of  Christ  had  its  being  and  character, 
its  taste,  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  which  oil  is  ever  and 
the  known  symbol.  But  purity  is  not  power,  and  it  is 
in  another  form  that  spiritual  power,  acting  in  the 
human  nature  of  Jesus,  is  expressed. 

The  cakes  were  to  be  anointed  with  oil;  and  it  is 
written  how  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power,  who  went  about  doing 
good  and  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil. 
It  was  not  that  anything  was  wanting  in  Jesus.  In 
the  first  place,  as  God,  He  could  have  done  all  things, 
but  He  had  humbled  Himself,  and  was  come  to  obey. 
Hence,  only  when  called  and  anointed,  He  presents 
Himself  in  public,  although  His  interview  with  the 
doctors  in  the  temple  shewed  His  relation  with  the 
Father  from  the  beginning. 

There  is  a  certain  analogy  in  our  case.  It  is  a  different 
thing  to  be  born  of  God,  and  sealed  and  anointed  with 
the  Holy  Ghost.  The  day  of  Pentecost,  Cornelius,  the 
believers  of  Samaria  on  whom  the  apostle  laid  their 
hands — all  prove  this,  as  also  many  passages  on  the 
subject.  We  are  all  "the  sons  of  God  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus."     But  "  because  ye  are  sons,"  "  God  hath 


could  be  looked  at  as  man,  it  was  absence  of  sin ;  His  human 
nature  formed  in  the  power  and  character  of,  and  anointed  also 
with,  the  Holy  Ghost.  For  we  may  consider  His  human  nature, 
as  such  in  itself:  oil  is  poured  on  it.  I  may  see  it  tried  to  the 
uttermost :  it  is  still  purity,  and  the  grace  and  expression  of  tlie 
Holy  Ghost,  in  its  inward  nature,  in  it.  I  may  see  it  displayed 
before  men,  and  it  is  in  Holy  Ghost  power.  We  may  see  both 
together  in  essential,  in  inward,  reality  of  character,  in  public 
walk,  in  every  part  (as  presented  to  God)  of  that  nature  which 
was  perfect  and  formed  by  Holy  Ghost  power :  absence  of  all 
evil,  and  the  Holy  Ghost's  power  is  manifested  in  it.  So,  when 
broken  into  pieces,  every  part  of  it  was  anointed  with  oil,  to 
shew  that  if  Christ's  life  were,  so  to  speak,  taken  to  pieces,  every 
detail  and  element  of  it  was  in  the  perfectness  of,  and  character- 
ised by,  the  Holy  Ghost. 


LEVITICUS.  159 

sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your  hearts."  "  In 
whom  also,  after  that  ye  beheved,  ye  were  sealed  with 
that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the  earnest  of  our 
inheritance,  until  the  redemption  of  the  purchased 
possession."  "  This  spake  he,"  says  John,  "  of  the  Spirit, 
which  they  that  believe  on  him  should  receive."  The 
Holy  Ghost  may  have  produced,  by  a  new  nature,  holy 
desires,  and  the  love  of  Jesus,  without  the  conscious- 
ness of  deliverance  and  power — the  joy  of  His  presence 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  finished  work  of  Christ.  As 
to  the  Lord  Jesus,  we  know  that  this  second  act,  of 
anointing,  was  accomplished  in  connection  with  the 
perfectness  of  His  Person,  as  it  could,  because  He  was 
righteous  in  Himself,  when,  after  His  baptism  by  John 
(in  which  He  who  knew  no  sin  placed  Himself  with 
His  people,  then  the  remnant  of  Israel,  in  the  first 
movement  of  grace  in  their  hearts,  shewn  in  going  to 
John,  to  be  with  them  in  all  the  path  of  that  grace 
from  beginning  to  end,  its  trials  and  its  sorrows),  He, 
sinless,  was  anointed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  descending  in 
a  bodily  shape  like  a  dove,  and  was  led  of  the  Spirit 
into  the  conflict  for  us,  and  returned  conqueror  in  its 
power,  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  into  Galilee.  I  say 
conqueror  in  its  power;  for  if  Jesus  had  repulsed  Satan 
simply  by  divine  power,  as  such,  first  there  evidently 
could  have  been  no  conflict ;  and  secondly,  no  example 
or  encouragement  for  us.  But  the  Lord  repulsed  him 
by  a  principle  which  is  our  duty  every  day — obedience, 
intelligent  obedience;  employing  the  word  of  God, 
and  repulsing  Satan  with  indignation  the  moment  he 
openly  shews  himself  such.*  If  Christ  entered  into 
His  course  with  the  testimony  and  joy  of  a  Son,  He 
entered  into  a  course  of  conflict  and  obedience  (He 
might  bind  the  strong  man,  but  He  had  the  strong  man 
to  bind). 

*  The  two  first  temptations  (Matt,  iv.)  were  the  wiles  of  the 
enemy.     In  the  last  he  is  openly  Satan. 

II. 


160  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

So  we.  Joy,  deliverance,  love,  abounding  peace, 
the  Spirit  of  sonship,  the  Father  known  as  accept- 
ing us:  such  is  the  entrance  to  the  christian  course, 
but  the  course  we  enter  on  is  conflict  and  obedience : 
leave  the  latter,  and  we  fail  in  the  former.  Satan's 
effort  was  to  separate  these  in  Jesus.  If  thou  be  the 
Son,  use  thy  power — make  stones  into  bread — act  by 
thine  own  will.  The  answer  of  Jesus  is,  in  sense,  "  I 
am  in  the  place  of  obedience — of  servitude  ;  I  have  no 
command.  It  is  written,  Man  shall  live  by  every  word 
that  proceeds  out  of  the  mouth  of  God.  I  rest  in  my 
state  of  dependence." 

It  was  power,  then,  but  power  used  in  the  state  and 
in  the  accomplishment  of  obedience.  The  only  act  of 
disobedience  which  Adam  could  commit  he  did  commit ; 
but  He,  who  could  have  done  all  things  as  to  power, 
only  used  His  power  to  display  more  perfect  service, 
more  perfect  subjection.  How  blessed  is  the  picture  of 
the  Lord's  ways  !  and  that,  in  the  midst  of  the  sorrows, 
and  enduring  the  consequences  of  the  disobedience,  of 
man,  of  the  nature  He  had  taken  in  everything  save 
sin.  "  For  it  became  him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and 
by  whom  are  all  things,  [seeing  the  state  we  are  in,]  in 
bringing  many  sons  unto  glory,  to  make  the  captain  of 
their  salvation  perfect  through  sufferings." 

Jesus,  then,  was  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  con- 
flict. Jesus  was  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  obedi- 
ence. Jesus  was  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  casting 
out  devils,  and  bearing  all  our  infirmities.  Jesus  was 
also  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  offering  Himself 
without  spot  to  God;  but  this  belonged  rather  to  the 
burnt-offering.  In  what  He  did  do,  and  in  what  He 
did  not  do,  He  acted  by  the  energy  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  Hence  it  is  that  He  presents  an  example  to  us, 
followed  with  mingled  energies,  but  by  a  power  by 
which  we  may  do  greater  things,  if  it  be  His  will, 
than  He — not  be  more  perfect,  but  do  greater  things ; 


LEVITICUS.  161 

and  morally,  as  the  apostle  tells  us,  all  things.  On 
earth  He  was  absolutely  perfect  in  obedience,  but  by 
that  itself  He  did  not,  and,  in  the  moral  sense,  could 
not,  do  many  things,  which  He  can  do,  and  manifest 
now,  by  His  apostles  and  servants.  For,  exalted  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  He  was  to  manifest,  even  as 
man,  power,  not  obedience  ;  "  Greater  things  than  these 
shall  ye  do,  because  I  go  to  my  Father." 

This  puts  us  in  the  place  of  obedience,  for  by  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  we  are  servants  to  Christ — diver- 
sities of  ministrations,  but  the  same  Lord.  Hence 
greater  works  were  done  by  the  apostles,  but  mingled 
in  their  personal  walk  with  all  sorts  of  imperfections. 
With  whom  did  Jesus  contend,  even  if  He  was  in  the 
right  ?  before  whom  manifest  the  fear  of  man  ?  when 
did  He  repent  of  an  act  which  He  had  done,  even  if 
afterwards  there  was  no  reason  for  repentance  ?  No  ! 
there  was  a  greater  exercise  of  power  in  apostolic 
service,  as  Jesus  had  promised )  but  in  vessels  whose 
weakness  shewed  all  the  praise  to  be  of  another,  and 
whose  obedience  was  carried  on  in  conflict  with  another 
will  in  themselves.  This  was  the  great  distinction. 
Jesus  had  never  need  of  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  lest  He 
should  be  exalted  above  measure.  Blessed  Master! 
Thou  didst  speak  that  Thou  knewest,  and  testifiedst 
that  Thou  hadst  seen;  but  to  do  so  Thou  hadst  emptied, 
Immbled  Thyself,  made  Thyself  of  no  reputation,  and 
taken  the  form  of  a  servant,  in  order  to  our  being  ex- 
alted by  it.  The  height,  the  consciousness  of  the 
height,  from  which  He  came  down,  the  perfectness  of 
the  will  in  which  He  obeyed  where  He  was,  made  no 
exaltation  needed  to  Him.  Yet  He  looked  on  the  joy 
that  was  set  before  Him,  and  was  not  ashamed,  for  He 
was  humbled  even  to  this,  to  rejoice  in  having  respect 
to  the  recompense  of  reward.  And  He  has  been  highly 
exalted.  "Because  of  the  savour  of  thy  good  oint- 
ments, thy  name  is  as  ointment  poured  forth."     For 

U.  M 


162  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

there  was  yet  besides,  in  the  meat-offering,  the  frank- 
incense— the  savour  of  all  Christ's  graces. 

How  much  of  our  graces  is  presented  to  the  accept- 
ance of  man,  and  consequently  the  flesh  often  mistaken 
for  grace,  or  mixed  with  it,  being  judged  of  according 
to  the  judgment  of  man !  But  in  Jesus  all  His  graces 
were  presented  to  God.  True,  man  could,  or  ought  to 
have  discerned  them  as  the  odour  of  the  frankincense, 
diffusing  itself  around,  where  all  was  burnt  to  God ; 
but  it  was  all  burnt  as  a  sweet  savour  to  God.  And 
this  is  perfection. 

How  few  so  present  their  charity  to  God,  and  bring 
God  into  their  charity,  exercising  it  for  and  towards 
Him,  though  in  behalf  of  man,  so  that  they  persevere 
nothing  the  less  in  its  exercise,  though  the  more  they 
love,  the  less  they  be  loved !  it  is  for  God's  sake. 
So  far  as  this  is  the  case,  it  is  indeed  a  sweet  odour  to 
God ;  but  this  is  difficult :  we  must  be  much  before 
God.  This  was  perfectly  the  case  with  Christ;  the 
more  faithful  He  was,  the  more  despised  and  opposed  ; 
the  more  meek,  the  less  esteemed.  But  all  this  altered 
nothing,  because  He  did  all  to  God  alone:  with  the 
multitude,  with  His  disciples,  or  before  His  unjust 
judges,  nothing  altered  the  perfectness  of  His  ways, 
because  in  all  the  circumstances  all  was  done  to  God. 
The  incense  of  His  service  and  His  heart,  of  His  affec- 
tions, went  ever  and  always  up,  and  referred  themselves 
to  God ;  and  surely  abundant  frankincense,  and  sweet 
its  odour,  in  the  life  of  Jesus.  The  Lord  smelled  a 
sweet  savour,  and  blessing  flowed  forth,  and  not  the 
curse,  for  us.  This  was  added  to  the  meat-offering, 
for  in  truth  it  was  in  effect  produced  in  His  life  by  the 
Spirit,  but  always  this  frankincense  ascended ;  so  of 
His  intercession,  for  it  was  the  expression  of  His 
gracious  love.  His  prayers,  as  the  holy  expression  of 
dependence,  infinitely  precious  and  attractive  to  God, 
were  all  sv/eet  odour,  as  frankincense,  before  Him. 


LEVITICUS.  163 

"  The  house  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  ointment." 
And  just  as  sin  is  taking  self  instead  of  God,  this  was 
taking  God  instead  of  self,  and  this  is  perfection.  And 
it  is  power  too,  because  then  circumstances  have  no 
power  over  self.  And  this  is  perfection  in  going 
through  the  world.  Jesus  was  always  Himself  in 
all  circumstances ;  yet  for  that  very  reason  we  feel 
them  all  according  to  God — not  self.  We  may  add, 
too,  as  Satan  led  to  one,  and  so  slavery  to  him,  so 
the  other  is  in  the  power  and  leading  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

There  was  yet  another  thing  forbidden,  as  well  as 
leaven,  in  the  sacrifice — namely,  honey,  that  which 
was  most  sweet  to  the  natural  taste,  as  the  affections 
of  those  we  love  after  the  flesh,  happy  associations,  and 
the  like.  It  is  not  that  these  were  evil.  "  Hast  thou 
found  honey  ?"  says  the  wise  man,  "  eat  so  much  as  is 
sufficient,  lest  thou  be  filled  therewith,  and  vomit  it." 
When  Jonathan  took  a  little  he  had  found  in  the  wood, 
in  the  day  of  service  and  the  energy  of  faith  for  Israel, 
his  eyes  were  lightened.  But  it  cannot  enter  into  a 
sacrifice.  He  who  could  say, "  Mother,  behold  thy  son," 
and  "Son,  behold  thy  mother,"  even  in  the  terrible 
moment  of  the  cross,  when  His  service  was  finished, 
could  also  say,  "Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee?"* 
when  He  was  in  the  simplest  accomplishment  of  His 
service.  He  was  a  stranger  to  His  own  mother's  sons, 
as  Levi,  in  the  blessing  of  Moses,  the  man  of  God — 
Levi,  who  was  offered  as  an  offering  to  God  of  the 
people  (Num.  viii.  11),  "who  said  unto  his  father  and 
his  mother,  I  have  not   seen  him ;    neither   did   he 

*  In  the  first  case  in  which  this  happens,  after  saying  it,  He 
goes  down  immediately  with  His  disciples,  and  His  mother 
(John  ii.  12),  and  brethren.  He  could  be  in  the  midst  of  all  that 
influences  man  naturally,  yet  separate  from  it  because  He  was 
inwardly  perfect.  All  the  gospels,  and  personally  John  xix.  26, 
shew  these  natural  relations  formed  of  God  fully  owned. 

II. 


164  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

acknowledge  his  brethren,  nor  knew  his  own  children: 
for  they  have  observed  thy  word,  and  kept  thy 
covenant." 

Yet  another  thing  remains  to  be  observed.  In  the 
burnt-offering  all  was  burnt  to  God,  for  Christ  offered 
Himself  wholly  up  to  God.  But  the  human  nature  of 
Christ  is  the  food  of  the  priests  of  God ;  Aaron  and 
his  sons  were  to  eat  what  was  not  burned  in  the  fire, 
of  the  meat-offering.  Christ  was  the  true  bread,  come 
down  from  heaven,  to  give  life  unto  the  world,  that 
we  (through  faith,  priests  and  kings)  may  eat  thereof 
and  not  die.  It  was  holy,  for  Aaron  and  his  sons  alone 
to  eat ;  for  who  indeed  ever  fed  on  Christ  but  those 
who,  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  live  the  life  of 
faith,  and  feed  on  the  food  of  faith  ?  And  is  not 
Christ  the  food  of  our  souls,  as  sanctified  to  God,  yea, 
sanctifying  us  also  ever  to  God  ?  Do  not  our  souls 
recognise  in  the  meek  and  humble  holy  One — in  Him 
who  shines  as  the  light  of  human  perfectness  and 
divine  grace  amongst  sinful  men — what  feeds,  nourishes, 
and  sanctifies  ?  Cannot  our  souls  feel  what  it  is  to  be 
offered  to  God,  in  tracing,  by  the  sympathy  of  the 
Spirit  of  Jesus  in  us,  the  life  of  Jesus  toward  God,  and 
before  men  in  the  world  ?  An  example  to  us,  He 
presents  the  impress  of  a  man  living  to  God,  and 
draws  us  after  Him,  and  that  by  the  attraction  of 
what  He  was — Himself  the  force  which  carries  on  in 
the  way  He  trod,  while  our  delight  and  joy  are  in  it. 
Are  not  our  afi'ections  occupied  and  assimilated  in 
dwellino^  with  delight  on  what  Jesus  was  here  below  ? 
We  admire,  are  humbled,  and  become  conformed  to 
Him  through  grace.  Head  and  source  of  this  life  in 
us,  the  display  of  its  perfection  in  Him  draws  forth 
and  developes  its  energies  and  lowliness  in  us.  For 
who  could  be  proud  in  fellowship  with  the  humble 
Jesus  ?  Humble,  He  would  teach  us  to  take  the  lowest 
place,  but  that  He  has  taken  it  Himself,  the  privilege 


LEVITICUS.  165 

of  His  perfect  grace.  Blessed  Master,  may  we  at  least 
be  near  to  and  hidden  in  thee ! 

This  is  true,  but  there  is  a  difference  to  be  made 
here.  In  the  peace-oiferings  there  was  also  an  eating 
of  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  besides  what  the  priests 
had.  Those  who  ate  were  Israelites  and  clean,  and 
they  ate  together  as  a  convivial  feast.  There  was  a 
common  enjoyment,  fellowship,  founded  on  the  offering 
of  the  blood  and  of  the  fat  to  God,  that  is  of  Christ  a^ 
offered  to  God  in  death  for  us — the  sin-offerings  are 
assimilated  in  this  last  (Lev.  iv.  10,  26,  31,  35),  and 
the  partaking  of  those  who  partook  of  the  feast  was 
carefully  connected  with  this.  This  was  common  and 
just  joy,  thanksgiving  for  blessings,  or  voluntarily  as 
rejoicing  in  the  Lord's  blessing,  it  was  "  Shalom,"  and 
was  fellowship  in  it,  the  fruit  of  redemption  and  grace. 
The  case  of  the  meat-offering  was  that  of  one,  himself 
consecrated  to  God,  entering  into  and  feeding  on  the 
perfectness  of  Christ  Himself  as  offering  Himself  to 
God.     The  priests  alone  ate  of  it  as  such. 

How  vast  too  the  grace  which  has  introduced  us  into 
this  intimateness  of  communion,  has  made  us  priests 
in  the  power  of  quickening  grace,  to  partake  of  that 
in  which  God  our  Father  delights;  that  which  is 
off^ered  to  Him  as  a  sweet  savour,  an  offering  made  by 
fire  to  Jehovah ;  that  with  which  the  table  of  God  is 
supplied  !  This  is  sealed  by  covenant  as  a  perpetual, 
an  eternal,  portion.  Hence  the  salt  of  the  covenant  of 
our  God  was  not  wanting  in  the  sacrifice,  in  any  sacri- 
fice; the  stability,  the  durability,  the  preservative 
energy  of  that  which  was  divine,  not  always  perhaps 
to  us  sweet  and  agreeable,  was  there — the  seal,  on  the 
part  of  God,  that  it  was  no  passing  savour,  no 
momentary  delight,  but  eternal.  For  all  that  is  of 
man  passes ;  all  that  is  of  God  is  eternal ;  the  life,  the 
charity,  the  nature,  and  the  grace  continues.  This 
holy  separating  power,  which  keeps  us  apart  from  cor- 

11. 


166  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

ruption,  is  o£  God,  partaking  of  the  stability  of  the 
divine  nature,  and  binding  unto  Him,  not  by  what  we 
are  in  will,  but  by  the  security  of  divine  grace.  It  is 
active,  pure,  sanctifying  to  us,  but  it  is  of  grace,  and 
the  energy  of  the  divine  will,  and  the  obligation  of 
the  divine  promise  binds  us  indeed  to  Him,  but  binds 
by  His  energy  and  fidelity,  not  ours — energy  which  is 
mingled  with  and  founded  on  the  sacrifice  of  Christ, 
in  which  the  covenant  of  God  is  sealed  and  assured 
infallibly,  or  Christ  is  not  honoured.  It  is  the  cove- 
nant of  God.  Leaven  and  honey,  our  sin  and  natural 
affections,  cannot  find  a  place  in  the  sacrifice  of  God, 
but  the  energy  of  His  grace  (not  sparing  the  evil,  but 
securing  the  good)  is  there  to  seal  our  infallible  enjoy- 
ment of  its  effects  and  fruits.  Salt  did  not  form  the 
offering,  but  it  was  never  to  be  wanting  in  any — could 
not  be  in  what  was  of  God;  it  was  indeed  in  every 
offering. 

.  We  must  remember  in  this  offering,  as  in  the  former, 
that  the  essential  characteristic,  common  indeed  to  all, 
was  its  being  oft'ered  to  God.  This  could  not  be  said  of 
Adam:  in  his  innocence  he  enjoyed  much  from  God; 
he  returned,  or  should  have  returned,  thankfulness  for 
it ;  but  it  was  enjoyment  and  thankfulness.  He  was 
not  himself  an  offering  to  God.  But  this  was  the 
essence  of  Christ's  life — it  was  offered  to  God ;  and 
hence  separated  from  all  around  it,  essentially  separ- 
ated.* He  was  holy,  therefore,  and  not  merely  inno- 
cent :  for  innocence  is  the  absence  of — ignorance  of — 
evil,  not  separation  from  it.  God  (who  knows  good 
and  evil,  but  is  infinitely  above  and  separated  from 
the  evil,  as  it  is  opposite  to  Him)  is  holy.  Christ  was 
holy,  and  not  merely  innocent,  being  consecrated  in  all 

*  This  was  what  was  properly  signified  by  salt.  So  every 
sacrifice  is  seasoned  with  salt.  Let  your  speech  be  always  with 
grace,  seasoned  with  salt.  It  is  what  gives  a  divine  taste,  a 
witness  of  God  to  everything. 


LEVITICUS.  167 

His  will  to  God,  and  separate  from  the  evil,  and  living 
in  the  energy  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Also,  as  offered, 
the  essence  of  the  offering  was  the  fine  flour,  oil,  and 
frankincense,  representing  human  nature,  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  the  perfume  of  grace.  Negatively  there 
was  to  be  no  leaven  or  honey :  so,  as  to  the  manner, 
tliere  was  the  mingling  with  oil  and  the  anointing  with 
oil ;  also,  for  every  sacrifice,  the  salt  of  the  covenant 
of  God :  here  noticed,  because  in  what  concerned  the 
grace  of  His  human  nature,  what  concerned  man  (a 
man  offering  Himself  to  God — not  as  dying,  but  as 
living,  though  tested  even  to  death),  it  might  have 
been  supposed  to  be  wanting,  that  it  was  as  man's  act 
just  as  good.  But  its  being  offered  on  the  altar  to 
God,  burned  as  a  sweet  savour,  and  the  three  things 
iirst  named,  formed  the  substance  and  essence  of  the 
meat-Oiibring. 

The  peace-offering  now  presents  itself  to  our  notice. 
It  is  the  offering  which  typifies  to  us  the  communion 
of  saints,  according  to  the  efficacy  of  the  sacrifice,  with 
God,  with  the  priest  who  has  offered  it  in  our  behalf, 
with  one  another,  and  with  the  whole  body  of  the 
saints  as  priests  to  God.  It  comes  after  those  which 
presented  to  us  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  in  His  devoting 
Himself  to  death,  and  His  devotedness  and  grace  in 
His  life,  but  even  unto  death,  and  the  testing  of  fire, 
that  we  may  understand  that  all  communion  is  based 
on  the  acceptability  and  sweet  odour  of  this  sacrifice ; 
not  only  because  the  sacrifice  was  needed,  but  because 
therein  God  had  all  His  delight. 

I  have  already  remarked  that,  when  a  sinner,  that  is 
a  guilty  person,  approached,  the  sin-offering  came 
first;  for  the  sin  must  be  borne  and  put  away  that  he 
might  approach,  as  qualified  to  do  so.  But,  being 
cleansed  and  clean,  he  approaches ;  and  so  here,  accord- 
ing to  the  sweet  savour  of  the  offering  of  God,  the 
XL,  III. 


168  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

perfect  acceptability  of  Christ,  who  knew  no  sin,  but 
consecrated  Himself  in  a  world  of  sin  to  God,  that 
God  might  be  perfectly  glorified — and  His  life  also, 
that  all  that  God  was  in  judgment  might  be  also  glori- 
fied— glorified  by  man  in  His  Person ;  and  hence  infi- 
nite favour  flow  forth  on  them  that  were  received  and 
that  came  by  Him.  "  Therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me, 
because  I  lay  down  my  life  that  I  might  take  it  again." 
He  does  not  say  here,  because  I  have  laid  it  down  for 
the  sheep ;  that  was  rather  the  sin-offering.  He  speaks 
of  the  positive  excellence  and  value  of  His  act ;  for  in 
this  Man  wrought  all  perfectness.  In  this  all  the 
majesty  and  truth,  the  righteousness  against  sin,  and 
love  of  God  were  infinitely  glorified  in  man,  though 
much  more  than  a  man,  and,  where  poor  estranged 
man  had  got  by  sin,  in  Him  who  was  made  sin  for  us. 
"  Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified,  and  God  is  glorified 
in  him."  "  By  man  came  death,  by  man  came  also  the 
resurrection  from  the  dead."  The  evil  which  Satan 
had  wrought  was  infinitely  more  than  remedied,  in  the 
scene  where  the  ruin  was  brought  in ;  yea,  by  the 
means  through  which  the  ruin  was  eflfected.  If  God 
was  dishonoured  in  and  by  man,  He  is  a  debtor  in  a 
certain  sense  to  man  in  Jesus  for  the  full  display  of  His 
best  and  most  blessed  glory :  though  even  this  be  all 
His  gift  to  us,  yet  Christ  making  Himself  man  has 
wrought  it  out.  But  all  that  Christ  was  and  did  was 
infinitely  acceptable  to  God ;  and  in  this  we  have  our 
communion — not  in  the  sin-offering.*  Hence  the 
peace-offerings  follow  here  at  once,  though,  as  I  have 

*  Though  the  perfect  offering  for  sin  is  the  basis  of  all ;  we 
should  not  without  it  have  the  thing  to  have  communion  in,  and 
this  point  was  carefully  guarded  in  the  type  of  the  peace-offering 
— it  could  not  be  acceptably  eaten  but  in  connection  with  what 
was  offered  to  God.  (See  chap,  vii.)  Only  it  is  communion  in 
the  joy  of  the  "  common  salvation,"  not  special  priestly  delight 
in  what  Christ  was  for  God. 


LEVITICUS.  169 

remarked,  the  sin-ofFering  came  first  of  all  where  the 
case  of  application  arose. 

The  first  act  in  the  case  of  the  peace-offering  was 
the  presenting  and  killing  it  at  the  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  congregation  and  sprinkling  the  blood, 
which  formed  the  basis  of  every  animal  offering,  the 
offerer  being  identified  with  the  victim  by  laying  his 
hands  on  his  head.* 

Next,  all  the  fat,  especially  of  the  inwards,  was 
taken  and  burnt  on  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  to  the 
Lord.  Fat  and  blood  were  alike  forbidden  to  be  eaten. 
The  blood  was  the  life,  and  necessarily  belonged  es- 
sentially to  God ;  life  was  from  Him  in  an  especial 
manner ;  but  fat  also  was  never  to  be  eaten  but  burnt, 
and  so  offered  to  God.  The  use  of  this  symbol,  fat,  is 
sufficiently  familiar  in  the  word.  "  Their  heart  is  fat 
as  brawn."  "  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  and  kicked."  "  They 
are  enclosed  in  their  own  fat,  with  their  mouth  they 
speak  proudly."  It  is  the  energy  and  force  of  the 
inward  will,  the  inwards  of  a  man's  heart.  Hence, 
where  Christ  expresses  His  entire  mortification.  He 
declares  they  could  tell  all  His  bones ;  and,  in  Psalm 
cii.,  "  By  reason  of  the  voice  of  my  groaning  my  bones 
cleave  to  my  skin." 

But  here,  in  Jesus,  all  that  in  nature  was  of  energy 
and  force,  all  His  inward  parts,  were  a  burnt-offering 
to  God,  entirely  sacrificed  and  offered  to  Him  for  such 
a  sweet  savour.  This  was  God's  food  of  the  offering, 
"  the  food  of  the  offering  made  by  fire  unto  Jehovah." 
In  this  Jehovah  Himself  found  His  delight ;  His  soul 
reposed  in  it,  for  surely  it  was  very  good — good  in  the 
midst  of  evil — good  in  the  energy  of  offering  to  Him 
— good  in  perfect  obedience. 

-  The  exceptions  to  this  rule  are  sin-offerings  of  the  day  ot 
atonement,  and  the  red  heifer,  which  confirm  the  great  principle, 
or  fortify  a  peculiar  portion  of  it.  The  sprinkling  of  the  blood 
was  always  the  priest's  work. 

III. 


170  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

If  the  eye  of  God  passed,  as  the  dove  of  Noah,  over 
this  earth,  swept  by  the  deluge  of  sin,  nowhere,  till 
Jesus  was  seen  in  it,  could  His  eye  have  rested  in  com- 
placency and  peace ;  there  on  Him  it  could.  Heaven, 
as  to  the  expression  of  its  satisfaction,  whatever  its 
counsels,  was  closed  till  Jesus  (the  second  and  perfect 
Man,  the  Holy  One,  He  who  offered  Himself  to  God, 
coming  to  do  His  will)  was  on  earth.  The  moment 
He  presented  Himself  in  public  service,  heaven  opened, 
the  Holy  Ghost  descended  to  dwell  in  this  His  one 
resting-place  here,  and  the  Father's  voice,  impossible 
now  to  be  withheld,  declares  from  heaven, "  This  is  my 
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Was  this 
object  (too  great,  too  excellent,  for  the  silence  of  heaven 
and  the  Father's  love)  to  lose  its  excellence  and  its 
savour  in  the  midst  of  a  world  of  sin  ?  Far  otherwise. 
It  was  there  its  excellency  was  proved. 

If  He  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  He 
suffered,  the  movement  of  every  spring  of  His  heart 
was  consecrated  to  God.  He  walked  in  communion, 
honouring  His  Father  in  all — in  His  life  and  in  His 
death.  Jehovah  found  continual  delight  in  Him ;  and 
above  all,  in  Him  in  His  death :  the  food  of  the  offer- 
ing was  there.  Such  was  the  great  principle,  but  the 
communion  of  our  souls  with  this  is  further  given  to 
us.  The  fat  being  burnt  as  a  burnt-offering,  the  con- 
secration to  God  is  pursued  to  its  full  point  of  accept- 
ance and  grace. 

If  we  turn  to  the  law  of  the  offerings,  we  shall  find 
that  the  rest  was  eaten.  The  breast  was  for  Aaron 
and  his  sons,  type  of  the  whole  church;  the  right 
shoulder  for  the  priest  that  sprinkled  the  blood,  more 
especially  type  of  Christ,  as  the  offering  priest;  the 
rest  of  the  animal  was  eaten  by  him  who  presented  it, 
and  those  invited  by  him.  Thus  there  was  identity 
and  communion  with  the  glory  and  good  pleasure — 
with  the  delight — of  Him  to  whom  it  was  offered, 


LEVITICUS.  171 

with  the  priesthood  and  the  altar,  which  were  the 
instruments  and  means  of  the  offering,  with  all 
God's  priests,  and  among  those  immediately  taking- 
part. 

The  same  practice  existed  among  the  heathen ;  hence 
the  reasoning  of  the  apostle  as  to  eating  things  offered 
to  idols.  So,  alluding  to  the  sacrament  of  the  Lords 
supper,  the  purport  of  which  is  strongly  associated 
with  this  type,  "  Behold  Israel  after  the  flesh  :  are  not 
they  which  eat  of  the  sacrifices  partakers  of  the  altar  ?" 
And  this  was  so  much  the  case,  that  in  the  desert, 
when  it  was  practicable  (and  the  analogous  order 
needful  to  maintain  the  principle  was  established  in 
the  land),  no  one  could  eat  of  the  flesh  of  any  animal 
unless  he  first  brought  it  to  the  tabernacle  as  an  offer- 
ing.* We  indeed  should  eat  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  offering  our  sacrifices  of  thanksgivings,  the 
calves  of  our  lips,  and  so  consecrate  all  we  partake  of, 
and  ourselves  in  it,  in  communion  with  the  Giver,  and 
Him  who  secures  us  in  it;  but  here  it  was  a  proper 
sacrifice. 

Thus  then  the  offering  of  Christ,  as  a  burnt-offering, 
is  God's  delight :  His  soul  delights  and  takes  pleasure 
in  it;  it  is  of  sweet  savour  with  Him.  Before  the 
Lord,  at  His  table  so  to  speak,  the  worshippers,  also 
coming  by  this  perfect  sacrifice,  feed  on  it  also,  have 
perfect  communion  with  God  in  the  same  delight  in 
the  perfect  sacrifice  of  Jesus,  in  Jesus  Himself  thus 


*  Life  belonged  to  God.  He  only  could  give  it.  Hence,  when 
allowed  to  be  taken  in  Noah's  time,  the  blood  was  reserved. 
There  was,  of  course,  no  eating  connected  with  death  before  the 
fall  (unless  the  warning  not  to  bring  it  in),  nor  allowedly  before 
Noah.  Hence,  as  hfe  belonged  to  God,  death  had  come  in  by 
sin,  and  there  could  be  no  eating  of  what  involved  death,  no 
nourishment  by  it,  unless  the  life  (the  blood)  was  offered  to  God. 
This  being  done,  man  could  have  his  living  nourishment  through 
it.     It  was  indeed  his  salvation  through  faith. 

III. 


172  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

offered,  thus  offering*  Himself — have  the  same  subject 
of  delight  as  God,  a  common  blessed  joy  in  the  ex- 
cellency of  the  work  of  redemption  of  Jesus.  As 
parents  have  a  common  joy  in  their  offspring,  enhanced 
by  their  communion  in  it,  so,  as  filled  with  the  Spirit, 
and  themselves  redeemed  by  Him,  the  worshippers 
have  one  mind  with  the  Father  in  their  delight  in  the 
excellency  of  an  offered  Christ.  And  is  the  Priest, 
who  has  ministered  all  this,  the  only  one  excluded 
from  the  joy  of  it  ?  No  ;  He  has  His  share  also.  He 
who  has  offered  it  has  part  in  the  joy  of  redemption. 
Further,  the  whole  church  of  God  must  be  embraced 
in  it. 

Jesus  then,  as  priest,  finds  a  delight  in  the  joy  of 
communion  between  God  and  the  people,  the  worship- 
pers, wrought  and  brought  about  by  His  means — yea, 
of  which  He  is  the  object.  For  what  is  the  joy  of  a 
Redeemer  but  the  joy  and  communion,  the  happiness, 
of  His  redeemed  ?  Such  then  is  all  true  worship  of 
the  saints.  It  is  joying  in  God  through  the  means  of 
the  redemption  and  offering  of  Jesus ;  yea,  one  mind 
Avith  God ;  joying  with  Him  in  the  perfect  excellency 
of  this  pure  and  self-devoted  victim,t  who  has  re- 
deemed and  reconciled  them,  and  given  them  this  com- 
munion, with  the  assurance  that  this  their  joy  is  the 
joy  of  Jesus  Himself,  who  has  wrought  it  and  given  it 
to  them.  In  heaven  He  shall  gird  Himself,  and  make 
them  sit  down  to  meat,  and  come  forth  and  serve 
them. 

This  joy  of  worship  necessarily  associates  itself  also 

-  Offering  has  a  double  character  distinguished  in  _  Greek  by 
7rpo<r0£pw  and  dvacpspcj,  in  Hebrew  by  Hikrib  and  Hiktir.  Christ 
offered  Himself  without  spot  through  the  eternal  Spirit  to  God ; 
but,  having  done  so,  God  laid  the  iniquity  on  Him,  made  Him 
to  be  sin  for  us,  and  He  was  offered  up  on  the  cross  as  an  actual 
sacrifice. 

t  This  expression,  in  a  measure,  brings  in  the  meat-offering. 


LEVITICUS.  173 

with  the  whole  body  of  the  redeemed,  viewed  as  in  the 
heavenly  places.  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  to  have 
their  part  also.  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  ever  the 
type  of  the  church,  not  as  Christ's  body  (that  was 
wholly  hidden  in  the  Old  Testament)  but  viewed  as 
the  whole  body  of  its  members,  having  title  to  enter 
into  the  heavenly  places,  and  offer  incense — made 
priests  to  God.  For  these  were  the  patterns  of  things 
in  the  heavens,  and  those  who  compose  the  church  are 
the  body  of  heavenly  priests  to  God.  Hence  worshij) 
to  God,  true  worship,  cannot  separate  itself  from  the 
whole  body  of  true  believers.  I  cannot  really  come 
with  my  sacrifice  unto  the  tabernacle  of  God,  without 
finding  necessarily  there  the  priests  of  the  tabernacle. 
Without  the  one  Priest  all  is  vain ;  for  what  without 
Jesus  ?  But  I  cannot  find  Him  without  His  whole 
body  of  manifested  people.  The  interest  of  His  heart 
takes  them  all  in.  God  withal  has  His  priests,  and  I 
cannot  approach  Him  but  in  the  way  which  He  has 
ordained,  and  in  association  with,  and  in  recognition 
of,  those  whom  He  has  placed  around  His  house,  the 
whole  body  of  those  that  are  sanctified  in  Christ.  He 
who  walks  not  in  this  spirit  is  in  conflict  with  the 
ordinance  of  God,  and  has  no  true  peace-ofiering  ac- 
cording to  God's  institution. 

But  there  were  other  circumstances  we  must  remark. 
First,  none  but  those  that  were  clean  could  partake 
among  the  guests.  We  know  that  moral  cleansing  has 
taken  the  place  of  the  ceremonial.  "Ye  are  clean 
through  the  word  which  I  have  spoken  unto  you."  God 
has  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them,  having  puri- 
fied their  hearts  by  faith.  Israelites  then  partook  of 
the  peace-ofierings ;  and  if  an  Israelite  was  unclean, 
through  anything  that  defiled  according  to  the  law  of 
God,  he  could  not  eat  while  his  defilement  continued. 

Christians  then,  whose  hearts  are  purified  by  faith, 
having  received  the  word  with  joy,  alone  can  worship 

III. 


174  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

really  before  God,  having  part  in  the  communion  of 
saints ;  and  if  the  heart  is  defiled,  that  communion  is 
interrupted.  No  person  apparently  defiled  has  title  to 
share  in  the  worship  and  communion  of  the  church  of 
God.  It  was  a  different  thing,  remark,  to  be  not  an 
Israelite  and  not  clean.  He  who  was  not  an  Israelite 
had  never  any  part  in  the  peace-offerings ;  he  could 
not  come  nigh  the  tabernacle.  Uncleanness  did  not 
prove  he  was  no  Israelite  (on  the  contrary,  this  disci- 
pline was  exercised  on  Israelites  only) ;  but  the  un- 
cleanness incapacitated  him  from  partaking,  with  those 
that  were  clean,  in  the  privileges  of  this  communion ; 
for  these  peace-offerings,  though  enjoyed  by  the 
worshippers,  belonged  to  the  Lord.  (Chap.  vii.  20,  21.) 
The  unclean  had  no  title  there.  True  worshippers 
must  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  for  the 
Father  seeketh  such  to  worship  Him.  If  worship  and 
communion  be  by  the  Spirit,  it  is  evident  that  those 
only  who  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  also  have  not 
grieved  the  Spirit  (and  thus  rendered  the  communion, 
which  is  by  the  Spirit,  impossible  by  the  defilements 
of  sin)  can  participate. 

Yet  there  was  another  part  of  this  type  which 
seemed  to  contradict  this,  but  which  indeed  throws 
additional  light  on  it.  With  the  offerings  which  ac- 
companied this  sacrifice,  it  was  ordered  (chap.  vii.  13) 
that  leavened  cakes  should  be  offered.  For  though 
that  which  is  unclean  is  to  be  excluded  (that  which 
can  be  recognised  as  unclean),  there  is  always  a 
mixture  of  evil  in  us,  and  so  far  in  our  worship  itself. 
The  leaven  is  there  (man  cannot  be  without  it) ;  it 
may  be  a  very  small  part  of  the  matter,  not  come  in 
to  the  mind,  as  it  will  be  when  the  Spirit  is  not  grieved, 
but  it  is  there  where  man  is.  Unleavened  bread  was 
there  also,  for  Christ  is  there,  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
in  us,  who  are  leavened,  for  man  is  there. 

There  was  another  very  important  direction  in  this 


LEVITICUS.  175 

worship.*  In  the  case  o£  a  vow,  it  might  be  eaten 
the  second  day  after  the  burning  o£  the  fat — Jehovah's 
food  of  the  offering;  in  the  case  of  thanksgiving- 
offering,  it  was  to  be  eaten  the  same  day.  This  identi- 
fied the  purity  of  the  service  of  the  worshippers  with 
the  offering  of  the  fat  to  God.  So  is  it  impossible  to 
separate  true  spiritual  worship  and  communion  from 
the  perfect  offering  of  Christ  to  God.  The  moment 
our  worship  separates  itself  from  this,  from  its  efficacy 
and  the  consciousness  of  that  infinite  acceptability  of 
the  offering  of  Christ  to  God — not  the  putting  away  of 
sins,  without  that  we  could  not  approach  at  all,  but  its 
intrinsic  excellency  as  a  burnt-offering,  all  burnt  to 
God  as  a  sweet  savourf — it  becomes  carnal,  and  either 
a  form,  or  the  delight,  of  the  fiesh.  If  the  peace-offer- 
ing was  eaten  separately  from  this  offering  of  the  fat, 
it  was  a  mere  carnal  festivity,  or  a  form  of  worship, 
which  had  no  real  communion  with  the  delight  and 
good  pleasure  of  God,  and  was  worse  than  unaccept- 
able— it  was  really  iniquity. 

When  the  Holy  Spirit  leads  us  into  real  spiritual 
worship,  it  leads  us  into  communion  with  God,  into 
the  presence  of  God  ;  and  then,  necessarily,  all  the  in- 
finite acceptability  to  Him  of  the  offering  of  Christ  is 
present  to  our  spirit.  We  are  associated  with  it:  it 
forms  an  integral  and  necessary  part  of  our  com- 
munion and  worship.  We  cannot  be  in  the  presence  of 
God  in  communion  without  finding  it  there.  It  is 
indeed  the  ground  of  our  acceptance,  as  of  our 
communion. 


*  It  may  be  well  to  remark  that  the  peace-offering  supposes 
fellowship  in  worship,  though  many  principles  are  individually 
applicable. 

t  We  may  add  of  Jesus  with  the  Father,  and  that  in  connec- 
tion even  with  His  laying  down  His  life,  but  this  is  not  our 
direct  subject  here.  (See  John  x.  17.)  But  there,  note,  it  is  not 
done  as  for  sinners,  but  for  God. 

ni. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Apart  from  this  then  our  worship  falls  back  into  the 
flesh;  our  prayers  (or  praying  well)  form  what  is 
sometimes  called  a  gift  of  prayer,  than  which  nothing 
often  is  more  sorrowful  (a  fluent  rehearsal  of  known 
truths  and  principles,  instead  of  communion,  and  the 
expression  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  in  the  joy  of 
communion,  and  even  of  our  wants  and  desires  in  the 
unction  of  the  Spirit) ;  our  singing,  pleasure  of  the 
ear,  taste  in  music,  and  expressions  in  which  we  sym- 
pathise— all  a  form  in  the  flesh,  and  not  communion  in 
the  Spirit.  All  this  is  evil;  the  Spirit  of  God  owns 
it  not ;  it  is  not  in  spirit  and  in  truth  ;  it  is  really 
iniquity. 

There  was  a  difference  in  the  value  of  the  various 
kinds  of  this  offering :  in  the  case  of  a  vow  it  might 
be  eaten  the  second  day ;  in  the  case  of  thanksgiving 
only  the  first.  This  typified  a  different  degree  of 
spiritual  energy.  When  our  worship  is  the  fruit  of 
unfeigned  and  single-eyed  devotedness,  it  can  sustain 
itself  longer,  through  our  being  filled  with  the  Spirit, 
in  the  reality  of  communion,  and  our  worship  be 
acceptable — the  savour  of  that  sacrifice  being  thus 
longer  maintained  before  God,  who  has  fellowship  with 
the  joy  of  His  people.  For  the  energy  of  the  Spirit 
maintains  His  joy  in  His  people  in  communion  accept- 
able to  God.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the 
natural  consequence  of  blessing  already  conferred,  it 
is  surely  acceptable  as  due  to  God,  but  there  is  not  the 
same  energy  of  communion.  The  thanks  are  rendered 
thus  in  communion  with  the  Lord,  but  the  communion 
passes  away  with  the  thanksgiving  really  offered. 

Note  we  also,  that  we  may  begin  in  the  Spirit  and 
pass  into  the  flesh  in  worship.  Thus,  for  example,  if  I 
continue  to  sing  beyond  the  real  operation  of  the  Spirit, 
which  happens  too  often,  my  singing,  which  at  the 
beginning  was  real  melody  in  the  heart  to  the  Lord, 
will  terminate  in  pleasant  ideas  and  music,  and  so  end 


LEVITICUS.  177 

in  the  flesh.  The  spiritual  mind,  the  spiritual  worship- 
per, will  discover  this  at  once  when  it  happens.  When 
it  does  happen,  it  always  weakens  the  soul,  and  soon 
accustoms  to  formal  worship  and  spiritual  weakness ; 
and  then  evil,  through  the  power  of  the  adversary, 
soon  makes  its  appearance  among  the  worshippers. 
The  Lord  keep  us  nigh  to  Himself  to  judge  all  things 
in  His  presence,  for  out  of  it  we  can  judge  nothing ! 

It  is  good  to  bear  strongly  in  mind  this  expression, 
"  which  pertain  to  Jehovah  "  (chap.  vii.  20) ;  the  wor- 
ship, what  passes  in  our  hearts  in  it,  is  not  ours — it  is 
the  Lord's.  The  Lord  has  put  it  there  for  our  joy, 
that  we  may  participate  in  the  offering  of  Christ,  His 
joy  in  Christ ;  but  the  moment  we  make  it  ours,  we 
desecrate  it.  Hence  what  remained  was  burnt  in  the 
lire ;  hence  what  was  unclean  must  have  nothing  to  do 
with  it ;  hence  the  necessity  of  associating  it  with  the 
fat  burnt  to  Jehovah,  that  it  may  be  really  Christ  in 
us,  and  so  true  communion,  the  giving  forth  of  Christ, 
on  whom  our  souls  feed,  towards  God. 

Let  us  remember  that  all  our  worship  pertains  to 
God,  that  it  is  the  expression  of  the  excellency  of 
Christ  in  us,  and  so  our  joy,  as  by  one  Spirit,  with 
God.  He  in  the  Father,  we  in  Him,  and  He  in  us,  is 
the  marvellous  chain  of  union  which  exists  in  grace  as 
well  as  in  glory :  our  worship  is  the  outgoings  and  joy 
of  heart  founded  on  this,  towards  God,  by  Christ.  So, 
as  Himself  ministering  in  this,  the  Lord  says, "  I  will 
declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren,  in  the  midst  of 
the  church  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thee."  He  surely  is 
in  joy  and  knows  redemption  is  accomplished.  May 
we  be  in  tune  with  our  heavenly  Guide !  He  shall 
well  conduct  our  praises,  and  agreeably  to  the  Father. 
His  ear  shall  be  attentive  when  He  hears  this  voice 
lead  us.  What  perfect  and  deep  experience  of  what  is 
acceptable  before  God  must  He  have,  who,  in  redemp- 
tion, has  presented  all  according  to  God's  mind  !  His 
VOL.  I.  m.  N 


178  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

mind  is  the  expression  of  all  that  is  agreeable  to  the 
Father,  and  He  leads  us,  taught  by  Himself,  though 
imperfect  and  feeble  in  it,  in  the  same  acceptableness. 
We  have  the  mind  of  Christ. 

The  "  calves  of  our  lips "  is  the  expression  of  the 
same  Spirit  in  which  we  offer  our  bodies  a  living  sacri- 
fice, holy  and  acceptable  unto  God,  proving  what  is  His 
good  and  perfect  and  acceptable  will:  such  our  wor- 
ship, such  our  service,  for  our  service  should  be  in  a 
certain  sense  our  worship. 

There  is  added  to  the  directions  of  this  sacrifice  a 
commandment  to  eat  neither  fat  nor  blood.  This 
evidently  finds  its  place  here,  inasmuch  as  the  peace- 
offerings  were  the  sacrifices  where  the  worshippers  ate 
a  great  part.  But  from  what  we  have  said,  the  signifi- 
cation is  evident ;  the  life  and  inward  energies  of  the 
heart  belonged  wholly  to  God.  Life  belonged  to  God 
and  was  to  be  consecrated  to  God;  to  Him  alone  it 
belonged  or  could  belong.  Life  spent  or  taken  by 
another  was  high  treason  against  the  title  of  God.  So  as 
to  fat — that  which  characterised  no  ordinary  functions, 
as  the  movements  of  a  limb  or  the  like,  but  the  energy 
of  the  nature  itself  expressing  itself — belonged  exclu- 
sively to  God.  Christ  alone  rendered  it  to  God,  because 
He  alone  offered  to  God  what  was  due ;  and  hence  the 
burning  of  the  fat  in  these  and  other  offerings  repre- 
sented His  offering  Himself  a  sweet  savour  to  God. 
But  it  was  not  less  true  that  all  belonged  to  God  and 
belongs  to  God:  man  could  not  appropriate  it  to  his 
use.  Use  might  be  made  of  it  in  the  case  of  a  beast 
dying  or  torn;  but  whenever  man  of  his  will  took 
the  life  of  a  beast,  he  must  recognise  the  title  of  God, 
and  submit  his  will,  and  own  the  will  of  God  as  alone 
having  claim. 

We  come  now  to  the  sacrifices  which  were  not  sacri- 
fices of  sweet  savour — the  sin  and  trespass-offerings, 
alike  in  the  great  principle,  though  differing  in  cha- 


LEVITICUS.  179 

racter  and  detail :  this  difference  we  will  notice.  But 
first  a  very  important  principle  must  be  noticed.  The 
sacrifices  of  which  we  have  spoken,  the  sacrifices  of 
sweet  savour,  presented  the  identity  of  the  offerer  and 
the  victim :  this  identity  was  signified  by  the  laying 
on  of  the  hands  of  the  worshippers.  But  in  those 
sacrifices  the  worshipper  came  as  an  offerer,  whether 
Glirist  or  one  led  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  so  iden- 
tified with  Him  in  presenting  himself  to  God — came 
of  his  own  voluntary  will,  and  was  identified  as  a 
worshipper  with  the  acceptability  and  acceptance  of 
his  victim. 

In  the  case  of  the  sin-offering,  there  was  the  same 
principle  of  identity  with  the  victim  by  laying  on  of 
licinds ;  but  he  who  came,  came  not  as  a  worshipper, 
but  as  a  sinner ;  not  as  clean  for  communion  with  the 
Lord,  but  as  having  guilt  upon  him ;  and  instead  of 
his  being  identified  with  the  acceptabilit}^  of  the  victim, 
though  that  became  subsequently  true,  the  victim 
became  identified  with  his  guilt  and  unacceptableness, 
bore  his  sins  and  was  treated  accordingly.  This  was 
completely  the  case  where  the  sin-offering  was  purely 
.such.  I  have  added,  "  though  that  became  subse- 
quently true,"  because  in  many  of  the  sin-offerings  a 
certain  part  identified  them  with  the  acceptableness  of 
Christ,  which,  in  Him  who  united  in  His  Person  the 
virtue  of  all  the  sacrifices,  could  never  be  lost  sight  of. 
The  distinction  between  the  identity  of  the  victim 
with  the  sin  of  the  guilty,  and  the  identity  of  the 
worshipper  with  the  acceptance  of  the  victim,  marks 
the  difference  of  these  sacrifices  and  of  the  double 
aspect  of  the  work  of  Christ  very  clearly. 

I  now  come  to  the  details.  There  were  four  ordinary 
classes  of  sin  and  trespass-offerings,  besides  two  very 
important  special  offerings,  of  which  we  may  speak 
hereafter :  sins  where  natural  conscience  was  violated  ; 
that  which  became  evil  by  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord, 

III 


180  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

as  uncleannesses  which  made  the  worshipper  inadmis- 
sible, and  other  things  (this  had  a  mixed  character  of 
.sin  and  trespass,  and  is  called  by  both  names)  ;  wrongs 
done  to  the  Lord  in  His  holy  things ;  and  wrongs  done 
to  the  neighbour  by  breaches  of  confidence  and  the 
like.  The  first  class  is  in  Leviticus  iv. ;  the  second, 
attached  to  it,  down  to  verse  13  of  chapter  v. ;  the 
third,  from  verse  14  to  the  end ;  the  fourth,  in  the  first 
seven  verses  of  chapter  vi. 

The  two  other  remarkable  examples  of  sin-ofiering 
were  the  day  of  expiation,  and  the  red  heifer,  which 
demand  an  examination  apart.  The  circumstances  of 
the  ofiering  were  simple.  In  the  case  of  the  high 
priest  and  the  body  of  the  people  sinning,  it  is  evident 
that  all  communion  was  interrupted.  It  was  not 
merely  the  restoration  of  the  individual  to  communion 
which  was  needed,  but  the  restoration  of  communion 
between  God  and  the  whole  people  ;  not  the  forming  a 
relation  (the  day  of  atonement  efiected  that),  but  the 
re-establishment  of  interrupted  communion.  Hence 
the  blood  was  sprinkled  before  the  veil  seven  times  for 
the  perfect  restoration  of  this  communion,  and  the 
blood  also  put  on  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  incense. 

When  the  sin  was  individual,  the  communion  of  the 
people  in  general  was  not  interrupted,  but  tlie  indi- 
vidual had  lost  his  enjoyment  of  the  blessing.  The 
blood  was  sprinkled  therefore,  not  where  the  priest 
approached — at  the  altar  of  incense ;  but  where  the 
individual  did — at  the  altar  of  burnt-ofiering.  The 
efficacy  of  the  sin-oftering  of  Christ  is  needed,  but 
has  been  once  for  all  accomplished,  for  every  fault ; 
but  the  communion  of  the  worshipping  body  of  the 
church,  though  lamed  and  hindered,  is  not  cut  off"  by 
the  individual  sin ;  but  when  this  is  known,  restoration 
is  needed  and  the  ofiering  demanded.*    That  the  Lord 

*  Only  we  must  always  remember  that  in  Christ  it  has  been 


LEVITICUS.  181 

may  punish  the  whole  congregation,  if  the  sin  lie  un- 
detected, we  know ;  for  He  did  so  in  Achan.  That  is 
the  power  belonging  to  a  state  in  which  God  is  un- 
grieved,  is  enfeebled  and  lost,  and  where  conscience  is 
awake  and  the  heart  interested  in  the  blessing  of  God's 
people,  this  leads  to  search  out  the  cause.  But  this  is 
connected  with  the  government  of  God;  the  imputation 
of  sin  as  guilt  is  another  matter,  but  sin  in  itself  has 
always  its  own  character  with  God.  "  Israel,"  said  He, 
"  hath  sinned ;"  but  Achan  only  suffers  when  the  evil 
is  known  and  purged,  and  blessing  returns,  though 
with  much  greater  difficulty.  The  truth  is,  that  He 
who  knows  how  to  unite  general  government  with 
particular  judgment,  even  where  there  is  general  faith- 
fulness, puts  in  evidence  individual  evil,  or  permits  it 
not  (a  yet  higher  and  happier  case) ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  can  employ  the  sin  of  the  individual  as  a  means 
of  chastening  the  whole. 

Indeed  it  appears  to  me  very  clear,  in  the  case 
alluded  to,  that,  though  the  occasion  of  the  chastening 
is  evident  in  the  sin  of  Achan,  Israel  had  shewn  a  con- 
fidence in  human  strength  which  was  chastised  and 
shewn  vain  in  the  result,  as  divine  strength  was  shewn 
all-sufficient  in  Jericho.  However  that  is,  it  is  evident 
from  the  detail  of  these  sin-offerings  that  God  can  let 
nothing  pass ;  He  can  forgive  all  and  cleanse  from  all, 
but  let  nothing  pass.  The  sin  hidden  to  a  man's  self 
is  not  hidden  to  God ;  and  why  is  it  hidden  to  himself, 
but  that  negligence,  the  fruit  of  sin,  has  stupified  his 
spiritual  intelligence  and  attention  ? 

done  once  for  all.  We  have  only  a  shadow  of  good  things  to 
come,  and  in  certain  points,  as  in  this,  contrast — a  contrast  fully 
developed  in  Hebrews  x.  In  Hebrews,  however,  it  is  not  restora- 
tion after  failure,  but  perfecting  for  ever,  in  the  conscience,  which 
takes  the  place  of  repeated  sacrifice.  The  restoration  of  com- 
munion on  failure  is  found  in  1  John  ii.  1,  2,  founded  on  the 
righteous  One  being  before  God  for  us,  and  the  propitiation 
made. 

IV. 


182  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

God  judges  sins  according  to  the  responsibility  of 
those  who  are  judged.  But  in  the  sovereign  work  of 
grace  God  judges  of  sin  in  those  who  approach  Him,  not 
according  to  what  becomes  man,  but  what  becomes 
Himself.  He  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  and  Israel 
must  be  judged  according  to  what  becomes  God's  pre- 
sence :  our  privileges  are  the  measure  of  our  responsi- 
bility. Men  admit  to  their  society  what  becomes 
themselves,  and  do  not  admit  the  base  and  corrupt, 
allowing  their  evil,  because  it  is  suited  to  their  estate 
so  to  act.  And  is  God  alone  to  profane  His  presence 
by  acting  otherwise?  Is  all  the  evil  which  man's 
corruption  leads  him  into  to  find  its  sanction  only  in 
the  presence  of  God  ?  No ;  God  must  (in  order  to 
make  us  happy  by  His  presence)  judge  evil,  all  evil, 
according  to  His  presence,  so  as  to  exclude  it  from  it. 
Has  the  moral  stupidity,  which  is  the  efiect  of  sin, 
made  us  ignorant  of  it  in  ourselves?  Is  God  to  become 
blind  because  sin  has  made  us  so — to  dishonour  Him- 
self and  make  others  miserable,  and  all  holy  joy  im- 
possible everywhere,  even  in  His  presence,  to  let  pass 
the  evil  ?  Impossible.  No ;  all  is  judged,  and  judged 
in  the  believer  according  to  the  place  grace  has  brought 
him  into. 

God  is  ignorant  of  nothing,  and  evil,  however  hidden 
to  us,  is  evil  to  Him.  "  All  things  are  naked  and  open 
before  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do." 
He  may  have  compassion,  enlighten  by  His  Spirit, 
provide  a  way  of  approach  so  that  the  greatest  sinner 
may  come,  restore  the  soul  that  has  wandered,  take 
account  of  the  degree  of  spiritual  light,  where  light  is 
honestly  sought ;  but  that  does  not  change  His  judg- 
ment of  evil.  "  The  priest  shall  make  an  atonement 
for  him  concerning  his  sin  wherein  he  erred  and 
wist  it  not,  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  him.  It  is  a 
trespass-offering  ;  he  hath  certainly  trespassed  against 
Jehovah." 


LEVITICUS.  183 

I  have  now  to  remark  certain  differences  in  these 
sin-offerings  full  of  interest  to  us  in  the  detail. 

The  bodies  of  those  in  which  the  whole  people,  or 
the  high  priest  (which  came  to  the  same  thing,  for  the 
communion  of  the  whole  body  was  interrupted),  were 
concerned,  were  burnt  without  the  camp;  not  those  for 
individuals,  nor  those  which  were  for  a  sweet  savour, 
a  sacrifice  made  by  fire,  though  the  whole  were  burnt. 
But  those  for  the  high  priest,  or  the  whole  people 
were :  they  had  been  made  sin,  and  were  carried  out 
of  the  camp  as  such.  The  sacrifice  itself  was  without 
blemish,  and  the  fat  was  burnt  on  the  altar ;  but,  the 
offender  having  confessed  his  sins  on  its  head,  it  was 
viewed  as  bearing  these  sins,  and  made  sin  of  God, 
was  taken  without  the  camp ;  as  Jesus  (as  the  epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  applies  it)  suffered  without  the  gate, 
that  He  might  sanctify  the  people  with  His  own 
blood.  This  was  always  the  case  when  the  blood  was 
brought  into  the  sanctuary  for  sin. 

One  of  the  sacrifices,  of  which  I  do  not  enter  into 
the  details  here,  was  abstractedly  and  altogether  viewed 
in  this  light  of  sin,  and  was  slain  and  burnt,  fat  and 
blood  (part  of  the  blood  having  been  first  sprinkled 
at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle),  and  every  part  of  it, 
without  the  camp.     This  was  the  red  heifer. 

In  the  three  other  sacrifices,  which  concerned  the 
whole  people,  the  bodies  were  burnt  indeed  without 
the  camp,  but  the  connection  with  the  perfect  accept- 
ance of  Christ  in  His  work,  as  offering  Himself,  was 
preserved,  in  the  burning  of  the  fat  on  the  altar  of 
burnt-offering,  and  thus  gave  us  the  full  sense  of  how 
He  had  been  made  sin  indeed,  but  that  it  was  He  who 
knew  no  sin,  and  whose  offering  in  His  most  inmost 
thoughts  and  nature  was  in  the  trial  of  God's  judg- 
ment perfectly  agreeable.  But  though  the  fat  was 
burnt  on  the  altar  to  maintain  this  association  and  the 
unity  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  yet,  maintaining  the 

IV. 


184  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

general  character  and  purpose  of  the  diversity,  it  is 
not  habitually  called*  a  sweet  savour  to  Jehovah. 

There  was  a  difference,  however,  between  one  of  the 
three  last-mentioned  sacrifices,  the  sacrifice  of  the 
great  day  of  atonement,  and  the  two  others  mentioned 
in  the  beginning  of  Leviticus  iv.  In  the  sacrifice  of  the 
great  day  of  expiation  the  blood  was  carried  within 
the  veil;  for  this  was  the  foundation  of  all  other 
sacrifices,  of  all  relationship  between  God  and  Israel, 
and  enabled  God  to  dwell  among  them  so  as  to  receive 
the  others.  Its  efficacy  lasted  throughout  the  year — 
for  us,  for  ever — as  the  apostle  reasons  in  the  Hebrews ; 
and  on  it  was  based  all  the  intercourse  between  God 
and  the  people.  Hence  the  blood  of  it  was  sprinkled 
on  the  mercy-seat,  to  be  for  ever  before  the  eyes  of 
Him,  whose  throne  of  grace,  as  of  righteousness,  that 
mercy-seat  was  thus  to  be.  And  God,  by  virtue  of  it, 
dwelt  among  the  people,  careless  and  rebellious  as  they 
were. 

Such  also  is  the  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Jesus.  It 
is  for  ever  on  the  mercy-seat,  efficacious  as  the  ground 
of  the  relationship  between  us  and  God.  The  other 
sin-ofFerings  referred  to  were  to  restore  the  communion 
of  those  who  were  in  this  relationship.  Hence,  in 
Leviticus  iv.  1-21,  the  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the 
altar  of  incense,  which  was  the  symbol  of  the  exercise 
of  this  communion ;  the  residue  poured  out,  as  habit- 
ually in  the  sacrifices,  at  the  altar  of  burnt-offering — 
the  place  of  accepted  sacrifice ;  the  body,  as  we  have 
seen,  was  burnt.  In  the  case  of  the  offerings  for  the 
sin  and  trespass  of  an  individual  the  communion  of 
the  body  was  not  directly  in  question  or  interrupted, 
but  the  individual  was  deprived  of  the  enjoyment  of 
it.  Hence  the  altar  of  incense  was  not  defiled  or  in- 
capacitated, as  it  were,  in  its  use ;  on  the  contrary,  it 

*  There  is  one  case  only  where  it  is. 


LEVITICUS.  185 

was  continually  used.  The  blood  of  these  sacrifices, 
therefore,  was  put  on  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt- 
oflfering,  which  was  always  the  place  of  individual  ap- 
proach. Here,  by  Christ  and  the  efficacy  of  the  sacri- 
fice of  Christ  once  ofiered,  every  individual  soul 
approaches ;  and,  being  thus  accepted,  enjoys  all  the 
blessing  and  the  privileges  of  which  the  church  at 
large  is  continually  in  possession.  But  for  us  the  veil 
is  rent,  and  as  to  conscience  of  guilt  we  are  perfected 
for  ever.  If  our  walk  be  defiled,  water  by  the  word 
restores  the  communion  of  our  souls,  and  that  with 
the  Father  and  with  His  Son. 

To  speak  of  resprinkling  of  blood  consequently  upsets 
the  real  position  of  the  Christian,  and  throws  him 
back  on  his  own  imperfect  state  as  to  acceptance  and 
righteousness.  There  may  be  a  repeated  remedy,  but 
one  who  is  on  that  ground  drops  the  question  of  holi- 
ness, and  makes  continuous  righteousness  in  Christ 
uncertain.  "Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord 
imputeth  not  iniquity''  is  unknown  in  such  cases ; 
as  is  also  that  the  worshipper  once  purged  should  have 
no  more  conscience  of  sins.  Were  it  so,  as  the  apostle 
urges,  Christ  must  have  sufifered  often.  Without 
shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission. 

But  there  was  another  circumstance  in  these  sin 
oflferings  for  the  individual.  The  priest  who  offered 
the  blood  ate  the  victim.  Thus  there  was  the  most 
perfect  identity  between  the  priest,  and  the  victim 
which  represented  the  sin  of  the  offerer.  As  Christ  is 
both,  the  eating  by  the  priest  shews  how  He  did  thus 
make  it  His  own.  Only,  in  Christ,  what  was  thus 
typified  was  first  effected  when  victim,  and  the  priest- 
hood, as  exercised  for  us  now  in  heaven,  comes  after. 
Still  this  eating  shews  the  heart  of  Christ  taking  it  up 
as  He  does  for  us  when  we  fail,  not  merely  its  being 
laid  vicariously  on  Him,  though  then  His  heart  took 
up  our  cause.     But  He  cared  for  the  sheep. 

V. 


186  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

The  priest  had  not  committed  the  sin ;  on  the  con- 
trary, he  had  made  atonement  for  it  by  the  blood 
which  he  had  sprinkled,  but  he  identified  himself 
completely  with  it.  Thus  Christ,  giving  us  the  most 
complete  consolation — Himself  spotless,  and  who  has 
made  the  atonement,  yet  identified  Himself  with  all 
our  faults  and  sins,  as  the  worshipper  in  the  peace- 
offering  was  identified  with  the  acceptance  of  the 
sacrifice.  Only  that  now,  the  one  offering  having  been 
made  once  for  all,  if  sin  is  in  question,  it  is  in 
advocacy  on  high  that  He  now  takes  it  up,  and  in  con- 
nection with  communion,  not  with  imputation.  There 
is  nothing  more  to  do  with  sacrifice  or  blood  sprinkling. 
His  service  is  founded  on  it. 

The  fat  was  burnt  on  the  altar,  where  the  priest 
was  identified  with  the  sin  which  was  on  the  offerer 
of  the  victim,  but  transferred  to  it.  It  was  lost,  so  to 
speak,  and  gone  in  the  sacrifice.  He  who  drew  nigh 
came  with  confession  and  humiliation,  but,  as  regarded 
guilt  and  judgment,  it  was  taken  up  by  the  priest 
through  the  victim ;  and,  atonement  having  been  made, 
reached  not  the  judgment-seat  of  God,  so  as  further  to 
affect  the  relation  between  God  and  the  offender.  Yet 
here  it  was  perpetual  repetition.  Communion  was 
restored  in  the  acceptance  of  the  sacrifice,  as  the  sin 
which  hindered  the  communion  was  entirely  taken 
away,  or  served  only  to  renew  (in  a  heart  humbled 
into  the  dust,  and  annihilated  before  the  goodness  of 
God)  the  communion  founded  on  goodness  become  in- 
finitely more  precious,  and  established  on  the  renewed 
sense  of  the  riches  and  security  of  that  mediation 
there  typically  exhibited,  but  which  Christ  has  accom- 
plished once  for  all,  eternally  for  us,  as  sacrifice,  and 
makes  good  as  to  the  blessings  flowing  from  it  con- 
tinually on  high ;  not  to  change  the  mind  of  God 
to  us,  but  to  secure  our  present  communion  and  en- 
joyment, in  spite  of  our  miseries  and  faults,  in  the 


LEVITICUS.  187 

presence,  the  glory,  and  the  love  of  Him  who  changes 
not.* 

Some  mteresting  circumstances  remain  to  be  ob- 
served. It  is  remarkable  that  nothing  was  so  stamped 
with  the  character  of  holiness,  of  entire,  real  separa- 
tion to  God,  as  the  sin-ofFering.  In  the  other  cases, 
perfect  acceptance,  a  sweet  savour,  and  in  some  cases 
our  leavened  cakes,  are  found  therewith  in  the  use  of 
them;  but  all  passed  in  the  natural  delight,  so  to 
speak,  which  God  took  in  what  was  perfect  and  infi- 
nitely excellent,  though  it  supposed  sin  and  judgment 
to  be  there ;  but  here  the  most  remarkable  and  exact 
sanctions  of  its  holiness  were  enjoined.  (Lev.  vi.  26-28.) 
There  was  nothing  in  the  whole  work  of  Jesus  which 
so  marked  His  entire  and  perfect  separation  to  God, 
His  positive  holiness,  as  His  bearing  sin.  He  who 
knew  no  sin  alone  could  be  made  sin,  and  the  act  itself 
was  the  most  utter  separation  to  God  conceivable,  yea, 
an  act  which  no  thought  of  ours  can  fathom,  to  bear 
all,  and  to  His  glory.  It  was  a  total  consecration  of 
Himself,  at  all  cost,  to  God's  glory;  as  God,  indeed, 


*  There  are  points  in  the  New  Testament  it  may  be  well  to 
notice  here.  The  Hebrews  views  the  Christian  as  walking  down 
here  in  weakness  and  trial,  but  as  perfected  for  ever  by  the  woik 
of  Christ,  no  more  conscience  of  sins,  and  the  priesthood  is 
exercised  not  to  restore  communion,  but  to  find  mercy  and  grace 
to  help.  1  John  speaks  of  communion  with  the  Father  and  Son. 
This  is  interrupted  by  any  sin,  and  Christ  is  our  Advocate  with 
the  Father  to  restore  it.  The  Hebrews  is  occupied  with  access 
to  God  within  the  veil,  the  conscience  being  perfect,  and  we 
enter  with  boldness,  hence  failure  and  restoration  are  not  in 
question.  The  Father  is  not  spoken  of.  In  John,  as  I  have 
said,  it  is  communion  and  the  actual  state  of  the  soul  is  in  ques- 
tion. And  it  is  so  true  that  it  is  the  standing  in  Hebrews,  that 
if  one  falls  away,  restoration  is  impossible.  In  the  tabernacle 
there  was  no  going  within  the  veil.  No  such  standing  was  re- 
vealed, and  priesthood  and  communion  as  far  as  enjoyed  were 
mingled  together,  the  Father  unknown. 

VI. 


188  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

could  accept  nothing  else.  And  the  victim  must  have 
been  as  perfect  as  the  self-offering  was. 

As  a  sacrifice  then  for  sins,  and  as  made  sin, 
Christ  is  specially  holy ;  as  indeed,  now  in  the 
power  of  this  sacrifice,  a  Priest  present  before 
God,  making  intercession,  He  is  "  holy,  harmless, 
separate  from  sinners,  made  higher  than  the  heavens." 
Yet,  so  truly  was  it  a  bearing  of  sins,  and  viewed 
as  made  sin,  that  he  who  carried  the  goat  before 
his  letting  loose,  and  he  that  gathered  the  ashes  of  the 
red  heifer,  and  sprinkled  the  water  of  separation,  were 
unclean  until  even,  and  must  wash  to  come  into  the 
camp.  Thus  are  these  two  great  truths  in  the  sin- 
ofFering  of  Christ  distinctly  presented  to  us  in  these 
sacrifices.  For,  indeed,  how  can  we  conceive  a  greater 
separation  to  God,  in  Christ,  than  His  offering  Himself 
as  a  victim  for  sin  ?  And,  on  the  other  hancl,  had  He 
not  really  borne  our  sins  in  all  their  evil,  He  could  not 
have  put  them  away  really  in  the  judgment  of  God. 

Blessed  for  ever  be  His  name  who  has  done  it, 
and  may  we  ever  learn  more  His  perfectness  in 
doing  it ! 

We  have,  then,  in  these  sacrifices,  Christ  in  His  de- 
votedness  unto  death  ;  Christ  in  the  perfection  of  His 
life  of  consecration  to  God ;  Christ,  the  basis  of  the 
communion  of  the  people  with  God,  who  feeds,  as  it 
were,  at  the  same  table  with  them  ;  and  finally,  Christ 
made  sin  for  those  who  stood  in  need  of  it,  and  bear- 
ing their  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  We  shall 
find  that  in  the  law  of  the  offerings  the  question  is 
chiefly  as  to  what  was  to  be  eaten  in  these  sacrifices, 
and  by  whom,  and  under  what  conditions. 

The  burnt-offering  and  the  meat- offering  for  a  priest 
were  to  be  entirely  burnt.  It  is  Christ  Himself,  offered 
wholly  to  God,  who  offers  Himself.  As  to  the  burnt- 
ofiering,  the  fire  burnt  all  night  upon  the  altar  and 
consumed  the  victim,  the  sweet-smelling   savour  of 


LEVITICUS.  189 

which  ascended  thu.s  to  God,  even  during  the  darkness, 
where  man  was  far  from  Him,  buried  in  sleep.  This 
too  is  true,  I  doubt  not,  as  to  Israel  now.  God  has 
the  sweet  savour  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  towards 
Him,  while  the  nation  forgets  Him.  However  this 
may  be,  the  only  effect  for  us  of  the  judgment  of  the 
holy  majesty  of  God — the  fire  of  the  Lord,  now  that 
Christ  has  offered  Himself,  is  to  cause  the  sweet  smell 
of  this  precious  sacrifice  to  ascend  towards  God. 

Of  the  other  sacrifices,  the  meat-offering  and  the 
sin-offering,  the  priest  ate.  The  first  pictures  the  saint 
in  his  priestly  character  feeding  on  the  perfectness  of 
Christ ;  the  last,  Christ,  and  even  those  who  are  His, 
as  priests,  in  devoted  love  and  in  sympathy  with 
others,  identifying  themselves  with  their  sin  and  with 
the  work  of  Christ  for  that  sin.  To  Him  alone  it 
was,  of  course,  to  bear  that  sin ;  but  founded  on 
His  work  our  hearts  can  take  it  up  in  a  priestly 
way  before  God.  They  are  connected  in  grace  with 
it  according  to  the  efficacy  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ ; 
they  enjoy  the  grace  of  Christ  therein.  Christ  entered 
into  it  directly  for  us,  we  in  grace  into  what  He  did 
This  is,  however,  a  solemn  thing.  It  is  only  as  priests 
that  we  can  participate  in  it,  and  in  the  consciousness 
of  what  it  means.  The  people  ate  of  the  peace-offer- 
ings, which,  though  they  were  holy,  did  not  require 
that  nearness  to  God.  It  was  the  joy  of  the  commu- 
nion of  believers,  based  on  the  redemption  and  the 
acceptance  of  Christ.  Therefore  the  directions  for 
these  offerings  follow  those  given  for  the  sacrifices  for 
sin  and  trespass,  although  the  peace-offering  comes 
before  the  sin-offering  in  the  order  of  the  sacrifices, 
because,  in  the  former,  it  required  to  be  a  priest  to  par- 
take of  them.  There  are  things  which  we  do  as  priests; 
there  are  others  which  we  do  as  simple  believers. 

The  sacrifices  and  the  rules  for  partaking  of  them 
being  thus  appointed,  priesthood  is  established  (chap. 

VII. 


190  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

viii.)  according  to  the  ordinance.  Aaron  and  his  sons 
are  washed ;  Aaron  is  then  clothed,  and  the  tabernacle, 
and  all  that  was  therein,  was  anointed,  and  Aaron 
also,  and  this  without  blood. 

In  this  we  have,  I  apprehend,  a  bright  inlet  into  the 
way  in  which  the  universe  is  filled  with  glory.  When 
Aaron  alone  is  anointed  without  blood,  the  tabernacle 
i8  also.  The  fulness  of  the  divine  power  and  spiritual 
grace  and  glory  which  is  in  Christ,  fills  the  whole  scene 
of  created  witness  of  the  glory  of  God;  that  is,  the 
energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  fills  it  with  the  claim  and 
witnesses  of  the  excellency  of  Christ.  When  the 
creature  has  had  to  do  with  it,  then,  indeed,  as  on  the 
great  day  of  atonement,  it  has  all  to  be  purified  and 
reconciled  with  blood.  But  this  does  not  undo  the 
direct  title  in  grace  and  divine  excellency  in  Jesus.  It 
is  His  on  this  ground  too.  It  is  His  as  Creator  of  it 
all.  It  may  have  contracted  impurity.  Redemption 
is  the  ground  of  the  restitution  of  all  things,  and  the 
creature  is  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption. 
But  as  His  creation  it  all  belonged  to  God.  As  the 
normal  order  it  was,  as  created — consecrated  to  God 
(See  also  Col.  i.  16  and  21.) 

When  Aaron's  sons  are  brought  in,  the  altar  is 
purified  with  blood,  because  we  have  got  out  of  the 
mere  personal  excellency  and  title  of  Christ.  When 
the  sons  of  Aaron  are  clothed  with  the  priestly  gar- 
ments, sacrifices  are  offered,  beginning  with  the  bullock 
for  a  sin-ofFering,  and  Aaron  and  his  sons  have  its 
blood  put  upon  ear  and  thumb  and  toe;  and  then 
Aaron  and  his  garments,  his  sons  and  their  garments 
with  him,  are  sprinkled  with  oil  and  blood  according 
to  the  directions  given  in  Exodus.  The  blood  of 
Christ  and  the  Spirit  are  the  ground  on  which  we,  as- 
sociated with  Him,  have  our  place  with  God. 

On  the  eighth  day  Jehovah  was  to  appear  and  mani- 
fest the  acceptance  of  the  sacrifices   offered  on  that 


LEVITICUS.  191 

day,  and  His  presence  in  glory  in  the  midst  of  the 
people.  This  manifestation  took  place  accordingly : 
first  Aaron,  standing  by  the  sacrifice,  blesses  the  people ; 
and  then  Moses  and  Aaron  go  into  the  tabernacle,  and 
come  out  and  bless  the  people.  That  is,  there  is  first 
Christ,  as  Priest,  blessing  them,  in  virtue  of  the 
oflfered  sacrifice ;  and  then  Christ,  as  King  and  Priest, 
croino^  in  and  hidins:  Himself  for  a  little  in  the  taber- 
nacle,  and  then  coming  out  and  blessing  the  people  in 
this  twofold  character.  When  this  takes  place,  as  it 
will  at  the  coming  of  Jesus,  the  acceptance  of  the 
sacrifice  will  be  publicly  manifested,  and  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  will  appear  to  the  people,  then  become  true 
worshippers  through  that  means. 

This  is  a  scene  of  the  deepest  interest ;  but  there  is 
a  remark  to  be  made  here.  The  church  is  not  found 
in  this  place  (though  there  are  general  principles  which 
apply  to  any  case  of  connection  with  God),  unless  it 
be  in  the  persons  of  Moses  and  Aaron.  The  blessing 
comes  and  is  made  manifest ;  that  is,  the  acceptance  or 
the  victim  is  made  manifest  when  Moses  and  Aaron 
appear  at  their  coming  out  of  the  tabernacle.  It  will 
be  thus  with  Israel.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  appears, 
and  they  recognise  Him  whom  they  pierced,  the 
eflScacy  of  this  sacrifice  will  be  manifested  in  favour 
of  that  nation.  It  will  be  public  by  the  manifesta- 
tion of  Christ.  Our  knowledge  of  that  efiicacy  is 
during  the  stay  of  Christ  within  the  veil,  or  rather  in 
heaven  itself,  for  the  veil  is  now  rent.  Israel  will  not 
know  the  acceptance  of  the  sacrifice  until  Christ  comes 
forth  as  King  ;  for  us  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  forth 
while  He  is  yet  within,  so  that  we  have  the  anticipa- 
tory certitude  of  that  reception,  and  are  connected 
with  Him  there.  And  it  is  this  which  gives  to  the 
Christian  his  proper  character. 

Here  the  manifestation  takes  place  in  the  court 
where  the  sacrifice  was  offered,  and  when  Moses  and 

VIII.,  IX. 


192  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Aaron  have  come  to  the  place  where  God  talked  with 
the  people  (not  where  He  communed  with  the  media- 
tor only,  that  is,  the  ark  of  the  testimony,  where  the 
veil  was  no  longer  on  the  face  of  him  who  also  com- 
muned with  the  Lord),  and  answering  to  this  figure 
the  manifestation  will  be  here.  There  is  a  very  peculiar 
circumstance  connected  with  that.  There  had  been  no 
sacrifice  whose  blood  was  carried  into  the  holy  place, 
though  the  body  of  the  bullock  was  burnt  without 
the  camp.*  A  sin-ofiering  was  indeed  offered,  but  it 
was  such  as  ought  to  have  been  eaten  by  the  priest. 
(See  chap.  x.  17,  18.)  The  relationships  which  had 
been  established  were  comparatively  external.  The 
sin  and  defilement  were  carried  clean  out  of  the  camp 
and  done  away ;  but  there  was  no  entering  in  within 
the  veil,  or  meeting  God  there. 

Lastly,  we  have  what,  alas !  is  always  the  case  with 
man.     The  first  day  the  priesthood  is  established,  it 


*  It  does  not  exactly  appear  whether  the  goat  for  the  people 
(chap.  ix.  3)  was  burnt  without  the  camp.  It  is  said  in  chapter 
X.  16  that  it  was  burnt,  and  that  its  blood  was  not  brought  into 
the  holy  place  for  sin,  so  that  they  ought  to  have  eaten  it.  So 
that  if  it  was  burnt  outside  the  camp  it  was  an  error  ;  the  bullock 
for  Aaron  was,  though  the  blood  was  not  carried  within  the  veil. 
Of  the  goat  it  is  merely  said,  "  offered  it  for  sin,  as  the  first." 
(Chap.  ix.  15.)  Aaron's  sacrifice  seems  to  shew  that  the  cha- 
racter of  Christ's  priesthood  does  not  bring  Israel  into  fellow- 
ship with  what  is  within  the  veil,  though  Christ  may  have 
suffered  on  the  cross  for  them.  The  blood  was  put  on  the  altar 
in  the  court.  The  sons  should  have  eaten  that  for  the  people, 
as  for  a  particular  fault  of  a  people  already  in  relationship  with 
God.  They  are  the  offerings  after  the  consecration  of  Aaron, 
not  those  of  his  consecration.  Then  there  was  naturally  no  offer- 
ing for  the  people  there.  Now  his  hands  were  filled.  The  reader 
may  remark,  as  regards  the  remnant  of  Israel  (the  one  hundred 
and  forty -four  thousand  who  are  on  Mount  Sion  with  the  Lamb, 
the  Sufferer  in  Israel,  now  King  there),  that  they  are  on  earth, 
but  they  learn  the  song  sung  in  heaven,  though  they  are  not 
there  to  sing  it. 


LEVITICUS.  193 

comes  short  of  the  glory  of  God.  Nadah  and  Abihu 
offer  strange  fire,  acting  as  men  in  nature  in  their  rela- 
tionship with  God,  not  founding  their  service  on  the 
altar  of  sacrifice,  and  they  die. 

The  priests  must  on  no  account  whatever  depart 
from  their  consecration  (vers.  6,  7) ;  therefore  they 
must  be  Nazarites  (ver.  9),  apart  from  that  which  is 
only  the  excitement  of  the  flesh,  separated  unto  God 
from  all  that  which  would  let  nature  loose  in  His 
presence ;  from  that  which  would  prevent  them  from 
feeling  its  power — a  state  of  abstraction  in  which  the 
flesh  has  no  place.  The  presence  of  God  must  have 
its  full  power,  and  the  flesh  must  be  silent  before  Him. 
It  is  only  thus  that  they  would  be  able  to  discern 
between  that  which  is  unclean  and  that  which  is  pure 
— that  which  is  profane  and  that  which  is  holy.  There 
are  lawful  things,  real  joys,  which,  however,  do  not 
belong  to  priesthood — joys  which  flow  from  God's 
blessings,  and  which  do  not  keep  the  flesh  in  check  as 
does  His  presence ;  for  there  is  always  a  certain  re- 
straint on  the  heart,  on  nature  and  its  activity,  pro- 
duced by  the  presence  of  God.  But  priesthood  is 
exercised  before  Him. 

Priesthood  being  established,  there  comes  the  diseern- 
ment  between  holy  things  and  profane,  and  the  judg- 
ment of  defilements  (chap,  xi.-xv.),  and  what  was  to 
be  done  for  the  purification  of  defiled  persons.  We 
see  that  it  is  this  nearnes,'*  of  separation  unto  God 
which  alone  can  discern  thus,  and  such  is  the  service 
and  ever  the  duty  of  priests. 

First,  as  to  food,  that  which  is  allowed  to  be  eaten. 
In  general  the  principle  seems  to  be,  that  anything  is 
allowed  that  is  clean,  in  this  sense,  first,  that  it  is 
thoroughly  according  to  its  element,  that  is,  in  prin- 
ciple, divine  order  (of  course  here  presented  in  a  figure), 
as  fishes  having  scales  ;  secondly,  that  was  allowed 
which  united  mature  digestion  to  the  absence  of  that 

VOL.  L  X.,  XI.  O 


194  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

wilful  energy  which  goes  boldly  through  everything. 
These  two  qualities  must  be  united.  The  grossness 
which  swallows  down  things  as  they  are,  or  the  lack 
of  quiet  firmness,  rendered  unclean.  To  be  clean,  it 
must  be  that  which  at  the  same  time  chews  the  cud 
and  divides  the  hoof.  Of  birds,  the  carnivorous  night 
birds  and  those  which  cannot  be  tamed  are  forbidden ; 
creeping  things  also,  whatever  grovelled  and  trailed 
itself  on  the  earth.  In  general,  there  was  to  be  in 
their  eating  the  discernment  of  what  was  clean. 

Then  we  have  the  judgment  of  God  fallen  on  that 
which  would  have  been,  for  unf alien  man,  joy  and 
blessing.  The  birth  of  a  man,  connected  now  with  sin, 
renders  unclean ;  that  of  a  woman,  in  whom  was  the 
transgression,  being  deceived,  still  more  so.* 

Leprosy  requires  a  little  more  detail.  It  was  found 
in  persons,  in  garments,  in  houses.  Leprosy  was  sin 
acting  in  the  flesh.  The  spiritual  man — the  priest — 
discerns  as  to  it.  If  the  raw  flesh  appears,  he  is  un- 
clean; the  strength  of  the  flesh  is  at  work.  If  the 
man  was  white  all  over,  it  was  only  the  eflfect,  as  sin 
entirely  confessed  but  no  longer  active ;  he  was  clean. 
The  thing  spreads  in  man,  if  it  be  evil  in  the  flesh. 
The  first  step  is  for  him  to  confess;  and  to  confess 
under  full  spiritual  discernment,  and  the  judgment  of 
God  who  has  brought  to  light  what  was  acting  in  his 
nature.  He  makes  up  his  mind  as  one  judged  and 
detected.     He  has  no  part  in  the  assembly  of  God, 

*  Connected  with  this  was  the  weakness  of  fallen  nature. 
(Compare  Gen.  i.  28.)  All  that  belonged  even  to  weakness  of 
nature,  being  the  effect  of  sin,  rendered  unclean  under  the  law. 
This  is  also  true  spiritually.  All  this  was  the  result  of  some 
manifestation  or  other  of  the  life  that  was  in  the  flesh.  It  was 
so  with  the  leper ;  raw  flesh  rendered  unclean,  as  well  as  any 
other  case  where  this  life  (whicli  had  become  unclean,  and  had 
been  as  set  aside  and  under  judgment  through  sin),  manifested 
itself  externally,  even  though  weakness  alone  were  the  cause 
its  manifestation. 


LEVITICUS.  195 

though  making  part  of  it  in  one  sense.  He  is  put  out, 
without  the  camp. 

Leprosy  (sin)  manifested  itself  in  circumstances,  in 
that  which  surrounds  us,  as  well  as  in  personal  conduct. 
If  it  was  only  a  spot,  the  garment  was  washed,  and  it 
was  clean ;  if  the  plague  spot,  on  the  contrary,  spread, 
the  whole  was  bunied;  if  the  plague,  though  it  did 
not  spread,  remained,  after  washing,  unchanged,  the 
whole  was  burned.  If  changed  and  it  spread  no  more, 
the  spot  was  torn  out. 

If  we  get  thus  defiled  by  our  circumstances,  and  it 
is  not  in  the  things  themselves,  we  need  only  wash  and 
remain  where  we  are  ;  if  a  part  of  them  be  essentially 
bad,  that  it  spread  defilingly  in  our  whole  condition, 
all  that  part  of  our  outward  life  must  be  given  up  ;  if, 
in  spite  of  washing,  sin  be  still  found  the  same  there, 
if  we  cannot  walk  therein  with  God,  such  a  position 
must  be  wholly  given  up  at  any  cost ;  if  it  be  affected 
by  the  washing  and  cease  to  spread,  the  general  state 
being  unafiected,  the  particular  thing  which  has  defiled 
is  to  be  given  up. 

As  to  purification,  the  leper  was  first  considered  as 
being  outside  the  camp,  not  belonging  to  it ;  but  if  the 
activity  of  the  disease  was  stopped  in  him,  he  was 
healed,  but  not  yet  purified.  Thus  this  type  supposes 
that  the  flesh,  instead  of  being  active  and  characteristic 
of  the  state  of  man,  is  iudged  and  arrested  in  its 
activity.  It  is  the  enjoyment  of  a  recognised  relation- 
ship with  God  which  is  to  be  established.* 

The  first  part  of  the  purification  relates  to  this  posi- 
tion. Christ  being  dead  and  risen,  man  sprinkled  with 
His  blood  is  fit,  as  regards  thfe  controversy  with  God, 
and  His  requirements,  to  enter  the   camp   of   God's 

'"  This  difference  is  important ;  it  is  that  between  the  work  in 
us  which  makes  a  sin  a  judged  thing  in  us,  judged  by  us,  and 
the  work  of  Christ  which  supposing  that,  puts  us  in  a  condition 
for  relationship  with  God. 

XI.-XIII. 


196  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

people ;  and  then  he  can  share  in  the  efficacy  of  the 
means  which  they  can  use  there,  of  that  which  is  found 
within,  in  order  to  present  himself  as  acceptable  before 
the  tabernacle  of  God.  Two  birds  were  to  be  taken, 
and  one  killed  by  some  one,  at  the  command  of  the 
priest ;  for  the  priest's  office  never  properly  began  till 
there  was  blood  to  offer  or  sprinkle,  though  the  high 
priest  represented  Israel  on  the  great  day  of  atone- 
ment.* The  two  birds,  however,  are  identified,  so  that 
we  hear  no  more  of  that  which  was  killed,  though  the 
efficacy  of  the  blood  be  everything  in  the  work  of 
cleansing ;  the  second  is  dipped  in  the  blood  of  the 
first. 

Thus  Christ  dead  is  no  more  found;  but,  being 
raised.  He  sprinkles  His  blood,  as  priest,  on  the  unclean 
sinner.  The  earthen  vessel,  over  running  water,  pre- 
sents to  us  the  efficacy  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  according 
to  the  all-powerful  efficacy  of  which,  in  Christ  as  man, 
this  work  of  the  death  of  Jesus  has  been  accomplished: 
through  the  eternal  Spirit  He  offered  Himself  without 
spot  to  God — God  having  brought  again  from  the  dead 
the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  through  the  blood  of 
the  everlasting  covenant.  He,  the  sinner,  was  under 
the  efficacy  of  Christ's  work. 

But  now  there  is,  before  he  can  offer,  the  work  done 
on  himself,  the  actual  cleansing  applied  to  him.  He 
who  cleansed  himself  washed  himself — a  purification 
of  water  as  well  as  of  blood,  which  is  always  found ; 
the  moral  judgment  of  sin  viewed  as  that  which  ex- 
cludes from  God's  presence,  so  that  the  sinner  is,  in 
principle  and  faith,  morally  as  well  as  judicially 
cleansed.  Of  the  last  blood  is  the  emblem;  but  the 
water  is  the  estimation  of  sin  as  shewn  in  Christ's 

"^^  It  was  the  high  priest  who  did  it,  but  it  was  not  a  properly 
priestly  act.  That  is,  it  was  not  one  going  between  individuals  or 
even  the  people  and  God,  but  representing  them  as  such  in  his 
own  person  :  as  Christ,  His  people  on  the  cross. 


LEVITICUS.  197 

death,  and  the  forsaking  of  God.  It  is  in  virtue  of 
the  death  of  Christ,  seen  as  His  work  for  us,  for  the 
water  comes  out  of  His  pierced  side.  He  came  by- 
water  and  blood.  The  leper  rids  himself  of  anything 
to  which  impurity  might  have  attached,  or  had  a  share 
in,  and  now  he  enters  the  camp;  and  the  work  of 
bringing  him  into  communion  with  God  in  his  con- 
science begins.* 

This  is  through  realising  all  the  efficacy  of  the  work 
of  Christ,  with  reference  to  conscience  itself — not  only 
as  to  the  acceptance  of  the  person,  according  to  God's 
knowledge  of  that  acceptance,  but  as  to  the  purifica- 
tion of  the  conscience,  and  as  to  a  knowledge  of  God, 
based  on  a  moral  appreciation  of  the  work  of  Christ 
in  every  aspect,  and  the  excellent  work  of  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  God.  This  is  the  second  part  of  the 
cleansing  of  the  leper,  that  which  took  place  after  he 
had  re-entered  the  camp. 

It  is  important  to  recognise  the  work  of  Christ 
under  these  two  aspects ;  its  intrinsic  efiicacy  for  the 
acceptance  of  the  person  on  the  one  hand ;  and,  on  the 
other,  the  purification  of  the  conscience  itself,  in  order 
that  there  may  be  communion  with  God,  according  to 
the  price  and  the  perfection  of  that  work,  known  in 
the  conscience  as  a  means  of  drawing  near  to  God,  and 
as  the  moral  condition  of  that  nearness. 

Let  us  now  examine  what  took  place.  The  first 
thing  was  the  trespass-offering.     The  conscience  must 

*  When  it  was  a  question  of  consecrating  those  who  were 
recognised  as  to  their  persons  (the  priests) ,  they  were  first  washed, 
and  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  viewed  under  every  aspect,  was  the 
measure  of  their  relation  with  God  in  every  way,  and  the  basis 
of  their  communion  in  its  inward  efficacy  upon  the  soul.  But 
here,  the  sinner  being  viewed  in  his  sin  outside  the  camp,  it  was 
necessary  first  to  lay  the  basis  for  the  possibility  of  intercourse 
with  God.  This  was  done  in  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Jesus.  Then,  being  washed  (the  efficacious  operation  of  the 
Spirit  by  the  word),  he  can  be  in  relationship. 
XIII. 


19S  •  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

be  purified,  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  of  all  that  with 
which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  charged,  or  would  bt> 
chargeable  in  the  day  of  judgment;  and  man  must  be 
consecrated  to  God  with  an  intelligence  which  applies 
the  value  of  that  blood  to  his  whole  walk,  his  whole 
conduct,  his  whole  thoughts,  and  upon  the  principle 
of  perfect  obedience.  It  is  the  judicial  purifica- 
tion of  the  whole  man,  upon  the  principle  of 
intelligent  obedience — a  purification  acting  upon  his 
conscience,  not  merely  an  outward  rule  for  a  man 
freed  from  the  present  power  of  sin,  but  a  purification 
of  his  conscience  felt  in  the  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil,  of  which  the  blood  of  Christ  is  the  measure  before 
God.  Man  being  a  sinner,  having  failed,  the  work 
must  take  place  in  the  conscience,  which  takes  an 
humbling  knowledge  of  it ;  and  in  becoming  cleansed 
through  the  precious  efiicacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ, 
does  so  through  the  sorrow  for  all  that  is  contrary 
to  the  perfection  of  that  blood,  and  which  has  required 
the  shedding  of  it. 

It  is  thus  man  is  consecrated.  The  heart  is  first 
purified  in  the  conscience.  The  things  to  which  he 
had  given  way  are,  as  it  were,  brought  to  the  con- 
science, which  takes  a  painful  knowledge  of  them,  ac- 
cording to  the  value  of  the  blood  of  the  precious  Lamb 
of  God,  who,  without  spot,  and  perfect  in  obedience, 
had  to  suffer  the  agony  caused  by  the  sin  from  which 
we  have  to  be  cleansed — wretched  creatures  that  we 
are. 

Afterwards  the  heart  makes  progress  in  the  power 
of  its  communion,  through  the  knowledge  of  the  most 
precious  objects  of  its  faith.  As  to  communion — though 
never  as  to  the  conscience  of  imputation  (see  Heb.  x,), 
and  as  to  communion  it  is  by  water.  (See  John  xiii. 
and  1  John  ii.)  This  work  must  go  on  again  from 
time  to  time  in  the  conscience,  whenever  there  is 
something  in  our  nature  which  is  not  in  subjection  to 


LEVITICUS.  109 

Christ,  which  is  not  brought  captive  to  the  obedience 
of  Christ. 

The  blood,  then,  was  put  upon  the  tip  of  his  right 
ear,  his  right  hand,  his  right  foot — his  thoughts,  his 
conduct,  and  his  walk  purified  on  the  principle  of 
obedience,  according  to  the  measure  of  Christ's  death, 
and  the  claim  of  the  love  displayed  in  it.  Over  that 
they  sprinkled  oil- — the  presence  and  sanctifying  in- 
fluence of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  given  to  us,  by  which  we 
are  anointed  and  sealed — not  washing  (that  was  typi- 
fied by  water,  the  application  of  the  word  by  the 
Spirit),  but  given  to  consecrate  in  knowledge  and 
power  of  purpose  and  affection  to  God  (with  whatever 
gifts  might  be  added  thereto) ;  the  whole  man  being 
thus  consecrated,  according  to  the  intelligence  and  the 
devotedness  wrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  God. 
After  that  the  oil  was  put  upon  his  head,  his  whole 
person  being  thus  consecrated  to  Him.  The  work  was 
complete  upon  him  who  was  to  be  cleansed.*  After 
that  the  sin  offering  was  offered ;  that  is,  Christ  (not 
only  for  the  purification  of  the  conscience  in  a  prac- 
tical sense,  for  its  actual  faults,  but  that  sin  might  be 
judged  in  its  full  extent  before  God;  for  Christ  was 
made  sin  for  us,  as  well  as  bore  our  sins)  thus  acts  on 
our  consciences  with  regard  to  those  sins — makes  us 
estimate  sin,  such  as  it  is  in  itself,  seen  in  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ. 

Then  the  burnt-offering  with  the  meat-offering  was 
offered ;  the  former,  the  appreciation  of  the  perfection 


*  Note  here  how  very  distinctly  the  ground  of  introduction 
into  the  new  christian  place  is  stated  in  its  completeness.  Cul- 
pabihty  is  fally  met,  guilt  removed,  cleansing  by  blood  as  to  all 
committed  sins  perfect,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  given,  giving  com- 
petency for  all  that  was  to  follow.  The  man  stood,  to  apply  the 
figure,  personally  on  christian  ground.  The  sin-offering  and 
the  burnt- offering  go  further,  hence  only  the  trespass- offering  is 
used  to  introduce  the  leper  and  have  him  anointed. 
XIV. 


200  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

of  the  death  of  Christ,  seen  as  the  devoting  of  Him- 
self to  God  unto  death,  to  vindicate  all  the  rights  of 
His  majesty,  and  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of 
Himself — in  view  of  the  existence  of  sin;  the 
latter,  the  absolute  sinlessness  of  Christ,  His  per- 
fection,  and  the  acting  power  of  the  Spirit  in  Him 
even  to  death,  and  full  testing  by  it.  This  death  was 
of  infinite  perfection  in  itself,  as  a  work,  for  it  can  be 
said,  "  Therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me,  because  I 
lay  down  my  life,  that  I  might  take  it  again."  It  was 
not  as  bearing  our  sins,  but  absolute  devotedness  to 
God  and  His  glory,  in  the  circumstances  that  sin  had 
brought  us  into,  and  into  which  Christ  also  came  by 
grace,  that  God  might  be  fully  glorified  in  Him. 

In  the  meat-ofiering  was  found,  besides,  all  the  per- 
fectness  of  the  grace  of  Christ  in  His  life — humanity, 
pure  without  doubt,  but  kneaded  with  oil;  humanity 
Lavino-  in  it  all  the  strength,  the  taste,  and  savour  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  in  its  nature ;  for  it  is  in  that  aspect 
that  it  is  presented  here,  not  as  anointed  with  oil* — as 
power — but  kneaded  with  oil  in  its  substance.  Now 
the  man  is  clean. 

And  how  great  is  the  importance  and  the  reality  of 
the  reconciliation  of  a  soul  to  God,  if  it  values  all  that 

*  The  fact  of  anointing  the  person  comes  after  the  trespass- 
offering.  But  this  circumstance  is  of  moment  as  shewing  that 
it  is  Christ,  in  what  He  was  in  Person  intrinsically — not  the 
display  of  power,  so  as  to  say,  "  If  I  by  the  Spirit  of  God  cast  out 
devils,  no  doubt  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  amongst  you,"  but 
what  He  was  in  all  His  blessed  life  in  perfectness  to  God  and  in 
love.  This  is  what  we  feed  on.  Note  here  that  what  is  said  in 
verse  IS  does  not  mean,  I  apprehend,  that  the  oil  in  itself  made 
an  atonement,  but  the  trespass -offering,  for  it  is  the  blood  that 
makes  atonement  for  the  soul.  But  it  is  not  the  less  true  that 
the  man  was  not  there  until  he  had  been  anointed  with  the  oil ; 
nor  is  a  man  in  heart  and  conscience  before  God  till  he  have 
received  the  Holy  Ghost,  though  the  ground  and  measure  of 
all  be  the  blood  with  which  he  is  sprinkled.  It  is  the  same  in 
verse  29.     See  what  follows. 


LEVITICUS.  201 

is  thus  unfolded  of  the  work  of  Christ,  and  of  its  ap- 
plication to  the  soul ;  and  certainly  its  reconciliation 
does  not  take  place  without.  Alas !  our  trifling  hearts 
pass,  perhaps  lightly,  over  this,  and  the  dealings  of 
that  hand  of  God  which  does  marvellous  things  with 
the  quiet  ease  which  perfect  grace  and  power  give. 
However,  we  do  see,  sometimes,  in  some  souls  (accord- 
ing to  the  wisdom  of  God),  the  anguish  and  the  suffer- 
ing which  accompany  this  work,  when  the  conscience, 
in  view  of  the  reality  of  things  before  God,  and  through 
Christ,  takes  knowledge  of  the  state  of  the  heart 
sinful  and  distant  from  God  in  its  nature. 

This  is  the  restoration  of  the  soul  on  the  part  of 
God.  It  is  all  the  working  of  divine  power,  not  merely 
as  to  the  work  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  but  even  as 
to  the  soul  itself ;  for  the  case  here  under  supposition 
is  that  of  a  man  already  vitally  cleansed.  The  priest 
judged  him  already  clean,  but  the  leper  was  not  him- 
self restored  to  God  in  his  conscience  ;*  and  the  Spirit 
of  God,  for  this  purpose,  goes  over  the  work  of  Christ, 
and  its  application  to  the  soul  itself,  and  its  relation- 
ship with  the  work  and  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
its  work,  whether  in  purifying  the  sinner,  or  in  con- 
secrating the  man.  May  our  gracious  God  render  us 
attentive  to  this !  happy  that  the  work  should  be  His, 
though  it  takes  place  in  us  as  well  as  for  us. 

There  remains  to  be  considered  leprosy  in  a  house. 
In  the  case  of  the  leprous  person,  the  whole  referred 
to  the  tabernacle.  They  were  still  in  the  wilderness : 
the  walk  in  the  world  was  what  was  in  question.  But 
here  the  being  in  the  land  of  promise  is  supposed.  It 
does  not  refer  to  the  cleansing  of  the  person ;  it  is 

'•'  This  difference  is  important,  and  shews  jhow  the  working 
of  sin  may  be  stopped,  and  the  desires  and  will  set  right,  and 
in  a  certain  sense  the  affections,  but  the  conscience  not  yet  be 
restored;  commimion  consequently  not  yet  re-established,  nor 
the  blessed  confidence  and  affections  founded  on  it. 
XIV. 


202  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

more  typical  of  an  assembly.  When  defilement  ap- 
pears there,  they  take  out  the  stones  and  the  plaster : 
the  external  walk  is  quite  changed,  and  the  individuals 
who  have  corrupted  this  walk  are  taken  out,  and 
thrown  amongst  the  unclean.  If  the  whole  be  there- 
upon healed,  the  house  remains  ;  if  not,  it  is  wholly 
destroyed ;  the  evil  is  in  the  assembly  itself,  and  it  was 
manifest,  as  in  the  case  of  the  leper.  If  its  soTirce  was 
in  the  stones  taken  away,  if  it  was  only  there,  the 
end  was  accomplished  by  taking  out  the  stones  and 
removing  the  plaster,  reforming  the  whole  external 
walk.  Purification  consisted  in  taking  away  the 
wicked  who  corrupted  the  public  testimony — that 
which  was  manifested  outside.  It  was  not  a  question 
of  restoring  the  conscience ;  the  whole  rests  anew  on 
the  primitive  efficacy  of  the  work  of  Christ,  which 
renders  the  assembly  acceptable  with  God. 

We  shall  find  that  the  Apostle  Paul,  in  his  Epistles 
addressed  to  assemblies,  says,  "  grace  and  peace ;"  and, 
when  writing  to  individuals,  adds  "  mercy."  Philemon 
seems  an  exception ;  but  the  church  is  addressed  with 
him. 

In  the  case  of  garments  it  is  no  question  about 
cleansing  one's  person,  but  of  getting  rid  of  defiled 
circumstances.  We  see  that  the  case  of  the  house  is 
presented  separate,  being  in  the  land  of  promise,  and 
not  in  the  walk  of  the  wilderness.  The  same  truth  is 
found  in  the  application,  I  doubt  not.  The  assembly 
is  in  the  land  of  promise ;  the  individual  walks  in  the 
wilderness.  However,  stones  which  corrupt  the  house 
may  be  found  there. 

Other  cases  connected  with  the  weakness  of  nature 
are  mentioned,  but  w^hich  point  out  that,  sin  having 
come  in,  all  that  is  of  nature,  of  the  flesh,  defiles 
(whatever  may  be  the  excuse  as  to  the  weakness  and 
the  unavoidable  character  of  the  thing).  If  it  cannot 
be  avoided,  it  is  the  manifestation,  or  at  least  the  in- 


LEVITICUS.  203 

evitable  existence,  of  that  which  is  shameful,  because 
it  is  a  nature  fallen  and  sinful. 

We  shall  find,  however,  that,  though  being  shameful, 
the  case  is  supposed  less  morally  serious  than  leprosy. 
In  leprosy  there  was  the  manifestation  of  positive  cor- 
ruption, existing  beforehand  in  the  nature,  which  was 
admitted  in  the  heart,  so  that  a  long  process  was  neces- 
sary to  purify  the  conscience.  Here  they  only  washed 
once,  and  they  offered  merely  a  sin-offering,  and  they 
were  thereby  able,  in  offering  their  burnt-offering,  to 
enter  into  communion  through  the  sweet  savour  of 
Christ. 

Having  made  provision  for  such  defilements  of  the 
people  as  allowed  of  it,  we  have  the  revelation,  first,  of 
the  general  provision  for  the  purification  of  the  sanc- 
tuary which  was  in  the  midst  of  a  people  who  defiled 
it,  and  secondly,  for  the  atonement  of  the  sins  of  the 
people  themselves. 

In  general,  there  are  two  great  ideas ;  first,  that  the 
atonement  was  made,  so  that  the  relationship  of  the 
people  with  God  was  maintained  notwithstanding  their 
sins ;  and  then,  in  the  second  place,  in  the  difficulties 
which  surrounded  the  entrance  of  Aaron  into  the  holy 
place,  there  was  the  testimony  (according  to  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  itself)  that  the  way  into  the  holiest 
of  all  was  not  yet  made  manifest  during  that  dis- 
pensation. 

It  is  important  to  examine  this  chapter  under  these 
two  points  of  view.  It  stands  alone.  No  mention  is 
made  anywhere  else  of  what  took  place  on  that  solemn 
day.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ,  as  meeting  God's  right- 
eousness against  sin  as  the  ground  of  redemption,  was 
typified  by  the  passover.  It  was  a  question  of  draw- 
ing near  luito  God  who  revealed  Himself  on  His 
throne — of  cleansing  defilements — of  taking  away  the 
sins  of  those  who  would  draw  near,  and  of  purifying 
their  conscience.  Now,  while  presenting  to  us  in 
XV.,  XVI. 


204  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLK 

figure  God's  means  of  doing  this,  it  signified  indeed 
that  the  thing  was  not  done.  As  to  the  general  idea 
of  its  efficacy,  the  high  priest  drew  near  personally, 
and  filled  the  most  holy  place  with  incense.  So  Christ 
goes  in  personally  in  the  perfect  savour  of  what  He 
is  for  God.     The  place  of  God's  presence  was  full  of  it. 

The  expression  "that  he  die  not"  expresses  the 
absolutely  obligatory  nature  of  anything  which  was 
fulfilled  in  Christ.  Personally  he  appears  before  God, 
being  as  ointment  poured  forth,  a  sweet  savour,  con- 
nected with  fire  from  the  altar,  that  is,  based  on  judg- 
ment and  death,  but  only  bringing  out  a  perfect  sweet 
odour  to  God :  not  blood  for  others,  but  fire  for  the 
testing  of  his  perf ectness ;  not  in  this  case  to  cleanse, 
but  to  bring  out  the  odour  of  this  good  ointment. 
Then  he  took  some  blood,  which  he  put  on  the  mercy- 
seat  and  before  the  mercy-seat.  Atonement  or  pro- 
pitiation was  made  according  to  the  requirement  of  the 
nature  and  majesty  of  the  throne  of  God  Himself,  so 
that  the  full  satisfaction  made  to  His  majesty  rendered 
the  throne  of  justice  favourable,  a  place  of  acceptance ; 
grace  had  free  course,  and  the  worshipper  found  the 
blood  there  before  him  when  he  drew  near,  and  even 
as  a  testimony  before  the  throne.  Then,  secondly, 
the  high  priest  cleansed  the  tabernacle,  the  altar  of 
incense,  and  all  that  was  found  there.  But  it  was 
only  that  which  was  within. 

There  were  thus  two  things;  the  blood  presented  to 
God,  the  throne  was  a  throne  of  grace  according  to 
righteousness — the  conscience  being  purified,  so  that 
we  enter  with  boldness  now ;  and  then  the  place  was 
cleansed,  with  all  that  belonged  to  it,  according  to  the 
nature  and  presence  of  God,  who  dwelt  there.  In 
virtue  of  the  sprinkling  of  His  blood,  Christ  will  re- 
concile all  things  in  heaven  and  earth — but  here  this 
is  only  shewn  as  to  the  heavenly  part — having  made 
peace  through  the  blood  of  His  cross.     There  could  be 


LEVITICUS.  205 

no  guiltiness  in  the  tabernacle,  but  it  was  the  place  of 
God's  dwelling,  and  God  would  cleanse  away  the  defile- 
ments, that  they  might  not  appear  before  Him. 

In  the  third  place  (but  this  as  a  distinct  service)  there 
was  no  cleansing  of  that  which  was  outside,  but  the 
high  priest  confessed  the  sins  of  the  people  over  the 
scape-goat,  which,  sent  away  unto  a  land  not  inhabited, 
bore  all  the  sins  away  from  God,  never  to  be  found 
again.  It  is  here  that  the  idea  of  substitution  is  pre- 
sented most  clearly.  There  are  three  things:  the 
blood  on  the  mercy-seat,  the  reconciliation  of  the 
sanctuary,  and  the  sins  confessed  and  borne  by 
another. 

It  is  evident  that,  though  the  scape-goat  was  sent 
away  alive,  he  was  identified  as  to  the  efficacy  of  the 
work  with  the  death  of  the  other.  The  idea  of  the 
eternal  sending  away  of  sins  out  of  remembrance  is 
only  added  to  the  thought  of  death.  The  glory  of 
God  was  established,  on  one  side,  in  the  putting  of  the 
blood  on  the  mercy-seat ;  and,  on  the  other,  there  was 
the  substitution  of  the  scape-goat,  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
in  His  precious  grace,  for  the  guilty  persons  whose 
cause  He  had  undertaken;  and,  the  sins  of  these 
having  been  borne,  their  deliverance  was  full,  entire, 
and  final.  The  first  goat  was  Jehovah's  lot — it  was  a 
question  of  His  character  and  His  majesty.  The  other 
was  the  lot  of  the  people,  which  definitively  repre- 
sented the  people  in  their  sins. 

These  two  aspects  of  the  death  of  Jesus  must  be 
carefully  distinguished  in  the  atoning  sacrifice  He  has 
accomplished.  He  has  glorified  God,  and  God  acts 
according  to  the  value  of  that  blood  towards  all.*  He 
has  borne  the  sins  of  His  people ;  and  the  salvation  of 
His  people  is  complete.  And,  in  a  certain  sense,  the 
first  part  is  the  most  important.     Sin  having  come  in, 

*  See  John  xiii.  31,  32,  and  xvii.  1,  4.  And  this  entitles  maa 
to  gloxj,  does  not  merely  justify  him. 

XVI. 


206  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  justice  of  God  might,  it  is  true,  have  got  rid  of  the 
sinner ;  but  where  would  then  have  been  His  love  and 
His  counsels  of  grace,  pardon,  and  even  the  mainten- 
ance of  His  glory  according  to  His  true  nature  as  love, 
while  righteous  and  holy  too  ? 

I  am  not  speaking  here  of  the  persons  who  were  to 
be  saved,  but  of  the  glory  of  God  Himself.  But  the 
perfect  death  of  Jesus — His  blood  put  on  the  throne 
of  God — has  established  and  brought  into  evidence  all 
that  God  is,  all  His  glory,  as  no  creation  could  have 
done  it;  His  truth  (for  He  had  passed  sentence  of 
death)  is  made  good  in  the  highest  way  in  Jesus; 
His  majesty,  for  His  Son  submits  to  all  for  His  glory ; 
His  justice  against  sin ;  His  infinite  love.  God  found 
means  therein  to  accomplish  His  counsels  of  grace,  in 
maintaining  all  the  majesty  of  His  justice  and  of  His 
divine  dignity ;  for  what,  like  the  death  of  Jesus,  could 
have  glorified  them  ? 

Therefore  this  devotedness  of  Jesus,  God's  Son,  to 
His  glory — His  submission,  even  unto  death,  that  God 
might  be  maintained  in  the  full  glory  of  His  rights, 
has  given  its  outlet  to  the  love  of  God,  freedom  to 
its  action ;  wherefore  Jesus  says,  "  I  have  a  baptism  to 
be  baptised  with,  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  ac- 
complished !"  His  heart,  full  of  love,  was  driven  back, 
in  its  personal  manifestation,  by  the  sin  of  man,  who 
would  not  have  it ;  but  through  the  atonement  it  could 
flow  forth  to  the  sinner,  in  the  accomplishment  of  God's 
grace  and  of  His  counsels,  unhindered ;  and  Jesus  Him- 
self had,  so  to  speak,  rights  upon  that  love — a  position 
we  are  brought  into  through  grace,  and  which  has  none 
like  it.  "  Therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me,  because 
I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I  might  take  it  again." 

We  speak  with  reverence  of  such  things,  but  it  is 
good  to  speak  of  them  ;  for  the  glory  of  our  God,  and 
of  Him  whom  He  has  sent,  is  found  therein  established 
and  manifested.     There  is  not  one  attribute,  one  trait 


LEVITICUS.  207 

of  the  divine  character,  which  has  not  been  manifested 
in  all  its  perfection,  and  fully  glorified  in  that  which 
took  place  between  God  and  Jesus  Himself.  That  we 
have  been  saved  and  redeemed,  and  that  our  sins  have 
been,  atoned  for  in  that  same  sacrifice,  according  to  the 
counsels  of  the  grace  of  God,  is  (I  presume  to  say  it, 
precious  and  important  as  it  is  for  us)  the  inferior  part 
of  that  work,  if  anything  whatever  may  be  called 
inferior  where  everything  is  perfect :  its  object  at  least 
— we  sinners — is  inferior,  if  the  work  is  equally  perfect 
in  every  point  of  view.  Nor  can  they  indeed  be 
separated ;  for  if  sin  had  not  been  there,  where  would 
that  in  God  have  been  displayed,  which  has  been, 
in  putting  it  away  ?  Nor  is  it  here  only,  though  we 
know  it  here ;  we  shall  be  eternally  in  glory  the  proof 
and  living  witness  as  to  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  work. 

Having  considered  a  little  the  grand  principles,  we 
may  now  examine  the  particular  circumstances. 

It  will  have  been  observed  that  there  were  two 
sacrifices ;  one  for  Aaron  and  his  family,  the  other  for 
the  people.  Aaron  and  his  sons  always  represent  the 
church,  not  in  the  sense  of  one  body,  but  as  a  company 
of  priests. 

Thus  we  have,  even  in  the  day  of  atonement,  the 
distinction  between  those  who  form  the  church,  and 
the  earthly  people  who  form  the  camp  of  God  on  the 
earth.  Believers  have  their  place  outside  the  camp, 
where  their  Head  has  suffered,  as  sacrifice  for  sin  ;  but, 
in  consequence,  they  have  their  place  in  the  presence 
of  God  in  the  heavens,  where  their  Head  has  entered. 
Outside  the  camp,*  here  below,  answers  to  a  heavenly 
portion  above :  they  are  the  two  positions  of  the  ever 
blessed  Christ. 

*  The  camp  is  an  earthly  religious  relationship  with  God  out- 
side the  sanctuary,  and  established  on  earth  with  priests  between 
men  and  God.  This  the  Jews  were ;  they  cast  Christ  out  of  it ; 
and  it  is  now  utterly  rejected. 

XVI. 


208  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

If  the  professing  church  takes  the  position  of  the 
camp  here  below,  the  place  of  the  believer  is  always 
outside.  It  is,  indeed,  what  she  has  done ;  she  boasts 
of  it — but  it  is  Jewish.  Israel  must  indeed  recognise 
themselves  outside  at  last,  in  order  to  be  saved  and  to 
be  brought  in  again,  through  grace;  because  the  Saviour, 
whom  they  despised  in  a  day  of  blindness,  has  in  grace 
borne  all  their  sins  as  a  nation,  owned  in  the  remnant, 
for  He  died  for  that  nation.  We  anticipate  that  posi- 
tion whilst  Christ  is  in  heaven.  The  heart  of  the 
remnant  of  Israel  will  indeed  be  brought  back  to 
Jehovah  before  that  time;  they  will  only  enter  into 
the  power  of  the  sacrifice  when  they  shall  look  upon 
Him  whom  they  pierced,  and  mourn  for  Him.  There- 
fore was  it  prescribed  that  it  should  be  a  day  to  afflict 
their  souls,  and  that  he  who  did  not  should  be  cut  ofi". 

The  day  of  atonement  supposes,  moreover,  according 
to  the  state  of  things  found  in  the  wilderness,  that  the 
people  were  in  a  state  of  incapacity  for  the  enjoyment 
of  the  relations  with  God  fully  manifested.  God  had 
redeemed  them,  had  spoken  to  them ;  but  the  heart  of 
Israel,  of  man  however  favoured,  was  incapable  of  it 
in  its  natural  state.  Israel  had  made  the  golden  calf, 
and  Moses  put  a  veil  over  his  face ;  Nadab  and  Abihu 
had  offered  strange  fire  upon  the  altar  of  God — fire 
which  had  not  been  taken  from  the  altar  of  burnt- 
offering.  The  way  into  the  holiest  is  closed ;  Aaron  is 
forbidden  to  enter  there  at  aU  times.  He  never  went 
in  in  his  garments  of  glory  and  beauty.  When  he 
went  in,  it  was  not  for  communion,  but  for  the  cleans- 
ing of  the  sanctuary  defiled  by  the  iniquities  of  a 
people  among  whom  God  dwelt ;  and  the  day  of  atone- 
ment is  only  introduced  with  a  prohibition  of  entering 
at  all  times  into  the  holy  place,  and  is  conspicuous  as 
taking  place  after  the  death  of  the  sons  of  Aaron.  He 
does  it  with  a  cloud  of  incense,  lest  he  die.  It  was 
truly  a  gracious  provision,  in  order  that  the  people 


LEVITICUS.  209 

should  not  perish  on  account  of  their  defilements ;  but 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  signifying  that  the  way  into  th© 
holiest  of  all  was  not  yet  made  manifest. 

In  what,  then,  is  our  position  changed  ?  The  veil  is 
rent ;  and  we  enter,  as  priests,  with  boldness  into  the 
holiest,  by  a  new  and  living  way  through  the  veil,  that 
is  to  say,  the  flesh  of  Christ.  We  enter  in  without 
conscience  of  sins,  because  the  blow  which  rent  the 
veil,  to  shew  all  the  glory  and  the  majesty  of  the 
throne,  and  the  holiness  of  Him  who  sits  thereon,  has 
taken  away  the  sins  which  would  have  incapacitated 
us  from  entering  in,  or  from  looking  within.  We  are 
even  seated  there  in  Christ  our  Head — the  Head  of 
His  body  the  church. 

In  the  meantime,  Israel  is  outside.  The  church  is 
seen  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  the  High  Priest,  and 
the  whole  of  this  dispensation  is  the  day  of  atone- 
ment, during  which  Israel's  High  Priest  is  hid  within 
the  veil.  The  veil  which  hid  the  import  of  all  these 
figures  is  indeed  done  away  in  Christ,  so  that  we  have 
full  liberty  by  the  Spirit,  but  it  is  upon  their  hearts. 
He  maintains  there  within,  it  is  true,  their  cause 
through  the  blood  which  He  presents ;  but  the  testi- 
mony to  it  is  not  yet  presented  to  them  outside,  nor 
their  consciences  freed  by  the  knowledge  that  their 
sins  are  lost  for  ever  in  a  land  not  inhabited,  where 
they  will  never  be  found  again. 

Now  our  position  is,  properly  speaking,  inside,  in 
the  person  of  Aaron,  the  blood  being  on  the  mercy- 
seat.  We  are  not  only  justified  by  the  scape-goat,  as 
being  without ;  that  is  done,  it  is  clear,  and  once  for 
all,  for  the  veil  is  only  on  the  heart  of  Israel,  it  is  no 
longer  between  us  and  God.  But  we  have  gone  in 
with  the  High  Priest,  as  united  to  Him ;  we  are  not 
waiting  for  reconciliation  till  He  comes  out.  Israel, 
though  the  forgiveness  be  the  same,  will  receive  these 
things,  when  the  true  Aaron  comes  out  of  the  taber- 
VOL.  I.  XVI.  p 


210  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

nacle.  This  is  why  that  which  characterised  the  sacri- 
fice of  Aaron  and  his  sons  was  the  blood  put  inside 
on  the  mercy-seat,  and  the  going  in  of  Aaron  in  person. 

But  the  church  is  composed  of  persons  who  are  here 
below,  who  have  committed  sins.  Thus  seen  in  the 
world,  they  are,  as  to  their  conscience,  in  the  rank  of 
the  outside  people,  as  well  as  Aaron  himself,  not  viewed 
as  a  typical  individual ;  and  the  conscience  is  purified 
by  the  certainty  that  Christ  has  borne  all  our  sins  in 
His  body  on  the  tree.  Our  position  is  within  accord- 
ing to  the  value  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  the  perfect 
acceptance  of  His  Person. 

It  is  the  same  with  regard  to  the  expectation  of 
Christ.  If  I  consider  myself  as  a  man  responsible 
upon  earth,  I  expect  Him  for  the  deliverance  of  all 
things,  and  to  put  an  end  to  all  suffering,  and  to  all 
the  power  of  evil ;  and  so  individually  myself,  as  a 
servant,  I  look  to  receive,  at  His  appearing  here,  the 
testimony  of  His  approval,  as  a  Master,  before  the 
whole  world,  though  if  we  had  done  all  that  was  com- 
manded us  we  have  only  to  say  we  are  unprofitable 
servants,  we  have  done  that  which  it  is  our  duty  to 
do — I  speak  merely  of  the  principle.  But  if  I  think 
of  my  privileges,  as  a  member  of  His  body,  I  think 
of  my  union  with  Him  above,  and  that  I  shall  come 
back  with  Him  when  He  shall  come  to  appear  in 
His  glory. 

It  is  well  we  should  know  how  to  make  this  distinc- 
tion ;  without  it  there  will  be  confusion  in  our  thoughts, 
and  in  our  use  of  many  passages.  The  same  thing  is 
true  in  the  personal  religion  of  every  day.  I  can  con- 
sider myself  as  in  Christ,  and  united  to  Him,  seated 
in  Him  in  heavenly  places,  enjoying  all  the  privileges 
which  He  enjoys  before  God,  His  Father,  and  also  as 
united  to  Him  as  Head  of  the  body.  I  may  also  look 
upon  myself  as  a  poor  weak  being,  walking  individ- 
ually upon  the  earth,  having  wants,  faults  and  tempta- 


LEVITICUS.  211 

tions  to  overcome ;  and  I  see  Christ  above,  whilst  I  am 
here  below,  Christ  appearing  alone  for  me  before  the 
throne — for  me,  happy  in  having,  in  the  presence  of 
God,  Him  who  is  perfect,  but  who  has  gone  through 
the  experience  of  my  sorrows;  who  is  no  longer  in 
the  circumstances  in  which  I  find  myself — but  with 
God  for  me  who  am  in  them.  This  is  the  doctrine  of 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  ;*  whilst  the  union  of  the 
church  ivUii  Christ  is  more  particularly  taught  in  that 
to  the  Ephesians ;  in  John's  writings  we  are  taught 
that  the  individual  is  in  Him. 

After  this  quite  special  instruction  of  the  day  of 
atonement  come  some  directions,  not  to  purify  from 
defilements,  but  to  preserve  from  them  either  the 
people  or  the  service  of  the  priests.  (Chap,  xvii.)  It 
is  to  maintain  them  as  a  people  holy  to  God,  and  keep 
them  from  all  that  would  dishonour  Him  in  their  re- 
lations with  Him,  and  themselves  in  their  relations 
with  others.  Life  belongs  to  God.  And  where  it  is 
taken,  it  must  be  offered  in  sacrifice  and  in  sacrifice  of 
course  to  God.  The  blood  must  -be  sprinkled,  and  the 
fat  burned  on  the  altar.  Thus  the  danger  of  secret 
departure  of  the  heart  to  demons  was  guarded  against, 
and  God's  title  to  life,  and  the  truth  of  sacrifice  were 
maintained — all  vital  truths.  Thus  God  was  owned 
and  honoured,  and  man's  relationship  with  Him. 

Chapter  xviii.  keeps  them  from  dishonouring  them- 
selves in  the  thino^s  which  belonof  to  nature  itself — to 
what  man  ought  to  be  in  his  natural  relations,  that  he 
might  not  dishonour  himself.   Man  ought  not  to  do  it ; 

*  The  difference  of  1  John  ii.  is  this :  there  communion  is  in 
question,  and  Christ  is  our  Advocate  with  the  Father.  Sin 
interrupts  that  communion,  but  the  advocacy  is  founded  on 
righteousness  and  propitiation.  In  Hebrews  it  is  approach  to 
God  which  is  in  question,  and  for  this  we  are  perfected  for  ever, 
have  boldness  to  enter  into  the  hohest.  Sin  is  not  thus  in 
question,  but  mercy  and  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need. 
XVII.,  XVIII. 


212  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

but,  not  having  honoured  God,  he  has  been  left  to  dis- 
honour himself.  (Compare  Rom.  i.)  The  people  of  God, 
being  brought  into  nearness  to  Him,  are  taught  on 
this  subject.  They  were  separated  from  the  evil  of 
the  world  they  were  called  out  of,  and  the  reckless 
profligacy  into  which  Satan  had  driven  degraded  man 
as  his  sport.  Verse  6  is  the  great  principle  which  is 
insisted  on  in  the  chapter — not  to  confound  the  inti- 
macies of  marriage  with  the  confidence  of  natural 
relationship.  Those  things  are  forbidden  into  which, 
in  the  Satanic  and  unnatural  indulgence  of  flesh, 
Satan  plunged  man,  and  to  which  God  had  given  them 
up  to  work  all  uncleanness  with  greediness.  The 
comeliness  of  nature  is  maintained  ;  what  is  defilingf 
forbidden.  Jehovah's  statutes  and  judgments  were 
to  guide  them :  man  in  probation  walking  in  them 
would  live. 

Chapters  xix.,  xx.,  carry  us  somewhat  farther.  They 
were  to  be  holy,  for  Jehovah  was  holy.  Chapter  xix. 
takes  up  rather  the  side  of  good,  though  keeping  them- 
selves from  all  that  was  profane,  or  profaning  what 
was  holy ;  but  we  find  what  is  good  and  kind  and 
comely,  what  ought  to  be  their  conduct,  in  various 
details,  in  the  relationship  they  sustain  one  with  the 
other,  either  with  regard  to  various  dangers  to  which 
they  were  exposed  in  their  walk,  in  their  every-day 
circumstances :  for  they  had  to  do  with  God,  and 
Jehovah  was  their  God.  The  people  of  God  were, 
in  all  their  ways,  to  walk  in  a  manner  worthy  of  this 
relationship,  and  even  to  understand  what  was  suitable 
to  man,  to  every  relationship  in  which  they  were  found, 
according  to  God.  Thus,  though  it  was  not  here 
priesthood,  it  was  the  practical  maintenance  of  this 
relationship  with  Him  who  dwelt  among  them,  and 
to  whom  they  drew  nigh,  by  guarding  against  defile- 
ments unsuited  to  those  who  were  in  it.  It  is  here 
we  find  the  precept  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves. 


LEVITICUS.  213 

Chapter  xx.  guards  more  against  the  evil  and  cor- 
ruption which  was  found  amongst  the  nations.  In  both 
they  are  called  to  be  holy,  in  chapter  xix.  more  in  con- 
formity to  the  character  of  God,  in  chapter  xx.  to 
keep  apart  from  idols  and  evil  because  Jehovah  had 
sanctified  them  to  Himself.  It  insists  upon  purity  in 
every  respect. 

Chapter  xxi.  specially  presents  what  becomes  the 
priests  as  set  apart  for  Jehovah :  this  more  intimate 
nearness  supposed  a  conduct  corresponding  with  it. 
All  in  their  state  must  be  fit  for  God's  presence.  So 
it  is  with  us. 

Chapter  xxii.  If  there  was,  through  weakness  or 
neglect,  anything  unbecoming  this  nearness,  they  were 
to  keep  at  a  distance.  Consequently  there  were  things 
of  which  the  priests,  and  those  of  their  families  in 
priestly  separation,  alone  could  eat.  It  is  the  same 
with  us:  there  are  things  of  the  spiritual  food  of 
Christ,  offered  to  God,  upon  which  we  can  only  feed, 
inasmuch  as  the  heart  is  really  separated  unto  Him,  by 
the  power  of  the  Spirit.  The  offerings  themselves 
must  be  pure,  and  such  as  become  the  eyes  of  God  to 
whom  they  are  presented,  and  a  right  appreciation  of 
His  majesty,  and  of  our  relationship  with  Him.  All 
this  indeed  is  found  in  Christ.  No  hardness  of  nature 
is  allowed,  but  holiness.  In  what  is  connected  with 
our  own  joy  before  God,  holiness  must  be  maintained 
in  what  is  offered. 

In  chapter  xx.,  where  they  are  forbidden  to  follow 
the  brutal  and  superstitious  customs  of  idolatry  (to 
which  Satan  had  degraded  man)  and  are  warned  against 
all  impurity,  which  indeed  was  always  inseparable 
from  it,  and  for  which  the  influence  of  the  devil  gave 
license,  we  have  this  simple  and  beautiful  exposition 
of  the  principle  which  was  to  govern  them  :  "  Sanctify 
yourselves,  therefore,  and  be  ye  holy :  for  I  am  Jeho- 
vah your  God.  And  ye  shall  keep  my  statutes,  and  do 
XVIII.-XXII. 


214  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

them  :  I  am  Jehovah  which  sanctify  you."  They  are 
bound  to  holiness  and  to  sanctify  themselves  practi- 
cally, because  they  are  in  the  house,  and  the  Master  of 
it  is  holy.  Sanctification  supposed  that  they  were  in 
an  acknowledged  relationship  with  God,  who  will  have 
the  inmates  of  His  house  clean  according  to  His  own 
cleanness. 

But  then  His  word  was  to  be  the  rule.  They  were 
to  obey  Him  in  His  directions,  for  it  was  He  who  was 
separating  them  to  Himself.  This  is  a  very  instructive 
word  as  to  the  standard  of  all  our  thoughts  with' 
regard  to  that.  If  any  are  in  my  house,  I  will  have 
them  clean,  because  they  are  there ;  those  outside  are 
no  concern  of  mine.*  Then  it  was  Jehovah  who  was 
separating  them  for  that.  There  are  interesting  in- 
structions with  regard  to  what  the  priests  ate,  which 
we  shall  find  again  in  the  following  book,  and  consider 
when  we  come  to  it. 

We  have  now  come  to  the  feasts.  (Chap,  xxiii.)  It 
is  the  fullf  year  of  the  counsels  of  God  towards  His 
people,  and  the  rest  which  was  the  end  of  those 
counsels. 

There  were  consequently  seven — a  number  expressive 
of  perfection  well  known  in  the  word :  the  sabbath, 
the  passover  and  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  the 
firstfruits  of  harvest,  Pentecost,  the  feast  of  trumpets 
in  the  seventh  month,  the  day  of  atonement,  and 
the  feast  of  tabernacles. 

If  the  sabbath  be  separated  and  reckoned  by  itself, 

*  I  do  not  speak  of  responsibility  or  mercy  here. 

t  I  add,  to  give  the  intelligence  of  this  expression,  that  the 
word  translated  "  feast "  signifies  an  appointed  or  definite  time, 
and  which  returned  consequently  at  the  revolution  of  the  year. 
The  series  of  the  feasts  embraced  the  whole  year,  inasmuch  as 
they  returned  regularly  each  consecutive  year.  This  shews  too 
the  difference  of  the  sabbath,  God's  rest — only  here  of  creation ; 
and,  I  may  add,  of  the  new  moon — figure  I  doubt  not  of  Israel's 
restoration.    The  great  new  moon  was  in  the  seventh  month. 


LEVITICUS. 

the  passover  would  be  distinguished  from  the  feast  of 
unleavened  bread,  which  would  make  the  seven.  I 
do  not  say  this  to  preserve  the  number,  but  because 
the  chapter  itself  speaks  thus :  having  counted  the 
sabbath  amongst  the  others,  it  resumes  and  calls  the 
others  (without  the  sabbath)  the  solemn  feasts.  For, 
in  one  sense,  it  was  indeed  a  feast ;  in  another,  it  was 
the  rest,  when  the  whole  was  ended.*  In  general  these 
feasts  present  us,  then,  with  all  the  bases  on  which 
God  has  entered  into  relationship  with  His  people ;  the 
principles  on  which  He  has  gathered  them  around 
Him,  in  His  ways  with  this  people,  upon  the  earth. 
Their  bearing  was  wider  than  that,  in  other  respects  ; 
but  it  is  in  this  point  of  view  that  these  circumstances, 
that  is,  these  facts,  are  here  considered.  They  are  seen 
in  their  accoiiiplishment  upon  the  earth. 

There  is  another  way  of  dividing  them,  by  taking 
the  words,  "  And  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses  "f  as  the 

*  The  idea  of  these  feasts  is  God  gathering  the  people  around 
Hunself  as  a  holy  convocation.  The  solemn  feasts  were,  then, 
the  gathering  of  God's  people  around  Him,  and  in  detail  the 
ways  of  God  in  gathering  them  thus.  Hence  the  distinction 
made  in  this  chapter.  It  is  evident  that  the  sabbath,  the  rest 
of  God,  will  be  the  great  gathering  of  the  people  of  God  around 
Him,  as  the  centre  of  peace  and  blessing.  So  that  the  sabbath 
is  truly  a  solemn  feast,  a  holy  convocation;  but,  also,  it  is 
evidently  apart  and  distinct  from  the  means  and  the  operations 
which  gathered  the  people.  Hence  we  find  it  mentioned  at 
the  beginning,  and  reckoned  amongst  the  solemn  feasts ;  then 
the  Spirit  of  God  begins  afi'esh  (ver.  4)  and  gives  the  solemn 
feasts,  as  embracing  all  the  ways  of  God  in  the  gathering  of 
His  people,  leaving  out  the  sabbath.  In  reckoning  the  feasts, 
the  passover  and  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  may  be  con- 
sidered as  one,  for  both  were  at  the  same  time,  and  treated 
together  ;  or,  looking  upon  the  sabbath  as  separate,  they  may  be 
estimated  as  two  feasts.  Both  these  things  are  found  in  the 
word. 

t  It  is  well  to  observe,  in  passing,  that  this  formula  gives,  in 
the  whole  Pentateuch,  the  true  division  of  the  subjects.  Some- 
times the  directions  are  addressed  to  Aaron,  which  supposes 
XXIII. 


216  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

title  of  each  part :  the  sabbath,  the  passover,  and  the 
unleavened  bread  (vers.  1-8) ;  the  firstfruits  and  the 
Pentecost  (vers.  9-22) ;  the  feast  of  trumpets  (vers. 
23-25) ;  the  day  of  atonement  (vers.  26-82) ;  the  feast 
of  tabernacles  (ver.  33  to  the  end).  This  latter  division 
gives  us  the  moral  distinction  of  the  feasts  ;  that  is, 
the  ways  of  God  therein.  Let  us  examine  them  a 
little  more  in  detail. 

The  very  first  thing  presented  is  the  sabbath,  as 
being  the  end  and  the  result  of  all  the  ways  of  God. 
The  promise  is  left  us  of  entering  into  God's  rest.  It 
is  a  feast  to  Jehovah ;  but  the  feasts,  which  present 
rather  the  ways  of  God  to  lead  us  there,  begin  again 
at  the  fourth  verse,  as  we  have  already  said.  (Compare 
vers.  37,  38.)  This  distinction  being  noticed,  we  can 
take  the  sabbath,*  the  passover,  and  the  feast  of  un- 

some  internal  relations  based  on  the  existence  of  priesthood — 
sometimes  to  Moses  and  Aaron  ;  and  in  that  case  they  are  not 
pm-ely  communications  and  commandments  to  establish  rela- 
tions, but  also  directions  for  the  exercise  of  functions  thus 
established.  Consequently  we  have  in  Leviticus  x.,  for  the  first 
time  I  think,  "  Jehovah  spake  unto  Aaron  ;" — chapter  xi.  to 
"  Moses  and  Aaron  ;"  because  that,  whilst  it  treats  of  command- 
ments and  ordinances  given  for  the  first  time,  it  is  also  a  ques- 
tion of  the  discernment  consequent  upon  relations  existing 
between  God  and  the  people,  and  in  which  the  exercise  of  the 
priesthood  came  in.  These  general  principles  will  assist  in  ap- 
prehending the  nature  of  the  communications  made  by  God  to 
His  people.  (See  chap,  xiii.)  Chapter  xiv.,  as  far  as  verse  32, 
consists  of  ordinances  to  settle  simply  what  priesthood  must  do ; 
verse  33,  priestly  discernment  is  again  in  exercise. 

*  I  shall  here  add  a  few  words  on  the  subject  of  the  sabbath, 
submitting  them  to  the  spiritual  thoughts  of  my  brethren.  It 
is  well  to  be  subject  to  the  word.  First,  the  participation  in 
God's  rest  is  what  distinguishes  His  people — their  distinctive 
privilege.  The  heart  of  the  believer  holds  that  fast,  whatever 
may  be  the  sign  that  God  has  given  of  it.  (Heb.  iv.)  God  had 
established  it  at  the  beginning ;  but  there  is  no  appearance  that 
man  ever  enjoyed  in  fact  any  share  in  it.  He  did  not  work  in 
the  creation,  nor  was  he  set  to  labour  or  toil  in  the  garden  of 
Eden  ;  he  was  to  dress  and  keep  it,  indeed,  but  he  had  nothing 


LEVITICUS.  217 

leavened  bread  as  making  a  whole.  (Vers.  1-8.)  Of 
the  two  latter,  the  unleavened  bread  was  the  feast 
properly  speaking;  the  passover  was  the  sacrifice  on 
which  the  feast  was  grounded.  As  the  apostle  says, 
"  Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed  for  us :  therefore  let 
us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  leaven,"  &c. 

What  was  indeed  necessary  for  the  sabbath,  for  the 
rest  of  God,  was  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  purity ; 
and  though  all  these  feasts  lead  on  to  the  rest  of  God, 
yet  these  two,  the  passover  and  unleavened  bread,  are 
the  basis  of  all,  and  of  the  rest  itself  for  us.  Christ's 
sacrifice  and  the  absence  of  all  principle  of  sin,  form 
the  basis  of  the  part  we  have  in  the  rest  of  God.  God 
is  glorified  in  respect  of  sin ;  sin  is  put  away  for  us, 
out  of  His  sight,  and  out  of  our  hearts.  The  perfect 
absence  of  leaven  marked  Christ's  path  and  nature 

to  do  but  continually  to  enjoy.  However  the  day  was  hallowed 
fi-om  the  beginning.  Afterwards  the  sabbath  was  given  as  a 
memorial  of  the  deliverance  out  of  Egypt  (Deut.  v.  15),  and  the 
prophets  specially  insist  on  that  point — that  the  sabbath  was 
eriven  as  a  sign  of  God's  covenant.  (Ezek.  xx. ;  Ex.  xxxi.  13.) 
It  was  plain  that  it  was  but  the  earnest  of  the  word,  "  My 
presence  shall  go,  and  I  will  give  thee  rest."  (Ex.  xxxi.  13 ; 
xxxiii.  14  ;  Lev.  xix.  30.)  It  is  a  sign  that  the  people  are  sanctified 
to  God.  (Ezek.  xx.  12,  13-16,  20 ;  Neh.  ix.  14  :  compare  Isa. 
Ivi.  2-6  ;  Iviii.  13  ;  Jer.  xvii.  22  ;  Lam.  i.  7  ;  ii.  6  ;  Ezek.  xxii. 
8 ;  xxiii.  38  ;  xliv.  24.)  Besides  these  passages,  we  see  that, 
whenever  God  gives  any  new  principle  or  form  of  relation  with 
Himself,  the  sabbath  is  added  :  thus  in  grace  to  Israel  (Ex.  xvi. 
23)  ;  as  law.  (Ex.  xx.  10.)  See  also,  besides  the  verse  we  are 
occupied  with,  Exodus  xxxi.  13,  14 ;  xxxiv.  21  ;  when  they  are 
restored  afresh  by  the  patience  of  God  through  mediation  (chap. 
XXXV.  2),  and  in  the  new  covenant  of  Deuteronomy  already 
quoted  in  the  passage. 

These  remarks  shew  us  what  was  the  radical  and  essential 
importance  of  the  sabbath,  as  the  thought  of  God  and  the  sign 
of  the  relation  between  His  people  and  Himself,  though,  being 
only  a  sign,  a  solemnity,  and  not  in  itself  a  moral  command- 
ment ;  for  the  thing  signified  the  association  with  God  in  His 
rest,  and  is  of  the  highest  order  of  truth  in  connecting  the  heart 
with  God.  But  if  that  be  of  the  utmost  importance,  it  is  of  an 
XXIII. 


218  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

down  here,  and  is  accomplished  in  us,  so  far  as  we 

equal  and  even  higher  importance  to  remember  that  the  coven- 
ant between  God  and  the  Jewish  people  is  entirely  set  aside  for 
us,  and  that  the  sign  of  this  covenant  does  not  belong  to  us, 
although  God's  rest  be  yet  quite  as  precious  to  us,  and  even 
more  so ;  that  our  rest  is  not  in  this  creation — a  rest  of  which 
the  seventh  day  was  the  sign ;  and  moreover  (which  is  more  im- 
portant still)  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  Lord  of  the  sabbath,  a 
remark  of  all  importance  as  to  His  Person,  and  null  if  He  was 
to  do  nothing  with  regard  to  the  sabbath ;  and  that,  as  a  fact, 
He  has  omitted  all  mention  of  it  in  the  sermon  on  tlie  mount, 
where  He  has  given  such  a  precious  summary  of  the  funda- 
mental principles  suited  to  the  kingdom,  with  the  addition  of 
the  name  of  the  Father  and  the  fact  of  a  suffering  Messiah,  and 
the  revelation  of  the  heavenly  reward,  making  a  whole  of  the 
principles  of  His  kingdom,  and  that  He  uniformly  thwarted  the 
thoughts  of  the  Jews  on  this  point ;  a  circumstance  which  the 
evangelists  (that  is,  the  Holy  Ghost)  have  been  careful  to  record. 
The  sabbath  itself  Jesus  passed  in  a  state  of  death,  a  terrible 
sign  of  the  position  of  the  Jews  as  to  their  covenant — for  us,  of 
the  birth  of  much  better  things. 

It  has  been  tried,  with  much  trouble,  to  prove  that  the  seventh 
day  was  in  fact  the  first.  A  single  remark  demolishes  the  whole 
edifice  thus  reared ;  it  is,  that  the  word  of  God  calls  this  last 
the  first  in  contrast  with  the  seventh.  What  is,  then,  the  first 
day?  It  is  for  us  the  day  of  all  days — the  day  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus,  by  which  we  are  begotten  again  unto  a  lively 
hope,  which  is  the  source  of  all  our  joy,  our  salvation,  and  that 
which  characterises  our  life.  Thus  we  shall  find  the  rest  of  God 
in  the  resurrection.  Morally,  in  this  world,  we  begin  our  spirit- 
ual life  by  the  rest,  instead  of  finding  it  at  the  end  of  our 
labours.  Our  rest  is  in  the  new  creation ;  we  are  the  beginning, 
after  Christ,  who  is  the  Head  of  it,  of  that  new  dispensation. 

It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  rest  of  God  cannot,  in  our  case,  be 
connected  with  the  sign  of  the  rest  of  creation  here  below. 
Have  we  any  authority  in  the  New  Testament  for  distinguishing 
the  first  day  of  the  week  from  the  others  ?  For  my  part,  I  do 
not  doubt  it.  It  is  certain  we  have  not  commandments  like 
those  of  the  old  law ;  they  would  be  quite  contrary  to  the 
spirit  of  the  gospel  of  grace.  But  the  Spirit  of  God  has  marked 
out,  in  divers  manners,  the  first  day  of  the  week,  though  that 
day  is  not  made  binding  upon  us  in  a  way  contrary  to  the  nature 
of  the  economy.  The  Lord,  being  raised  on  that  day  according 
to  His  promise,  appears  in  the  midst  of  His  disciples  gathered 


LEVITICUS.  21^ 

realise  Christ  as  our  life,  and   recognise   ourselves^ 

according  to  His  word :  the  week  following  He  does  the  same» 
In  the  Acts  the  first  day  of  the  week  is  marked  as  the  day  on 
which  they  gathered  together  to  break  bread. 

In  1  Corinthians  xvi.  Christians  are  exhorted  to  lay  by  what 
they  had  earned,  each  first  day  of  the  week.  In  Eevelation  it 
is  positively  called  the  Lord's  day,  that  is,  designated  in  a  direct 
manner  by  a  distinctive  name  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  am  well 
aware  that  it  has  been  sought  to  persuade  us  that  John  speaks 
of  being  in  spirit  in  the  millennium.  But  there  are  two  fatal 
objections  to  that  interpretation.  First,  the  Greek  says  quite 
another  thing,  and  uses  the  same  word  that  is  used  for  the  Lord's 
supper,  lordly  or  dominical — the  dominical  supper,  the  domini- 
cal day.  Who  can  doubt  as  to  the  meaning  of  such  an  expres- 
sion, or,  consequently,  can  fail  to  admit  that  the  first  day  of 
the  week  was  distinguished  from  others  (as  the  Lord's  supper 
was  distinguished  ficom  other  suppers),  not  as  an  imposed 
sabbath,  but  as  a  privileged  day  ?  But  the  reasoning  to  prove 
it  refers  to  the  millennium  is  founded  on  a  totally  false  idea,  in 
that  only  a  minimum  portion  of  the  Eevelation  speaks  of  the 
millennium.  The  book  is  about  the  things  which  precede  it, 
and  in  the  place  where  the  expression  is  found,  there  is  decidedly 
no  mention  whatever  of  it,  but  of  the  existing  churches,  what- 
ever withal  might  be  their  prophetic  character ;  so  that,  if  we 
hold  to  the  word  of  God,  we  are  forced  to  say  that  the  first  day 
of  the  week  is  distinguished  in  the  word  of  God  as  being  the 
Lord's  day.  We  are  also  bound  to  say,  if  we  desire  to  maintain 
the  authority  of  the  Son  of  man,  that  He  is  superior  to  the 
sabbath — "  Lord  of  the  sabbath  ;"  so  that  in  maintaining  for  us 
the  authority  of  the  Jewish  sabbath  as  such,  we  are  in  danger  of 
denying  the  authority,  the  dignity,  and  the  rights  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Himself,  and  of  re-establishing  the  old  covenant,  of  which 
it  was  the  appointed  sign,  of  seeking  rest  as  the  result  of  labour 
under  the  law.  The  more  the  true  importance  of  the  sabbath, 
the  seventh  day,  is  felt,  the  more  we  shall  feel  the  importance  of 
the  consideration  that  it  is  no  longer  the  seventh,  but  the  first 
day  which  has  privileges  for  us.  Let  us  take  care,  on  the  other 
hand,  because  we  are  no  longer  under  law  but  under  grace,  not 
to  weaken  the  thought  not  only  of  man's  rest  but  of  God's — a 
governing  thought  in  the  whole  of  the  revelation  of  His  relation- 
ships with  man.  The  final  rest  for  us  is  rest  from  spiritual 
labours  in  the  midst  of  evil,  not  merely  from  sin  ;  a  rest  which 
we,  as  fellow-labourers,  shall  enjoy  with  Him  who  has  said, 
"  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work." 
XXIII. 


220  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

though  the  flesh  be  still  in  us,  as  dead  and  risen  with 
Him.*  It  is  thus  that  we  have  seen  the  manna  con- 
nected with  the  sabbath  in  Exodus  xvi.  To  be  with- 
out leaven  was  the  perfection  of  the  Person  of  Christ 
living  upon  earth,  and  becomes  in  principle  the  walk 
upon  earth  of  him  who  is  partaker  of  His  life.  In 
the  true  and  final  sabbath,  of  course,  all  leaven  will  be 
absent  from  us.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  and  purity  of 
life  render  one  capable  of  participating  in  God's  rest. 

After  that  comes  power,  the  firstfruits  ;  that  is,  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  on  the  morrow  after  the  sabbath 
— the  first  day  of  the  week.  It  was  the  beginning  of 
the  true  harvest — harvest  gathered,  by  power,  outside 
and  beyond  the  natural  life  of  the  world.  According 
to  the  Jewish  law  nothing  of  the  harvest  could  be 
touched  before  :  Christ  was  the  beo-innino-  the  firstborn 
from  the  dead.  With  this  first  of  the  firstfruits  were 
offered  sacrifices  for  a  sweet  savour,  but  not  for  sin.  It 
is  clear  there  was  no  need  for  it.  It  is  Christ  who  has 
been  offered  to  God,  quite  pure,  and  waved  before  God 
— placed  fully  before  His  eyes  for  us,  as  raised  from 
the  dead,  the  beginning  of  a  new  crop  before  God — 
man  in  a  condition  which  not  even  innocent  Adam 
was  in,  the  Man  of  God's  counsels,  the  second  Man,  the 
last  Adam  :  not,  all  hanging  on  obedience  which  might 
fail,  and  did,  but  after  God  had  been  perfectly  glori- 
fied in  the  place  of  sin,  past  death,  past  sin  (for  He 

*  There  are  three  points  which  we  may  notice  here  as  to  tliis. 
First  in  Colossians  iii.  God  counts  us  dead  with  Christ  (in  Col. 
also  risen) ;  in  Eomans  vi.  we  reckon  ourselves  dead  to  sin,  and 
alive  not  in  Adam,  but  through  Him ;  in  2  Corinthians  iv.  it  is 
practically  carried  out ;  always  bearing  about  in  the  body  the 
dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  the  life  of  Jesus  may  be  manifested 
in  om-  flesh.  Ephesians  is  on  different  gi'ound :  we  are  not  such 
as  have  died  to  sin,  but  were  dead  in  sins,  and  then  a  wholly 
new  creation.  Sovereign  grace  has  put  us  into  Christ  with  the 
6ame  power  that  raised  Christ  from  the  grave  to  the  throne  of 
God. 


LEVITICUS.  221 

died  Tinto  sin),  past  Satan's  power,  past  judgment,  and 
consequently  by  this  wholly  out  of  the  scene  where 
responsible  man  had  stood,  on  a  totally  new  footing 
with  God  after  His  finished  work,  and  God  perfectly 
glorified  ;  such  a  work  too  as  gave  Him  title  to  say, 
therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me  because  I  lay  down 
my  life  that  I  might  take  it  again,  and  made  it  God's 
righteousness  to  set  Him  at  His  right  hand  in  glory. 

Connected  with  that  comes  the  meat-offering  at  the 
end  of  the  seven  weeks.  It  is  no  longer  Christ  here, 
but  those  who  are  His,  the  firstf ruits  of  His  creatures ; 
they  are  considered  as  being  upon  earth,  and  leaven  is 
found  in  them.  Therefore,  though  ofiered  to  God,  they 
were  not  burned  as  a  sweet  savour  (Lev.  ii.  12) :  but 
with  the  loaves  was  oftered  a  sin-oftering,  which  an- 
swered by  its  efficacy  to  the  leaven  found  in  them. 
They  are  the  saints  of  which  Pentecost  commenced  the 
ingathering. 

This  feast  was  followed  by  a  long  space  of  time,  in 
which  there  was  nothing  new  in  the  ways  of  God. 
Only  they  were  commanded,  when  they  reaped  the 
harvest,  not  to  make  clean  riddance  of  the  corners  of 
the  field.  A  part  of  the  good  grain  was  to  be  left  in 
the  field,  after  the  harvest  was  gathered  into  the 
garner,  but  not  to  be  lost ;  it  was  for  those  who  were 
not  enjoying  the  riches  of  God's  people,  but  who  would 
participate  exceptionally  by  grace  in  the  provision 
which  God  had  made  for  them — in  the  abundance 
which  God  had  granted  them.  This  will  take  place  at 
the  end  of  this  age. 

Pentecostal  work  being  ended,  another  series  of 
events  begins  (ver.  23)  with  the  words  referred  to, 
"  And  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses."  They  blow  up  the 
trumpet  in  the  new  moon.  (Compare  Ps.  Ixxxi. ;  Num. 
X.  3,  10.)  It  was  the  renewal  of  the  blessing  and  the 
splendour  of  the  people — Israel  gathered  as  an  as- 
sembly before  Jehovah.  It  is  not  yet  the  restoration 
XXIII. 


222  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

of  joy  and  gladness,  but  at  least  the  renewal  of  the 
light  and  reflected  glory  which  had  disappeared  takes 
place,  and  enlightens  their  expectant  eyes;  and  they 
gather  the  assembly  to  re-establish  the  glory. 

But  Israel  must  at  least  feel  their  sin ;  and  in  the 
solemn  feast  which  follows,  the  affliction  of  the  people 
is  connected  with  the  sacrifice  of  the  day  of  atone- 
ment: Israel  shall  look  on  Him  whom  they  have 
pierced,  and  mourn.  The  nation  (at  least  the  spared 
remnant  who  become  the  nation)  will  participate  in 
the  efficacy  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  that  in  their 
state  here  below,  repenting,  and  recognised  of  God,  so 
that  the  times  of  refreshing  will  be  come.  This  is 
then  the  repentance  of  the  people,  but  in  connection 
with  the  atoning  sacrifice.  The  efficacy  is  in  the  sacri- 
fice ;  their  participation  in  it  is  connected  with  the 
affliction  of  their  souls.  (Compare  Zech.  xii.)  But 
Israel  did  nothing — it  was  a  sabbath — they  were  as- 
sembled in  humiliation  in  the  presence  of  God.  They 
accept  the  pierced  One  under  the  sense  of  the  sin 
of  which  they  have  been  guilty  in  rejecting  Him. 

Then  follows  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  They  offered, 
during  seven  days,  offferings  made  by  fire  unto  Jehovah ; 
and  on  the  eighth  day  there  was  again  a  holy  convoca- 
tion— an  extraordinary  day  of  a  new  week  which  went 
beyond  the  full  time — including,  I  doubt  not,  the  re- 
surrection ;  that  is,  the  participation  of  those  who  are 
raised  in  that  joy. 

It  was  a  solemn  assembly — that  eighth  day,  the  great 
day  of  the  feast,  on  which  the  Lord  {having  declared 
of  the  then  time  that  His  hour  was  not  yet  come  to 
shew  Himself  to  the  world — His  brethren  [the  Jews] 
not  believing  in  Him  either)  announced  that  for  him 
who  believed  in  Him  there  would  be,  in  the  mean- 
while, rivers  of  living  water  which  would  flow  from  his 
belly ;  that  is,  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  would  be  a  living 
power  working  in,  and  flowing  forth  from  the  heart, 


LEVITICUS.  223 

and  in  the  expression  of  its  intimate  affections.  Israel 
had  indeed  drunk  of  the  living  water  out  of  the  rock 
in  the  wilderness,  the  sojourn  in  which,  now  past  when 
the  feast  of  tabernacles  is  celebrated,  was  celebrated 
with  joy  in  the  memorial  of  that  which  was  over,  to 
enhance  the  joy  of  the  rest  into  which  they  were 
ushered.  But  believers  now  meanwhile  were  not  only 
to  drink,  for  blessed  are  those  who  have  not  seen  and 
yet  have  believed ;  the  river  itself  would  flow  from  the 
heart ;  that  is,  the  Holy  Spirit  in  power,  which  they 
would  have  received  through  Christ  before  He  should 
be  manifested  to  the  world,  or  they  have  their  place 
in  the  heavenly  Canaan. 

Thus,  the  feast  of  tabernacles  is  the  joy  of  the  mil- 
lennium, when  Israel  have  come  out  of  the  wilderness 
where  their  sins  have  placed  them  ;  but  to  which  will 
be  added  this  first  day  of  another  week — the  resurrec- 
tion joy  of  those  who  are  raised  with  the  Lord  Jesus, 
to  which  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  answers 
meanwhile. 

Consequently,  we  find  that  the  feast  of  tabernacles 
took  place  after  the  increase  of  the  earth  had  been 
gathered  in,  and,  as  we  learn  elsewhere,  not  only  after 
the  harvest  but  after  the  vintage  also ;  that  is,  after 
separation  by  judgment,  and  the  final  execution  of 
judgment  on  the  earth,  when  heavenly  and  earthly 
saints  should  be  all  gathered  in.  Israel  was  to  rejoice 
seven  days  before  Jehovah. 

The  passover  has  had  its  antitype,  Pentecost  its  also  ; 
but  this  day  of  joy  is  yet  awaiting  Him  who  is  to  be 
the  centre  and  spring  of  it  all,  the  Lord  Jesus,  who 
will  rejoice  in  the  great  congregation,  and  whose  praise 
will  begin  with  Jehovah  in  the  great  assembly.  (Ps. 
xxii.)  He  had  already  done  it  in  the  midst  of  the  as- 
sembly of  His  brethren ;  but  now  the  whole  race  of 
Jacob  is  called  to  glorify  Him,  and  all  the  ends  of  the 
world  shall  remember  themselves. 
XXIII. 


224  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

The  expression,  solemn  assembly,  is  not  found  applied 
to  any  of  the  feasts  but  this,  except  to  the  seventh 
day  of  the  passover  (Deut.  xvi.),  as  it  seems  to  me 
somewhat  in  the  same  sense.  The  feast  of  tabernacles 
could  not  be  kept  in  the  wilderness.  In  order  to  ob- 
serve it,  the  people  were  to  be  in  possession  of  the 
land,  as  is  plain.  It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that  it 
never  was  kept  according  to  the  prescriptions  of  the 
law  from  Joshua  till  Nehemiah.  (Neh.  viii.  17.)  Israel 
had  forgotten  that  they  had  been  strangers  in  the 
wilderness.  Joy,  without  the  remembrance  of  this, 
tends  to  ruin;  the  very  enjoyment  of  the  blessing 
leads  to  it. 

It  will  be  remarked  that,  properly  speaking,  all  the 
feasts  are  types  of  what  is  done  on  earth  and  in  con- 
nection with  Israel,  unless  we  except  the  eighth  day  of 
tabernacles.  The  church  period,  as  such,  is  the  lapse  of 
time  from  Pentecost  to  the  seventh  month.  We  may, 
and  of  course  do,  get  the  benefit  of,  at  any  rate,  the 
two  first ;  but  historically  the  type  refers  to  Israel. 

The  remaining  chapters  of  this  book  appear  to  me  to 
have  a  special  bearing.  The  Spirit  of  God  has  pre- 
sented, in  chapter  xxiii.,  the  history  of  the  ways  of 
God  towards  His  people  upon  earth  from  beginning  to 
end,  from  Christ  to  the  millennial  rest. 

Chapter  xxiv.  presents  tirst  the  internal  work,  so  to 
speak,  which  related  to  priesthood  alone  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  public  sin  of  an  apostate  on  the  other — 
the  fruit  of  the  alliance  with  an  Egyptian  who  blas- 
phemed Jehovah.  Through  the  care  of  priesthood 
(whatever  might  be  God's  public  ways,  and  the  state 
of  Israel)  the  gracious  light  of  the  Spirit  would  be 
maintained,  and  that  particularly  from  the  evening 
until  the  morning — the  time  during  which  darkness 
brooded  over  Israel. 

Moreover,  the  incense  which  was  on  the  memorial  of 
the  bread,  representing  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  was 


LEVITICUS.  225 

burned  as  a  sweet  smell  to  Jehovah,  and  the  priests 
identified  themselves  with  the  tribes  by  eating  this 
bread — the  action  o£  eating  having  the  significance  of 
continued  identification. 

Thus  priesthood  maintained  the  light  with  respect  to 
Israel,  when  all  was  darkness  in  the  midst  of  them,  and 
the  memorial  of  Israel  was  in  sweet  savour  before 
God,  the  priesthood  identifying  itself  with  them ; 
although  the  people  were  in  the  eyes  of  man  as  lost, 
they  exist  through  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  on  high, 
as  a  memorial  before  God.  There  is  a  certain  sense  in 
which  the  church  participates  in  this,  as  is  explained 
doctrinally  in  Romans  xi.  This  is  only  as  far  as 
promise  goes,  and  the  being  children  of  Abraham,  not 
the  mystery  in  which  we  are  taken  up  as  lost  sinners, 
without  promise,  and  placed  by  sovereign  grace  in 
the  same  glory  as  the  Lord  Jesus.  In  Isaiah  liv.  we 
see  that  believers  are  reckoned  to  Jerusalem,  in  grace, 
though  she  were  a  widow. 

Externally  the  judgment  of  cutting  ofi'  and  death 
without  mercy  is  executed  against  him  that  had 
cursed. 

Liiapter  xxv.  The  land  itself  is  held  for  Jehovah, 
as  being  His;  it  must  enjoy  God's  rest;  and  moreover 
he  who  had  lost  his  inlieritance  therein  should  find  it 
again,  according  to  the  counsels  of  God,  at  the  appointed 
time.  The  trumpet  of  the  jubilee  would  sound  and 
God  would  re-establish  each  one  in  his  possession, 
according  to  His  (Gods)  rights,  for  the  land  was  His. 
Their  persons  also  were  to  be  free  then,  for  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  were  God's  servants.  It  was  not  so 
with  those  not  belonging  to  God's  people.  And 
although  Israel  have  sold  themselves  to  the  stranger, 
He  who  made  Himself  nigh  of  kin  has  redeemed  them 
from  his  hands.  The  day  of  jubilee  will  free  the  people, 
whatever  may  be  the  power  of  those  who  hold  them 
captives. 

VOL.  I.  XXIV.,  XXV.  Q 


226  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

Chapter  xxvi.  We  have  a  touching  picture  of  the 
ways  of  God  in  patience  and  in  chastisement,  if  Israel 
walked  contrary  to  Him.  When  they  acknowledged 
their  fault,  then  He  would  remember  the  covenant 
made  with  their  fathers,  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob.  This  was  a  covenant  made  without  condition, 
and  with  the  land.  Then  He  would  remember  the 
covenant  made  with  their  ancestors,  under  His  name  of 
Jehovah,  when  they  came  out  of  Egypt.*  God  will 
take  these  two  titles  on  their  restoration:  Almighty, 
the  name  of  His  relationship  with  the  fathers ;  and 
Jehovah,  the  name  of  His  relationsliip  with  the  people, 
viewed  as  taken  to  Himself  at  their  coming  out  of 
Egypt. 

The  last  chapter  (xxvii.)  treats  of  the  rights  and 
the  appointments  of  God  in  all  that  relates  to  things 
which  are  devoted  to  Him  through  the  medium  of 
priesthood.  This  necessarily  finds  its  place  in  that 
which  treats  of  priesthood ;  but  it  has,  I  doubt  not,  a 
much  wider  meaning.  The  subject  treated  is  that  of 
him  who  devotes  himself  to  God,  and  that  of  the 
lands  belonging  to  Him — of  the  rights  of  Israel, 
whose  possession  it  was  not,  and  of  their  selling  it 
to  others. 

As  to  Christ,  He  offered  Himself  without  spot  to 
God ;  He  was  valued  at  a  low  price  Israel  by  right 
belonged  to  Jehovah.  As  Emmanuel's  land,  the 
Israelites  only  enjoyed  the  land  without  being  pro- 
prietors, and  they  could  only  pledge  it  till  jubilee ; 
it  would  then  return  to  its  possessor  as  Eiiimanuel's 
land.  Israel  (looked  at  as  the  possessor  of  the  gift 
of  God)  not  having  redeemed  it  when  sold  to  the 
stranger,  when   the  jubilee  comes  the  land  will   be 

*  I  take  this  to  be  the  covenant  of  Exodus  vi.,  not  the  law. 
It  connected  itself  directly  with  the  covenant  made  with  Abra- 
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob,  adding  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and  taking 
up  the  people  under  that  name. 


LK  vinous.  227 

absolutely  the  Lord's  ;  the  priest  will  possess  it.  In 
Zechariah  xi.  Christ  is  thus  valued,  "  whom  they  of 
the  children  of  Israel  did  value." 

I  only  point  out  the  principle  presented  in  the  chap- 
ter, without  pretending  to  enter  into  all  the  details  of 
application  which  may  suggest  themselves.  The  prin- 
ciple is  the  important  thing  to  enable  one  to  understand 
the  purpose  of  God ;  in  the  case  of  any  vow,  whether 
it  be  redeemed  or  not ;  or  of  land,  whether  it  shall  re- 
turn in  the  day  of  jubilee,  when  God  shall  take  pos- 
session aoain  of  His  riMits  in  the  land  of  Israel,  and 
cause  to  enter  those  whose  right  it  is. 

Thus  the  government  of  God,  resulting  in  Hi.s  return 
in  grace  to  His  unconditional  promise  and  [earthly] 
purpose  are  given  to  us  in  chapter  xxvi.,  and  the  abso- 
lute title  of  Jehovah  in  chapter  xxvii.  Chapter  xxvi. 
is  in  fact  a  parenthesis  shewing  God's  ways,  with 
return  to  His  promise  in  grace ;  chapter  xxv.  man's 
redeeming,  if  he  could,  or  his  kinsman ;  chapter  xxvii. 
God's  absolute  title. 

It  is  to  be  observed  also,  that  the  judgment  is  ac- 
cording to  the  judgment  of  the  priest.  But  although 
this  be  attributed  to  the  priest,  it  is  to  the  king  in  Je- 
shurun  (the  upright)  that  the  appreciation  is  entrusted. 
This  shews  plainly  who  is  to  do  it,  and  under  what 
character,  though  being  according  to  the  discerinnent, 
the  grace,  and  the  rights  of  priesthood.  It  is  Christ 
as  Priest,  but  Christ  as  King  in  Israel,  who  will  order 
all  that. 


XXVI.,    XXVII. 


NUMBERa 


The  Book  of  Leviticus  contains  the  revelation  of  God 
sitting  upon  the  throne,  where  He  places  Himself  that 
He  may  be  approached  by  the  people,  as  far  as  they 
could  come ;  that  of  the  priesthood  brought  into  prox- 
imity to  the  throne,  as  far  as  men  could  have  access  to 
it ;  and  then  the  promulgation  of  the  commandments 
relative  to  these  two  great  facts,  in  that  which  concerned 
the  generality  of  the  people. 

In  Numbers  we  have  the  service  and  walk  of  the 
people,  figuratively  of  the  saints  through  this  world : 
and,  consequently,  that  which  relates  to  the  Levites, 
and  the  journey  through  the  wilderness.  Now,  as 
Leviticus  ended  with  regulations  and  warnings  respect- 
ing the  possession  of  the  land,  and  that  with  regard  to 
the  rights  of  God,  and  conserjuently  to  the  rights  of 
His  people,  the  Book  of  Numbers  brings  us  througli 
(he  wilderness  to  the  moment  before  the  entrance  of 
the  people  into  the  land  at  tlio  end  of  the  wilderness 
journey,  and  speaks  of  that  grace  which  justifies  the 
people  at  the  close,  notwithstanding  all  their  uni'aitli- 
fulness.  • 

It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  as  to  tin.' 
efficacy  of  redemption  the  people  were  brought  to  God 
at  Sinai.  (Ex.  xv.  13  and  xix.  4.)  All  in  this  respect 
was  complete.  (Compare  the  thief  on  the  cross  and 
Col.  i.  12.)  The  wilderness  journey  is  a  distinct 
thing ;  no  part  of  the  purpose  of  God,  but  of  His 
ways  with  us.  Hence  it  is  here  'if  comes  in  and  the 
time  of  testing.  Jordan  coalescing  with  the  Red  Sea, 
coming  out  and  going  in  (only  the  ark  was  in  Jordan), 


NUMBERS.  229 

there  was  no  question  of  judgment  or  enemies.  It  i;> 
the  experimental  realisation  of  our  death  and  resurrec- 
tion with  Christ.  But  as  to  the  journey  we  must 
reach  the  goal  to" get  in. 

The  first  thing  to  be  noticed  is,  thafc  Cod  numbers 
His  people  exactly,  and  arranges  them,  once  thus  re- 
cognised, around  His  tabernacle :  sweet  thought,  to  be 
thus  recognised  and  placed  around  God  Himself  !  But 
here  it  had  no  reference  to  calling  by  faith,  but  to 
families,  and  households,  and  tribes.  That  order  was 
carefully  maintained  when  encamped  at  rest,  or  on 
their  march ;  but  it  was  the  order  of  a  nation  and 
its  tribes.  God  dwelt  there,  but  the  unity  of  the 
body,  or  of  the  Spirit — union  in  any  sense  had  no  place. 

Three  tribes  on  each  side  of  the  court  kept  the 
tabernacle  of  Jehovah.  Levi  alone  was  excepted,  in 
order  to  be  consecrated  to  the  service  of  God :  there- 
fore the  tribe  of  Levi  encamped  according  to  their 
families  immediately  around  the  court.  Closes,  Aaron, 
and  the  priests  were  placed  opposite  the  entrance 
whereby  God  was  approached.  The  least  things  in  the 
word  deserve  to  be  noticed.  Psalm  Ixxx.  is  entirely 
opened  by  the  position  of  the  tribes.  The  spirit  of 
the  psahnist  asks,  in  the  last  days  of  the  desolation  of 
Israel,  for  God  to  lead  them  and  to  manifest  His  power 
as  He  did  when  He  led  them  through  the  wilderness ; 
he  asks  for  the  power  of  His  presence  on  the  ark  of 
testimony,  as  God  manifested  it  when  it  was  said,  at 
the  moment  when  Israel  set  forward,  "  Rise  up,  Jeho- 
vah, and  let  thine  enemies  be  scattered."  Ephraim, 
Benjamin,  and  Manas^eh  were  the  three  tribes  nearest 
the  ark  in  the  camp  of  Israel ;  that  is  why  it  is  said, 
in  verse  2  of  the  Psalm,  "  before  Ephraim,  Benjamin, 
and  Manasseh." 

In  the  setting  forward  of  the  camp,  the  order  given 
was  that  the  tabernacle,  surrounded  by  the  Levites, 
should  be  in  the  midst  of  the  tribes,  as  it  was  when 

I. 


THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

the  camp  was  at  rest.  (Chap.  ii.  17.)  It  was  in  the 
midst  of  them  as  of  an  army  that  was  its  guard,  as 
the  rallying-point  of  worship  and  approach  when  the 
camp  was  at  rest.   They  kept  the  charge  of  the  Lord. 

In  chapter  x.  we  shall  lind  that  another  arrange- 
ment took  place  as  a  matter  of  fact :  of  this,  in  its 
place. 

In  chapter  iii.  we  have  the  Levites  set  apart,  accord- 
in '>■  to  the  thoughts  of  God,  for  service.  They  are  a 
tig  are  of  the  church,  or  rather  of  the  members  of  the 
church  in  their  service,  even  as  the  priests  are  the 
hgure  of  Christians  drawing  near  to  the  throne  of 
God,  though  both  be  a  shadow,  not  a  perfect  image. 

The  Levites  were  firstfruits  offered  to  God,  for  they 
were  instead  of  the  firstborn  in  whom  God  had  taken 
Israel  to  Himself,  when  He  smote  the  firstborn  of  the 
Egyptians. 

Thus  it  is  that  the  church*  is,  as  the  firstfruits  of  the 
creatures  of  God,  holy  to  the  Lord.  The  number  of 
the  firstborn  being  greater  than  that  of  the  Levites,, 
those  that  were  over  were  redeemed,  as  a  sign  that 
they  belonged  to  God,  and  the  Levites  became  God's 
possession  for  His  service.  (Vers.  12,  18.)  It  is  the 
same  with  regard  to  the  church :  it  belongs  wholly  to 
God  to  serve  Him  down  here. 

But,  besides,  the  Levites  were  entirely  given  t-) 
Aaron  the  high  priest;  for  the  service  of  the  church, 
or  of  its  members,  is  wholly  dependent  on  Christ  in 
the  presence  of  God,  and  has  no  other  object  but  that 
which  concerns  Him,  and  that  which  is  connected  with, 
and  flows  from  the  place  and  service  which  He  Him- 
self renders  to  God  in  the  true  tabernacle,  carrying  out 
in  service  here  the  ends  for  which  He  is  in  the  holy 
place  up  there ;  but  directly  connected  with  the  sanc- 

*  I  speak  always  of  the  church  here  in  its  individual  members 
as  indicatinof  the  class  of  persona. 


NUMBERS.  2  CI 

tiiary — that  is  for  u.s  heaven,  for  we  belong  to  heaven, 
and  our  walk  and  all  our  service  is  referred  to,  and 
characterised  by  our  connection  with  it.  Our  conversa- 
tion (living  association)  is  in  heaven ;  we  purify  our- 
selves as  He  is  pure,  and  are  called  to  walk  worthy  of 
God,  who  has  called  to  His  own  kingdom  and  glor}', 
— worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing.  Only,  the  ve'  I 
being  rent,  we  are  much  more  fully  connected  wiiii 
that  than  the  Levites  were  even  in  figure.  The  service 
of  the  saints  has  no  value  (on  the  contrary,  it  is  sin), 
except  as  it  is  united  to  the  priesthood  (that  is  to 
Christ  on  high,  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us,  with 
whom  we,  indeed,  are  also  associated  in  this  nearness, 
priests  by  grace) ;  and  hence  all  is  accomplished  in 
direct  reference  to  Him  in  that  heavenly  character. 

In  all  its  details,  consequently,  our  service  is  abso- 
lutely good  for  nothing,  if  it  be  not  linked  with  our 
communion  with  the  Lord  and  with  the  priesthood  of 
Christ.  Christ  is  "  a  Son  over  his  own  house."  "  There 
are  differences  of  administrations,  but  the  same  Lord." 
The  Holy  Ghost  gives  the  capacity  and  the  gift  for 
.•■ervico ;  but  in  the  exercise  of  this  capacity  and  of 
this  gift,  we  are  the  servants  of  Christ. 

Thus,  as  regards  our  service,  we  have  these  three 
principles:  1,  we  are  redeemed,  delivered  from  the 
judgments,  under  which  are  the  enemies  of  God,  being 
taken  from  the  midst  of  those  enemies ;  2,  as  a  conse- 
quence of  this  first  fact,  we  belong  absolutely  to  God ; 
bought  witli  a  price,  we  are  no  longer  our  own,  but 
God's,  to  glorify  Him  in  our  bodies  which  are  His ;  8, 
we  are  entirely  given  to  Christ,  who  is  the  Head  of 
the  house  of  God,  the  Priest,  for  the  service  of  His 
tabernacle.  Blessed  bondage,  happy  self-renunciation, 
true  deliverance  from  a  world  of  sin !  Service  is 
rendered  in  dependence  on  Christ,  and  in  the 
communion  of  the  Lord :  it  is  linked  to  the  priesthood 
and  flows  from  and  is  connected  with  Himself 
II.,  III. 


232  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  place  where  He  is,  and  with  which  He  has  con- 
nected our  hopes,  our  lives,  and  the  affections  of  our 
hearts.  We  serve  from,  and  in  view  of  that :  "to  pre- 
sent every  man  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus." 

Service  appears  to  be  limited  to  the  tabernacle,  that 
is,  to  be  exercised  in  the  midst  of  God's  people  and  in 
connection  with  their  drawing  near  to  God.  For  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  to  those  without  made  no  part 
of  the  Jewish  system,  which  was  the  shadow,  but  not 
the  perfect  image,  of  the  present  state  of  things.  The 
gospel  is  the  expression  of  grace  visiting  sinners,  to 
effect  their  salvation,  a  love  that  goes  actively  out. 
The  institution  of  the  Levites  is  here  presented  to  us 
in  principle :  we  shall  find,  further  on,  their  purifica- 
tion and  their  consecration  to  God. 

We  may  remark  here,  that  with  regard  to  that 
which  is  most  elevated  in  the  calling  of  the  church,  all 
her  members  are  one.  The  priests,  the  high  priest  ex- 
cepted, accomplished,  all  equally  or  together,  the  service 
of  the  offerings  to  God.  And  so  it  is  with  the  church  ; 
all  its  members  equally  draw  near  unto  God,  and  are 
in  the  same  relationship  with  Him.  (A  priest  acting 
for  another  Israelite  who  brought  an  offering,  or 
who  had  sinned,  represented  rather  Christ  Himself.) 

The  order  of  the  service  of  the  Levites,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  according  to  the  sovereignty  of  God,  who  put 
each  one  in  his  place.  Thus,  in  the  service  of  the 
church,  the  greatest  differences  are  found,  and  each  one 
has  his  own  place  assigned  him. 

The  same  thing  will  likewise,  I  believe,  take  place 
in  the  glory.  (Compare  Eph.  iv. ;  1  Cor.  xii.)  All  are 
conformed  to  the  likeness  of  the  Son ;  but  as  each  has 
been  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  for  service,  and  thus 
according  to  the  counsels  of  God,  they — to  whom  it  is 
given  of  the  Father  to  sit  on  the  right  hand  or  on  the 
left — are  over  ten  cities  or  five.  All  enter  together 
into  the  joy  of  their  Lord.   We  are  all  brethren,  having 


NUMBERS.  233 

only  one  Master.  But  the  Master  gives  grace  to  each 
according  to  His  own  will,  according  to  the  counsels  of 
God  the  Father.  He  who  denies  brotherly  unity 
denies  the  sole  authority  of  the  Master.  He  who 
denies  the  diversity  of  services  equally  denies  the 
authority  of  the  Master  who  disposes  of  His  servants 
as  He  pleases,  and  chooses  them  according  to  His 
wisdom  and  His  divine  rights. 

Next  in  order  come  the  arrangements  prescribed  for 
the  carrying  of  the  things  which  the  tabernacle  con- 
tained, as  well  as  their  coverings,  when  the  camp, 
journeyed  in  the  wilderness.  I  shall  point  out  what 
appears  to  be  the  typical  meaning  of  these  prescribed 
ordinances.  This  is  full  of  interest  and  of  practical 
importance. 

After  the  instructions  intended  to  teach  us  how  it  is 
given  to  us  to  draw  near  God,  the  connection  between 
the  manifestations  of  God  in  Christ,  and  our  walk  here 
below,  are  for  us  what  is  most  essential. 

Now,  this  last  subject  is  the  one  treated  of  in  type, 
in  the  arrangements  made  for  the  carriage  of  the  chief 
utensils  destined  for  the  service  of  God.  When  they 
were  in  their  place,  while  the  camp  rested,  they  were 
uncovered.  Those  which  were  shut  up  within  the 
tabernacle  had  reference  to  heaven ;  the  altar  and  the 
laver  were  outside,  before  coming  to  it. 

In  the  wilderness,  these  utensils  put  on  certain  cha- 
racters, one  of  them  especially;  but  others  also,  in 
certain  cases.  I  consider  them,  therefore,  as  the  mani- 
festation of  certain  relationships  existing  between  the 
walk  of  the  Christian,  and  various  manifestations  of 
God  in  Christ.* 

*  I  say  the  walk  of  the  Christian,  applying  it  to  our  con- 
sciences ;  but  the  expression  is  imperfect,  for  the  subject  seems 
to  me  to  embrace  the  life  of  Christ  Himself  upon  earth,  and 
even,  in  some  respects.  His  life  in  the  time  to  come,  but  always 
upon  earth.  They  shew  the  relationship  between  the  manifesta- 
III.,  IV. 


234  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

The  ark  of  the  covenant  represented  the  throne  of 
God  in  heaven,  the  holiness  and  the  justice  which  are 
there  manifested  in  God.  It  was  first  of  all  covered 
with  the  veil  of  the  humanity  of  Christ,  such  as  He 
was  here  below  in  His  Person ;  that  is,  that  divine 
holiness  and  righteousness  have  clothed  themselves  in 
humanity.     Over  this  were  the  badgers'  skins. 

We  have  seen,  in  these  skins,  that  practical  and 
watchful  holiness  down  here  which  keeps  itself  from 
the  evil  to  which  we  are  liable  in  passing  through 
tlie  wilderness.  However,  when  there  is  an  immediate 
connection  with  what  God  is  in  heaven  itself  (and  it 
is  thus  that  He  Himself  was  manifested  in  Christ), 
the  entirely  heavenly  cliaracter,  which  results  there- 
from, manifests  itself  outside. 

Hence,  outside  even  the  badgers'  skins,  there  was  a 
covering  wholly  of  blue.  This  was  what  appeared  in 
the  wilderness.  This  is  what  took  place  with  regard 
to  Christ :  the  ark,  by  the  way,  in  the  wilderness  finds 
no  perfect  antitype  but  Himself,  considered  in  His 
personal  walk  down  here.  Nevertheless,  the  walk  of 
the  believer,  in  as  far  as  it  reaches  towards  this  height, 
has  also  its  expression  in  this  type. 

After  the  ark  comes  the  table  of  shewbread ;  it  was 
a  figure  of  Christ  in  the  divine  perfection  of  justice 
and  holiness,  according  to  tlie  power  of  the  Eternal 
Spirit,  in  connection  with  the  perfection  of   human 

tion  of  life  here  below,  the  forms  and  the  characters  it  assumes, 
and  the  sources  of  Hfe  in  the  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ :  a 
subject  of  the  deepest  interest.  The  badgers'  skins,  and  the 
circumstances  with  which  this  book  is  occupied,  still  suppose 
the  walk  to  be  in  the  wilderness.  It  is  only  when  we  abstract, 
as  to  these  circumstances,  that  we  see  the  manifestation  of 
things  to  come.  Thus  faith,  that  of  the  thief  on  the  cross  for 
example,  saw,  in  Christ's  suffering,  the  King,  though  all  was 
hidden.  I  have  therefore  alluded  to  it  without  fear.  I  only 
present  the  idea  contained  in  the  type,  without  unfolding  all  the 
consequences  of  it. 


NUMBERS.  235 

administration,  which  manifests  itself  in  the  number 
twelve  and  in  the  loaves,  of  which  the  twelve  tribes, 
and  the  twelve  apostles,  were  the  expression.  Here 
the  heavenly  covering  was  placed  immediately  upon 
the  golden  table ;  the  part  properly  divine  put  on  the 
heavenly  character.  Upon  this  covering  were  put  the 
utensils  and  the  loaves,  v^hich  were  covered  over  witli 
a  second  covering  of  scarlet  (that  is,  as  it  appears  to 
me,  human  glory  and  splendour).*  This  glory  and 
this-  splendour  were  of  God,  but  they  were  human. 
Over  all  were  the  badgers'  skins  to  preserve  the  whole 
from  evil.  This  external  protection  is  always  needful 
for  any  one,  save  the  Person  of  Christ.  Christ  was 
assuredly  sheltered  from  evil ;  but  it  was  in  an 
internal  and  deeper  manner.  That  which  was  hea- 
venly was  seen  in  Him  at  the  first  glance  by  those  who 
had  eyes  to  see :  "  the  second  man  is  the  Lord  from 
heaven." 

As  regards  us,  we  have  within  ourselves  that  which 
is  heavenly;  but  we  must  keep  it  carefully,  with  a 
vigilance  most  decided,  and  commensurate  with  the 
evil  we  are  passing  through,  and  from  which  it  is  oi 
consequence  we  should  keep  ourselves.  Therefore 
Christ,  in  His  relationship  with  the  government  of 
the  world  in  Israel  in  the  age  to  come,  will  put  on,  in 
principle,  that  which  is  here  represented  by  the  badgers' 
skins,  which,  in  the  case  of  the  ark,  were  inside.  There 
will  be  in  Him  the  divine  character,  then  the  heavenly, 
then  the  perfection  of  human  government  covered  over 
with  the  brightness  of  the  glory.      In  His  passage  in 

*  It  is  the  idea  which  has  been  suggested  to  me  by  the  ex- 
amination of  all  the  passages  in  the  word  where  scarlet  is  men- 
tioned. Saul  adorned  the  maidens  of  Israel  with  scarlet  and 
other  delights.  Babylon  is  clothed  with  scarlet.  The  colour  of 
the  beast  is  scarlet.  Scarlet  was  cast  into  the  fire  when  the 
leper,  and  he  who  was  defiled  bj'^  a  dead  body,  were  purified. 
Scarlet  is  a  very  briUiant  colour. 

IV. 


236  THE    BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

the  wilderness,  all  this  was  guarded  by  a  power  which, 
in  the  wisdom  of  God,  repelled  all  evil.  In  the  mani- 
festation of  the  kingdom  it  will  be  in  the  judicial 
exercise  of  power.  But  here  we  treat  of  the  wilder- 
ness. The  principle  is  the  same,  the  repelling  of  evil, 
of  all  injury  to  the  holy  thing  entrusted  to  be  guarded; 
only  one  is  moral  and  spiritual  power,  the  other  judicial. 
{See  Ps.  ci.) 

Next  to  the  table  of  shewbread  came  the  candle- 
stick, covered  with  a  cloth  of  blue  and  badgers'  skins. 
It  was  the  spiritual  perfection  of  the  light  of  the 
Spirit ;  that  which  covered  it  was  simply  heavenly, 
with  the  covering  of  badgers'  skins,  the  guard  against 
the  injuries  which  the  entiasted  grace  might  receive 
in  the  wilderness.  All  its  utensils  bore  the  same 
character. 

The  altar  of  incense  (spiritual  intercession)  was 
covered  in  the  same  manner.  I  leave  these  to  the 
spiritual  reflections  of  the  reader,  and  the  intelligence 
of  that  which  has  been  explained  in  its  principles. 
It  was  so  with  all  that  was  contained  in  the  holy 
j)lace,  for  the  sanctuary  represented  the  heavenly 
places. 

With  regard  to  the  brazen  altar  it  was  different. 
Its  covering  was  a  purple  cloth,  the  royal  colour.  If 
we  suffer,  we  shall  reign.  There  is  a  connection 
between  the  cross  and  the  crown  upon  the  earth  and 
in  heaven.  Thus  was  it  with  Christ,  the  King  of  the 
Jews,  according  to  the  superscription  written  on  the 
cross ;  and  the  very  throne  of  God  was  the  answer  to 
Plis  sufferings,  inasmuch  as  He  was  the  burnt-offering, 
offered  according  to  the  power  of  the  eternal  Spirit 
acting  in  man,  according  to  the  exigency  of  the  divine 
majesty.*   But  what  was  thus  crowned  was  perfection 

'^  The  comparison  of  Psalms  xix.,  xx.,  xxi.,  xxii.  is,  under 
this  point  of  view,  most  interesting.  Psalm  xix.  contains  testi- 
monies of  the  creation  and  the  law ;  Psalm  xx.  presents  Messiah 


NUMBERS.  237 

itself ;  that  which  was  being  accomplished  in  man,  ac- 
cording to  the  energy  of  the  eternal  Spirit,  was  aLs  i 
divine ;  so  that  the  Lord  could  say,  "  Therefore  dot!  i 
my  Father  love  me,  because  I  lay  down  my  life,  that  1 
may  take  it  again." 

However,  that  which  was  divine  in  the  act,  was 
divine  in  the  sense  of  the  eternal  Spirit  acting  in  man, 
while  the  Godhead  itself  was  the  source  of  it,  and  on 
that  title  it  would  claim  the  glory  of  the  Godhead. 
The  circumstances  of  the  death  of  Jesus  were  conse- 
quent upon  His  humanity — a  truth  most  precious  to 
us.  He  was  crucified  through  weakness  ;  He  was  de- 
livered into  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles  ;  His  throat  was 
dried  up,  whilst  He  waited  on  His  God.  He  was  per- 
fect in  all  these  things.  They  were  manifested  out- 
wardly, seen  of  men  :  it  was  man.  He  who  could  look 
within  saw  Him  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered 
Himself  without  spot  to  God. 

Thus  all  that  related  to  the  service  was  placed  on 
purple;  the  altar  was  under  this  covering.  The 
badgers'  skins  here,  as  always,  were  spread  over  all.* 

suffering,  but  externally,  so  that  man  can  take  an  interest  in 
Him;  Psalm  xxi.  Messiah  exalted,  ard,  as  a  consequence,  ven- 
geance striking  His  enemies  who  had  rejected  Him ;  Psalm  xxii. 
His  sufferings  as  forsaken  by  God  Himself.  This  is  the  expres- 
sion of  Christ  alone,  whilst  in  Psahiis  xx.,  xxi.  the  Jewish 
remnant  were  speaking  of  His  outward  sufferings.  There  is  no 
vengeance  in  connection  with  those  sufferings  consequent  on 
His  being  forsaken  of  God,  for  it  was  expiation  ;  there  is  nothing 
but  blessing,  which  the  mouth  of  the  Saviour  announces,  and  to 
which  He  Himself  responded  by  praising  in  the  midst  of  His 
saints.  This  blessing  will  extend  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  during 
the  millennium. 

--  The  laver  is  not  among  the  things  to  which  these  commands 
relate.  The  reason  for  this  omission  is  apparent  from  the  explana- 
tion we  have  just  given  of  these  figures,  and  confirms  this  expla- 
nation. The  laver  did  not  represent  a  manifestation  of  God,  tlie 
efficacy  of  which  is  reproduced  in  the  christian  life,  or  in  the 
glory  of  Christ ;  but  a  means  for  the  purification  of  man.  These 

IV. 


238  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Let  us  pursue  the  study  of  the  book.  Chapter  v. 
presents  three  things,  in  connection  with  the  purity  of 
the  camp,  looked  at  as  the  dwelhng-place  of  God,  and 
in  connection  with  our  pilgrim  passage  through  the 
^\dlderness,  which  is  the  great  subject  of  the  Book  of 
Numbers ;  a  passage  in  which  all  is  put  to  the  test, 
and  in  which  the  presence  of  God  ungrieved  in  the 
inidst  of  us  is  our  only  security,  and  guidance,  and 
strength. 

Every  defilement  was  to  be  purged  out. 

God  took  knowledge  of  the  ^v rong  done  there  against 
a  brother.  If  this  be  always  true,  it  is  the  more  so 
Avhen  applicMi  to  the  wrong  done  to  Him  who  has  not 
been  ashann  d  to  call  us  His  brethren  When  the  tres- 
pass could  not  be  recompensed  to  the  person  who  had 
suffered  the  wrong,  or  to  his  kinsman,  it  was  due  to 
(jrod  in  the  person  of  the  priest,  beside  the  sin-offering. 
In  God's  camp  no  wrong  could  be  committed  without 
amends  being  made  for  it. 

Then  comes  the  question  of  jealousy.  If  the  faith- 
fulness of  Israel,  the  church,  or  an  individual,  to  God 
or  to  Christ,  be  questioned,  there  must  be  the  trial  of 
it.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  dust  of  the  tabernacle  was 
the  power  of  death  in  God's  presence,  fatal  to  the 
natural  man,  but  precious,  as  the  death  of  sin,  for  him 
who  has  life.  The  water  is  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  acting  by  the  word  on  the  conscience. 

The  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  judging  thus  (accord- 
ing to  the  sentence  of  death  against  the  flesh),  the 
state  of  unfaithfulness  which  was  thought  to  be  hidden 
from  the  true  husband  of  the  people,  makes  the  sii: 
manifest,  and  brings  down  the  chastening  and  the 
curse  upon  the  unfaithful  one,  and  that  evidently  by 
the  just  judgment  of  God.     Drinking  death,  according ;• 

directions  here,  only  summarily  entered  ou,  seem  to  me,  it' 
entered  into  with  spiritual  intelhgence,  full  of  the  deepest  import 
and  interest. 


NUMBERS  239 

to  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  is  life  to  the  soul.  "By 
these  things,"  says  Hezekiah,  "men  live,  and  in  all 
these  things  is  the  life  of  the  Spirit ;"  even  when  they 
are  the  ettect  of  chastening,  which  is  not  always  neces- 
sarily the  case.  But  if  any  of  the  accursed  things  be 
hidden — if  there  be  unfaithfulness  towards  Jesus,  un- 
detected, it  may  be,  by  man,  and  God  puts  it  to  the 
test;  if  we  have  allowed  ourselves  to  be  enticed  by 
liim  who  has  the  power  of  death,  and  the  holy  powei- 
of  God  is  occupied  with  death,  and  comes  to  deal  witli 
this  power  of  the  enemy — the  concealed  evil  is  laid 
bare,  the  flesh  is  reached  ;  its  rottenness  and  its  power- 
essness  are  made  manifest,  however  fair  its  appear- 
ances may  be.  But  if  we  be  free  from  unfaithfulness, 
the  result  of  the  trial  is  only  negative ;  it  shews  that 
the  Spirit  of  holiness  finds  nothing  to  judge,  when  He 
applies  death  according  to  the  holiness  of  God. 

In  the  offering  without  either  oil  or  frankincense, 
the  woman  is  set  before  God,  accordii^g  to  the  judg- 
ment of  God  displayed  against  sin,  in  His  holiness 
and  majesty,  when  Christ  was  made  sin  for  us.  Sin 
which  is  confessed  has  never  that  efiect ;  for  the  con- 
science is  purified  from  it  by  Christ.  The  unfaithful- 
ness here  spoken  of,  is  that  of  the  lieart  of  Israel — oi' 
the  church  to  Christ.  All  these  things  apply,  not  to 
the  acceptance  of  the  believer,  or  of  the  church  as  to 
righteousness — that  is  treated  of  where  drawing  near 
to  God  is  in  question — but  to  the  judgment  of  our 
ways  in  the  wilderness  journey,  inasmuch  as  God  is  in 
our  midst. 

The  church  would  do  well  to  consider  how  far  she 
has  given  herself  to  another.  There  are  some,  assured]  y. 
amongst  its  members  who  have  not  done  it  in  heart. 
If  Christ  did  not  discover  the  iniquity,  and  cause  it  to 
be  judged.  He  would  be,  so  to  speak,  identified  with 
the  iniquity  of  the  bride,  and  thus  defiled  thereby 
(ver.  31) :  He  will  therefore  surely  do  so.     What  is 

V. 


240  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

here  said  of  the  church  may  be  erjually  said  of  each 
one  of  its  members :  remembering  liere  also,  that  the 
question  is  one,  not  of  salvation,  but  of  the  walk  down 
here,  the  walk  in  the  wilderness  being  ever  the  subject 
of  this  book.*  Let  us  also  observe  that  the  soul,  or 
the  church,  can,  in  other  respects,  shew  a  zeal,  an  ex- 
traordinary devotedness,  which  are  indeed  sincere, 
whilst  it  falls  into  a  fault  which  it  conceals  from  itself 
up  to  a  certain  point.  But  nothing  can  counterbalance 
unfaithfulness  to  one's  husband. 

The  Nazarite  presents  to  us  another  character  con- 
nected with  the  walk  of  the  Spirit  down  here — special 
separation  and  devotedness  to  God.  They  separated 
themselves  unto  Him.  Christ  is  the  perfect  example 
of  this.  The  church  ought  to  tread  in  His  footsteps. 
Cases  of  special  call  to  devote  oneself  to  the  Lord  come 
under  this  class. 

There  were  three  things  connected  with  this  separa- 
tion. The  Nazarite  was  to  drink  no  wine  ;  he  was  to 
let  his  hair  grow;  and  he  was  not  to  make  himself 
unclean  for  the  dead.  Wine  designated  the  joy  de- 
rived from  the  pleasures  of  society,  which  rejoice  the 
heart  of  those  who  give  themselves  up  to  them.  "  Wine 
which  cheereth  God  and  man."  From  the  moment 
Christ  began  His  public  service,  He  was  separated  from 
nil  that  nature  had  its  just  part  in.  Invited  witli 
iLis  disciples  to  a  marriage,  He  says  to  His  mother, 
■  Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?"  But  in  fact 
even  His  disciples  knew  Him  "  after  the  flesh."-f"     His 


*  Looked  at  as  a  professing  whole,  or  as  an  individual  who 
makes  profession,  there  may  be  the  discovery  that  there  is 
iiotliing  real ;  as  the  case  has  been  in  Israel  according  to  the 
llesh  and  will  be  also  in  the  professing  church.  They  have 
been  unfaithful  to  their  husband. 

t  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  in  no  one  case  did  His  disciples 
understand  what  He  said  when  He  expressed  what  was  in  His 
heart.     This  was  utter  isolation. 


NUMBERS.  241 

intercourse  with  them  was,  as  to  the  capacity  of  their 
fellowship  in  it,  on  the  ground  of  the  presenting  of 
the  kingdom  then  as  come  in  the  flesh. 

As  to  this  too,  however,  He  must  take  His  separate 
and  Nazarite  character,  and,  true  as  His  affection  was 
for  His  disciples,  even  in  that  human  sphere  where 
He,  who  saw  through  weakness,  delighted  in  the  true 
"excellent  of  the  earth,"  the  poor  of  the  flock  that 
waited  on  Him,  yet  He  must  be  separated  from  this 
joy  too.  "  I  will  not  drink  henceforth  of  this  fruit  of 
the  vine,"  says  the  Lord,  "until  that  day  when  I  shall 
drink  it  new  with  you  in  my  Father's  kingdom."  He 
separated  Himself  indeed  from  that  intercourse  which, 
miserable  as  even  His  own  were,  His  love  had  led  Him 
to  desire  to  have  with  them.  He  had  said,  "  With 
desire  I  have  desired  to  eat  this  passover  with  you." 
These  natural  affections  were  already  denied,  because 
God's  consecration  was  upon  His  head.  "  What  have 
I  to  do  with  thee  ?"  had  already  expressed  this  to  His 
mother.  It  is  not  that  He  had  not  the  most  tender 
affection  for  her ;  but  now  He  was  separated  from 
everything  to  be  God's.* 

Secondly,  the  Nazarite  let  his  hair  grow:  it  was 
neglecting  self  in  yielding  oneself  to  the  will  of  God, 
renouncing  one's  dignity  and  rights  as  a  man;  for  a 
long  head  of  hair  marked,  on  the  one  hand,  in  a  man, 

*  The  difiference  of  these  two  phases  of  the  Nazarite  cha- 
racter of  Christ  in  His  Hfe  and  in  His  death  is  not  so  great  as 
might  appear.  He  was  ever  separated  from  hmnan  joy  as  from 
all  evil — there  was  no  honey  as  there  was  no  leaven,  a  man  of 
sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief  as  passing  in  holy  love 
through  a  world  of  sinners — His  love  driven  back,  and  thus  Him- 
seK  straitened  and  pent  up  :  the  atonement  opened  its  sluices. 
He  is  now,  in  fact,  outwardly  made  separate  from  sinners. 
The  early  rejection  of  His  mother's  claim  in  John  has  its 
natural  place  in  John,  because  in  that  Gospel  He  stands  from 
the  beginning  apart  in  His  own  Person,  and  the  Jews  are  a 
rejected  people. 

VOL.  I.  VL  R 


242  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  neglect  of  his  person  ;  and  on  the  other,  subjection 
— power  on  the  head.*  It  was  consecration  to  God 
in  the  giving  up  of  the  joy,  the  dignity,  and  the 
natural  rights  of  man  (man  considered  as  the  centre 
of  the  affections  proper  to  him),  and  that  to  be  wholly 
God's. 

Man  has  his  place  as  the  representative  and  the 
glory  of  God,  and  in  that  place  he  is  encompassed  by  a 
multitude  of  affections,  joys,  and  rights,  which  have 
their  centre  in  himself.  He  can  give  up  this  place  for 
the  special  service  of  God,  seeing  that  sin  has  entered 
into  all  these  things,  which,  far  from  being  bad  in 
themselves,  are,  on  the  contrary,  good  in  their  proper 
place.  This  Christ  has  done.  Having  made  Himself 
a  Nazarite,  He  did  not  take  His  place  as  a  man.  His 
rights  as  Son  of  man ;  but,  for  the  glory  of  God,  He 
made  Himself  completely  subject ;  He  submitted  to  all 
that  that  glory  required.  He  identified  Himself  with 
the  godly  remnant  of  the  sinful  people  whom  He  had 
loved,  and  became  a  stranger  to  His  mother's  children. 
He  did  nothing  that  was  not  prescribed  to  Him ;  He 
lived  by  the  word  that  proceeded  out  of  the  mouth  of 
God;  He  separated  Himself  from  all  the  links  of 
human  life  to  devote  Himself  to  the  glory,  the  service 
of  God,  and  obedience  to  Him.  If  He  found,  in  the 
love  of  His  own,  any  consolation,  which  can  only  have 
been  very  small  and  poor.  He  had  to  give  up  this  also, 
and  with  regard  to  this,  as  to  everything  else,  become, 
in  His  death,  a  complete  Nazarite,  alone  in  His  separa- 
tion to  God.  The  church  should  have  followed  Him  ; 
but  alas !  she  has  taken  strong  drink ;  she  has  eaten 
and  drunk  with  the  drunken,  and  has  begun  to  smite 
the  servants  of  the  house. 

The  believer  may  be  called  to  deny  himself,  for  the 
precious  service  of  his  Saviour,  in  things  which  are  not 

*  1  Corinthians  xi.  10, 


NUMBERS.  243 

bad  in  themselves.  But  this  act  is  accomplished  in- 
wardly. "  Her  Nazarites  were  purer  than  snow,"  says 
Jeremiah.  Devotedness  is  inward.  It  is  proper  to 
consider  here  to  what  those  who  fail  in  this  separation 
expose  themselves. 

If  we  have  devoted  ourselves  to  the  Lord  in  a  way 
which  is  pleasing  in  His  sight,  enjoyment  follows  this 
devotedness  in  the  measure  of  the  testimony  which  is 
rendered  to  Him.  God  is  with  His  servant  according 
to  His  call ;  but  it  is  a  secret  between  His  servant  and 
Himself,  though  the  external  effects  are  seen  by  others. 
If  we  have  failed  in  this  separateness,  we  must  begin 
all  afresh  :  divine  influence  and  power  in  the  work  are 
lost.  There  may  be  nothing  amiss  in  other  respects ; 
we  may  arise  to  shake  ourselves,  like  Samson,  but  we 
have  lost  our  strength  without  being  aware  of  it. 
God  is  no  longer  with  us.  The  case  of  Samson  is  an 
extreme  but  a  solemn  one ;  for  it  may  be  that  our 
strength  has  placed  us  in  the  presence  of  evil,  and 
then,  if  God  be  with  us.  His  magnificent  glory  mani- 
fests itself ;  but  if  not  with  us,  the  enemy  has  the  sad 
opportunity  of  glorying  o\'er  one  long  known  as  a 
champion  for  God,  and  apparently  over  God  Himself. 
In  this  second  alternative  the  inward  secret,  the  true 
strength  of  separation  unto  God,  wap  lost. 

Let  us  beware,  in  ordinary  things,  of  the  first  step 
that  would  separate  us  from  inward  holiness,  and  that 
separation  of  heart  to  Him  which  gives  us  His  secret, 
light  from  above  on  all  that  is  around ;  for  the  secret 
of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him.  If  grace 
has  called  us  to  separation  for  an  extraordinary  service 
in  anything  whatever,  let  us  keep  ourselves  from  any 
lack  of  obedience  to  the  word  of  the  cross,  whereby 
we  are  crucified  to  the  world,  sin,  and  the  law.* 


*  These  are  the  three  things  to  which  the  cross  is  applied  in 
the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians. 

VI. 


244  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

Generally,  the  unfaithful  Nazarite  returns  to  his 
separation,  through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ ;  he  is  con- 
secrated anew  to  God.*  But  anything  which  brings  us 
into  contact  with  sin  produces  its  effect  on  our  Nazarite- 
ship.  We  lose  the  power  attached  to  the  communion 
of  God,  and  the  special  presence  of  the  Spirit  with  us, 
whatever  be  the  measure  in  which  this  power  was 
gTanted  to  us,  Alas !  the  time  which  has  preceded  is 
lost :  we  must  begin  again.  It  is  great  grace  that  all 
privilege  of  serving  God  is  not  taken  from  us;  but 
though  it  be  not,  we  suffer  something  from  the  efiects 
of  our  unfaithfulness,  when  the  power  is  restored  unto 
us.  A  blind  Samson  was  obliged  to  kill  himself  in 
killing  his  enemies.  It  belongs  to  us,  in  any  case,  im- 
mediately to  acknowledge  our  defilement,  to  go  to 
Christ,  and  not  pretend  to  be  Nazarites  externally, 
when  we  are  not  so  in  the  eyes  of  God.  Nothing  is 
more  perilous  than  the  service  of  God,  when  the  con- 
science is  not  pure :  however,  let  us  ever  recollect  that 
we  are  under  grace. 

This  separateness  and  this  self-denial  are  not  for  ever. 
Even  Christ  will  not  always  be  a  Nazarite.  He  will 
know  fulness  of  joy  with  God  and  His  own.  He  will 
say,  "  Eat,  0  friends ;  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  O 
beloved."  It  is  by  the  alone  power  of  the  Spirit  that 
we  are  separated  fiom  that  which  is  evil,  and  often 
even  from  that  which  is  natural,  to  be  vessels  of 
service  and  enjoyment,  a  testimony  to  God  in  the 
midst  of  evil.  The  time  will  come  when,  evil  being 
removed,  we  shall  be  able  to  gratify  our  nature,  but  it 
will  be  a  new  one :  a  time  in  which  the  operation  of 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  will  only  produce  joy, 
and  when  everything  surrounding  us  will  be  in  com- 
munion with  us.    Then  Christ  will  take  a  place  which 

"!=  It  is  not  here  his  own  conscience  repui-ified  as  to  guilt. 
Tliat  is  never  done.  All  through  here  it  is  not  redemption,  but 
the  walk  of  a  professing  people  who  have  to  say  to  God. 


KUMBERS.  245 

it  was  impossible  for  Him  to  take  heretofore,  although 
He  was  ever  the  perfect  sociable  man,  perfectly  ac- 
cessible to  sinners  because  He  was  thoroughly  sepa- 
rated from  them,  and  set  apart  for  God  inwardly, 
and  had  denied  Himself,*  to  live  only  by  the  words 
of  God. 

Such  is  the  life  of  God  here  below.  That  which 
He  has  created  cannot  be  bad.  God  forbid  we  should 
think  it !  Such  an  assertion  is  a  sure  sign  of  the  latter 
days.  Christ  could  think  about  His  mother  with 
tenderness,  when  the  work  of  His  soul  on  the  cross 
was  done.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  in  as  a  power 
foreign  to  this  life,  and  takes  up  man  to  make  him  go 
through  it  according  to  that  power ;  so  that,  the  more 
man  is  a  stranger  to  it  himself,  the  more  he  is  able  to 
shew,  and  does  indeed  shew,  sympathy  to  those  who 
are  there  according  to  God.  Anything  else  is  only 
monkish.  If  we  are  truly  free  within,  we  can  sympa- 
thise with  that  which  is  outside ;  if  we  are  not  so,  we 
shall  become  monks,  with  the  vain  hope  of  obtaining 
this  freedom. 

Lastly,  when  the  Nazarite  vow  was  fulfilled,  all  the 
sacrifices  were  ofiered,  and  the  hair  of  the  head  of  his 
separation  was  burnt  in  the  fire  which  consumed  the 
sacrifice  of  the  peace-ofierings :  a  type  of  the  full  com- 
munion which  is  the  result  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 
When,  in  the  time  fixed  by  God,  the  sacrifice  of  Christ 
shall  have  obtained,  in  its  effects,  its  full  and  entire 
efficacy,  the  energising  power  of  separation  will  merge 
in  the  communion  which  will  be  the  happy  consequence 
of  this  sacrifice.     We  are  thankful  to  Imow  that  the 

*  Not  of  coTirse  that  there  was  any  evil  nature  in  Him  to 
deny  as  there  is  in  us,  but  in  will  and  nature  where  there  was  no 
evil ;  as  *'  Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?"  which  I  take 
only  as  an  example.  On  the  cross  when  all  was  finished,  He 
carefully  owned  her.  Honey  could  not  be  in  a  sacrifice  any 
more  than  leaven. 

VI. 


246  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  now  spent,  in  a  great  measure 
in  checking  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  will  then  be  wholly  a 
power  of  joy  in  God,  and  of  communion  with  all  that 
will  surround  us. 

Let  us  now  speak  of  the  ways  of  God  when  the 
Nazarite  vow  is  ended.  Then  the  result  of  the  work 
of  Christ  will  be  produced ;  all  the  varied  efficacy  of 
His  sacrifice  will  be  acknowledged;  His  people  will 
enter  into  the  communion  of  His  joy ;  wine  will  be 
taken  with  joy.  Jesus  Himself  awaits  that  time.  I 
believe  this  specially  applies  to  His  people  here  below, 
to  the  Jewish  remnant  in  the  latter  days.  Their  par- 
taking of  the  Holy  Ghost  will  be  joy  and  delight. 
Something  similar,  however,  awaits  us,  but  in  a  still 
better  way.  So  we  have  this  joy  by  anticipation  up 
to  a  certain  point ;  for  the  Holy  Spirit  produces  these 
two  things,  the  joy  of  communion,  and  separation  in 
loneliness  for  the  service  of  God.  It  is  a  little  what 
the  apostle  means  in  these  words  to  the  Corinthians, 
"  Death  worketh  in  us,  but  life  in  you."  However, 
it  can  always  be  said  of  all  Christians,  "I  would  to 
God  ye  did  reign,  that  we  also  might  reign  with  you." 

After  having  placed  the  people  around  Himself — 
having  counted  them  by  name,  having  arranged  the 
service,  cleansed  the  camp  (which  is  distinct  from  the 
cleansing  of  defiled  individuals,  a  subject  which  belongs 
to  Leviticus),  and  shewn  the  true  position  of  the  de- 
voted servant,  a  position  which  Israel  might  have 
taken,  and  which  Christ,  true  servant,  set  apart  for 
God,  has  taken — God  ends  by  putting  His  blessing  and 
His  name  on  the  people.  The  blessing  places  them 
under  the  keeping,  the  grace,  and  in  the  peace  of  Je- 
hovah ;  and  effectively  Jehovah  first  blessed  them  in  a 
general  way  ;  then,  in  making  His  face  to  shine  u]  on 
them,  He  caused  them  to  enjoy  His  grace ;  lastly,  in 
lifting  up  His  countenance  upon  them.  He  gave  them 
the  assurance  of  peace. 


NUMBERS.  247 

Here  ends  this  part  of  the  book.  The  camp,  ar- 
ranged according  to  God's  order,  is  placed  under  His 
blessing.*  Thereupon  the  princes  of  the  people  offer 
a  free-will-offering  to  Jehovah,  for  the  service  of  the 
sanctuary  and  the  dedication  of  the  altar  according  to 
the  number  of  the  tribes.  This  was  done  with  a 
common  imderstanding,  each  offering  the  same,  and  as 
to  the  wagons ;  jointly  not  the  service  of  the  sanctuary, 
but  the  united  devotedness  and  free-will-offerings  of 
the  people  for  the  service  and  consecration  of  the  altar 
when  the  people  came  to  God.  It  was  done  in  tribes  ; 
they  were  Israel's  gifts  in  the  finitely  perfect  unity  of 
the  twelve — none  wanting  in  the  orderly  unity,  and  as 
a  whole  as  that  completeness  stood  before  God  in  that 
day.  Then  we  have  the  form  of  the  communications 
of  Jehovah  to  Moses  to  instruct  him  in  the  way.  We 
see  that  it  is  in  the  tabernacle  from  between  the 
cherubim.  It  is  not  now  a  law  to  the  people  from 
Sinai,  a  covenant,  but  the  regulation  of  a  people  in 
connection  with  God. 

Chapter  viii.  speaks  of  the  candlestick.f  The  lamps 
were  to  make  the  light  shine  from  it,  and  cause  that 
light  to  be  diffused  around  and  before  it.  This  is  the 
case  when  that  which  is  the  vessel  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
shines  with  the  light  of  God.  Whether  it  be  Israel  or 
the  church,  it  throws  light  before  it.  "  Let  your  light 
so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good 
works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 

*  Note,  chapters  v.,  vi.  give  the  cleansing  of  the  camp  in  every 
way  from  impurity  and  wrong,  and  the  consecration  of  the 
Nazarite  to  God,  and  the  blessing.  Then  comes  the  free-wiU- 
offering.  Pm-ity  of  the  camp  and  personal  separation  to  God 
— hohness  in  its  twofold  character,  negative  cleansing,  and 
positive  consecration  to  God.  Then  the  free-will-offering.  The 
putting  of  the  name  follows  the  cleansing  and  consecration. 

t  The  introduction  of  this  type  at  this  place  shews  how  much 
the  order  of  the  types,  and  their  introduction  in  such  or  such  a 
place,  refers  to  the  things  typified  and  to  their  moral  order. 

vi.-vin. 


248  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

It  is  because  the  profession  of  the  Christian  is  clear 
and  unequivocal  that  men,  seeing  his  good  works,  know 
to  whom  to  attribute  them.  The  candlestick  was  of 
pure  gold  only,  beaten  work ;  it  was  properly  divine,  and 
that  only,  God's  light  in  the  sanctuary.  The  twelve 
loaves,  connected  with  what  was  divine,  were  the 
government  of  God  in  man;  the  table  was  of  wood, 
though  overlaid  with  gold ;  the  number  we  have  seen 
as  marking  divine  government,  but  in  man,  specially 
true  of  Israel,  but  the  testimony  of  God  in  light  is 
purely  divine. 

We  have  next  the  purification  of  the  Levites  and 
their  consecration  to  the  service  of  Jehovah.  This 
prefigures  the  consecration  of  the  members  of  the 
church  to  God  for  service.  The  Levites  were  sprinkled,* 
then  shorn  like  the  lepers,  and  their  clothes  washed,  all 
their  manifested  life  purified  according  to  the  purifica- 
tion of  the  sanctuary,  their  ways  suited  to  the  service 
of  God.  After  that  the  whole  people  laid  their  hands 
upon  them,  and  they  laid  theirs  upon  the  sacrifices. 
In  the  offerings  which  accompanied  their  consecration 
there  was  no  peace-offering,  because  it  was  a  question 

*  The  leper  was  washed,  not  merely  sprinkled.  He  was  out- 
side the  camp,  wholly  unclean  before  God.  It  was  cleansing,  not 
consecration ;  he  had  been,  before  the  washing,  brought  under  the 
blood- sprinkling — the  full  abiding  efficacy  of  Christ's  work  in 
itself.  Then  he  was  washed  with  water,  cleansed  personally  in 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  and  word,  according  to  that  water  that  came 
out  of  Christ's  side.  His  clothes  or  outward  demeanour  were 
even  cleansed  too,  and  all  that  could  harbour  defilement  re- 
moved. Here  it  was  the  consecration  of  those  who,  in  an  ordinary 
sense  were  clean  and  within.  The  sprinkling  was  a  sign  calling 
to  remembrance  consecration  according  to  Christ's  death,  what 
was  fit  for  the  sanctuary,  bringing  them  into  that  conscious 
separation  to  God's  service ;  and  so  their  clothes,  their  outward 
demeanour,  were  washed.  It  was  all  of  the  same  nature — the 
water — but  with  the  leper  it  was  the  body  of  sin  destroyed, 
cleansing  from  it  so  as  not  to  serve  it.  Here  it  was  consecration 
too. 


NUMBERS.  249 

of  service  and  not  of  communion;  but  the  sacrifices 
which  represented  the  efficacy  of  the  atonement,  and 
the  devotedness  unto  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  were 
offered,  and  characterised  the  ground  and  nature  of 
their  service.  They  are  the  double  character  of  the 
death  of  Christ.  The  meat-offering  was  there  also 
with  the  burnt-offering ;  all  that  constituted  Christ  as 
an  offering  to  God,  glorifying  God  in  death  as  regards 
sin,  bearing  sins,  and  also  in  living  perfection  and 
devotedness  fully  tried  in  the  fire,  were  found.  In  the 
application  the  sin-offering  comes  first. 

The  children  of  Levi  belonged  to  Jehovah  as  His 
redeemed,  having  been  saved,  when  He  judged  sin, 
and  themselves  offered  as  an  offering  to  Jehovah.  The 
laying  on  of  hands  identified  with  the  victim  the 
person  who  did  so.  If  it  were  an  offering  for  sin,  the 
offering  was  identified  with  the  sinner  in  his  sin ;  if  it 
were  a  burnt-offering,  the  offerer  was  identified  with 
the  value  of  the  consecration  to  God's  glory  of  the 
victim  in  respect  of  sin.  Romans  xv.  16  is  an  allusion 
to  this  consecration  of  the  Levites,  and  considers  the 
church  as  thus  offered  to  God  from  among  the  Gentiles. 
The  Israelites  having  also  laid  their  hands  upon  the 
Levites,  the  whole  people  were,  so  to  speak,  identified 
in  this  consecration  with  them,  as  an  offering  made  by 
them  to  Jehovah,  so  that  the  Levites  represented  them 
before  Him. 

We  find  here  again,  what  we  have  already  seen,  that 
the  Levites  were  given  to  Aaron  and  his  sons,  as  the 
church  is  given  to  Christ,  the  true  Priest  and  Son  over 
the  house  of  God,  to  be  used  in  the  service  of  the 
house.  They  were  first  offered  by  Israel  to  Jehovah  for 
His  service  by  Aaron  the  priest  (ver.  11);  it  was  a  wave- 
offering  (tenupha);  that  is,  they  were  presented  before 
the  Lord  as  consecrated  to  Him.  Then  (ver.  18)  they 
were  set  before  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  so  under  their 
hand  given  to  the  Lord,  wholly  given  to  Him  instead  of 

VIII. 


250  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  firstborn.  (Vers.  16-19.)  How  solemn  and  perfect  is 
the  offering  up  of  the  servant  of  the  Lord  to  Him,  ac- 
cording to  the  purification  of  the  sanctuary  and  all  the 
value  and  true  character  of  Christ's  ofiering  of  Himself 
to  God,  and  the  divine  judgment  of  sin.*  The  pass- 
over,  the  memorial  of  redemption,  and  in  consequence 
the  symbol  of  the  unityf  of  the  people  of  God,  as  an 
assembly  redeemed  by  Him,  is  obligatory  during  the 
journey  through  the  wilderness. j  Only  God  makes  a 
provision,  in  grace  and  forbearance,  for  those  who  were 
not  able  to  keep  it  according  to  His  will,  to  whom  it 
had  reference. 

But  these  provisions  of  forbearance  and  grace  kept 
continually  present  the  idea  of  a  redeemed  people  and 
one  under  the  direct  fatherly  government  of  God. 
Besides  this  we  have  the  precious  declaration  that 
God  Himself  conducted  His  people  by  His  presence. 
At  His  commandment  they  pitched  ;  at  His  command- 
ment they  journeyed.  They  kept  the  charge  of  Jeho- 
vah, according  to  the  commandment  of  Jehovah.  God 
grant  that  we,  who  have  His  Spirit,  may  thus  be  led 
in  all  things,  to  stay  or  to  go  entirely  under  His  im- 
mediate direction !  If  we  are  near  God  in  His  com- 
munion, we  shall  be  guided  by  His  eye;  if  not,  we 
shall  be  guided  by  His  external  providence,  as  horses, 
and  mules,  with  bits  and  bridles,  that  we  may  not 
stumble. 

Chapter  x.  speaks  of  the  silver  trumpets  which 
served  for  calling  the  assembly  of   the  people,  and 

*  They  served  from  25  to  50,  the  first  five  years  a  kind  of 
noviciate,  as  after  50  they  ministered,  but  were  not  charged 
with  the  service. 

t  In  Israel  this  unity  was  simply  that  of  a  people  redeemed 
together  to  the  enjoyment  of  a  common  portion,  not  a  body  as 
the  church. 

\  Yet  those  who  had  only  wilderness  character  were  not  in  a 
condition  to  keep  it.  None  born  there  were  circumcised  till 
they  came  to  Gilgal  across  the  Jordan. 


NUMBERS.  251 

for  the  journeying  of  the  camps,  but  which  serve  also 
for  other  purposes.  It  was  the  testimony  of  God, 
rendered  publicly,  with  two  chief  ends  in  view;  to 
gather  the  people,  and  to  make  them  journey.  It  is  so 
indeed,  practically ;  the  testimony  of  God  gathers  His 
people  around  Him,  and  makes  them  go  forward.  The 
testimony  of  God  was  the  sign  of  His  intervention, 
whilst,  at  the  same  time,  its  result  was  to  produce  it. 
The  priests  who,  in  communion  with  their  Head,  were 
to  be  in  the  intimacy  of  the  thoughts  of  God,  sounded 
the  trumpets  when  needed. 

All  was  thus  done  according  to  communion  with  God 
in  His  sanctuary.  After  the  people  were  brought  into 
the  land,  if  war  arose,  they  sounded  an  alarm :  they 
proclaimed  the  testimony  of  God,  without  being  afraid, 
and  God  remembered  His  people  aiid  interfered.  So 
with  us,  we  need  never  fear  the  attack  of  the  enemy ; 
instead  of  being  frightened,  let  us  give  a  faithful  testi- 
mony, in  answer  to  which  God  has  pledged  Himself  to 
come  in  in  power.  Let  us  not  fear :  in  nothing  terrified 
by  our  adversaries. 

The  trumpets  were  also  used  in  the  solemn  feasts ; 
for  the  testimony  and  the  memorial  of  God  constitute 
the  joy  of  His  gathered  people.  Thus  the  whole  people 
in  national  unity  and  order,  were  assembled  as  the 
camp  where  God  was,  and  were  to  march  in  like  order. 
All  was  complete  for  the  order  of  the  people  and  the 
service  of  Jehovah. 

At  length  the  people  are  called  to  take  the  first  stage 
of  their  journey.  The  order  followed  in  the  march 
diff'ers  from  that  which  had  been  prescribed,  in  this, 
that  the  tabernacle,  with  its  curtains,  went  after  the 
first  three  tribes,  that  it  might  be  set  up  to  receive  the 
ark,  which  followed  the  second  division.  Still  this 
was  merely  a  detail  in  the  arrangements,  to  have  all 
ready  when  the  ark  arrived.  But  God  appears  in  a 
remarkable  manner  in  grace,  outside  the  whole  order 
IX.,  X. 


252  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

He  had  prescribed ;  for  it  is  the  ark  itself  which  pre- 
cedes the  whole  camp.  Moses  had  asked  a  child  of  the 
wilderness  to  be  to  them  instead  of  eyes;  but  what 
man  does  not  care  to  do,  God  takes  upon  Himself.  He 
comes  out  of  the  place  which  He  had  taken  in  the 
midst  of  the  tribes,  to  be  taken  care  of,  so  to  speak, 
and  honoured  there,  and  makes  Himself,  in  some  sort, 
their  servant,  seeking  a  place  where  they  might  rest  in 
the  trackless  desert. 

It  was  not  in  Canaan,  but  a  place  in  the  wilderness, 
where  the  Lord  went  a  three  days'  journey  to  seek  a 
rest  for  them.  A  beautiful  picture  of  the  tender  and 
precious  grace  of  Him  who,  if  He  makes  us  pass 
through  the  wilderness  for  our  good,  does  not  fail  to  be 
there  with  us,  and  who  takes  care,  in  putting  out  His 
sheep,  to  go  befor^  them,  and  to  solace  them  with  His 
love.  Mighty  leader  of  His  people  by  the  way.  He  is 
their  joy  and  their  glory  when  He  comes  to  rest  in 
their  midst ! 

This  closes  the  divinely  instituted  order  of  the  camp 
and  the  grace  that  led  them  through  the  wilderness. 
Compare  Psalm  cxxxii.  8,  where  God  at  the  close  of 
Israel's  history  (anticipating  David)  arises  into  His 
rest.  Psalm  Ixviii.  is  God's  intervention  to  establish 
the  rest. 

We  are  now  brought  to  turn  our  thoughts  in  another 
direction — to  see  the  conduct  of  the  people  in  the  wil- 
derness ;  and  alas !  what  is  it  except  a  history  of  un- 
faithfulness and  rebellion  ?  Let  us  add,  however,  that 
it  is  also  that  of  the  forbearance  and  the  grace  of  God. 
it  is  an  extremely  humbling  and  instructive  picture. 
We  shall  briefly  review  the  different  forms  of  imbelief 
which  are  here  presented  to  us. 

The  first  thing  we  find,  after  the  sweet  manifestation 
of  the  love  of  God,  is  the  murmuring  of  the  people. 
They  complain  of  fatigue,  where  God  is  seeking  a 
resting-place  for  them.   God  chastens  them.  Humbled, 


NUMBERS.  253 

they  cry  unto  Moses,  and  upon  his  intercession  the 
chastening  is  removed ;  but  their  heart  remains  alien- 
ated from  the  Lord,  and,  seduced  by  the  mixed  multi- 
tude who  accompanied  them,  and  to  whom  Canaan  was 
not  a  land  of  promise,  they  get  wearied  with  the 
manna.  How  often  does  Christ,  the  bread  of  life,  not 
suffice  a  heart  not  in  communion  with  God  !  The  heart 
seeks  elsewhere  for  its  nourishment;  it  wants  some- 
thing else  ;  it  remembers  what  the  flesh  used  to  enjoy 
in  the  world,  whilst  it  forgets  the  bondage  in  which  it 
was  held.  It  knows  no  more  the  power  of  the  word — 
"  he  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger." 

God  grants  the  people  the  object  of  their  desires : 
instead  of  being  ashamed  when  they  see  that  God  is 
equally  able  to  satisfy  them  in  the  wilderness,  they 
greedily  gather  the  quails,  and  the  wrath  of  God  falls 
upon  this  wicked  people. 

Moses,  wearied  of  them  as  of  a  heavy  burden,  com- 
plains, in  his  turn,  of  his  glorious  position.  God  re- 
lieves him  of  the  weight  of  his  charge,  but  not  without 
upbraiding  him;  and  He  adjoins  seventy  persons  to 
him  to  help  him  in  bearing  it.  The  Spirit  of  God  acts 
in  two  of  them,  though  they  do  not  present  themselves 
to  receive  it  where  Moses  w^as :  they  prophesy  in  the 
camp.  Joshua,  jealous  of  the  glory  of  his  master, 
wishes  them  to  be  silenced.  But  if  Moses,*  unable  to 
bear  the  weight  of  his  glory,  has  been  obliged  to  share 
it  with  others,  and,  up  to  a  certain  point,  lose  part  of 
it,  he  shews  at  least,  in  this  circumstance,  the  depth  of 

*  Eemark  here  the  difference  even  in  the  blessed  apostle's 
faith,  comparing  chapter  xi.  12  liere  and  Galatians  iv.  19 :  see 
also  2  Corinthians  xi.  28.  It  is  possible  that  this  failure  of  Moses 
under  the  pressure  of  the  weight  of  the  people,  giving  occasion 
to  the  prophesying  in  the  camp,  was  the  occasion  also  of  the 
rising  up  of  Miriam  and  Aaron  against  him.  At  any  rate  God 
maintained  the  authority  of  His  servant,  who,  as  to  himself, 
held  his  ground  by  unfeigned  meekness,  and  leaving  all  that 
concerned  himself  to  God. 

XI. 


254  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  grace  that  was  in  him.  He  does  not  envy  those 
who  prophesy  in  the  camp.  "  Would  God,"  he  says, 
**  that  all  were  prophets !" 

There  is  something  very  beautiful  in  the  spirit  which 
animated  this  servant  of  God.  Finally,  whatever  may 
be  God's  arrangements,  He  is  sovereign  in  the  dispensa- 
tions of  His  Spirit. 

After  that  (for  what  form  will  not  rebellion  assume  ?) 
Miriam  and  Aaron  speak  against  Moses.  It  is  the 
prophetess  and  the  priest  (one  who  has  the  word  from 
God  and  access  to  God,  the  twofold  character  of  the 
people  of  God),  who  rise  up  against  him  who  is  king 
in  Jeshurun,  with  whom  God  speaks  as  unto  His 
friend.  In  this  Moses  is  in  all  respects  a  type  of 
Christ,  who  stands  personally  outside  the  rights  which 
grace  has  conferred  upon  the  people.  Faithful  in  all 
the  house  of  God,  he  enjoys  close  intercourse  with 
Him.  Miriam  and  Aaron  ought  to  have  been  afraid. 
The  excuse  of  the  two  rebels  was,  that  Moses  had  taken 
an  Ethiopian  woman — a  blessed  sign  for  us  of  the 
sovereignty  of  grace  which  has  introduced  into  the 
blessing  of  Christ  those  who  had  no  right  or  title  to 
it.  The  people  of  God,  whatever  their  privileges, 
ought  to  have  recognised  this  sovereignty.  Israel 
would  not,  and  was  smitten  with  leprosy.  It  is,  how- 
ever, in  their  character  of  witness  or  prophet  that  they 
suffer  this  chastening. 

Aaron  resumes  his  place  of  intercessor,  and  speaks 
humbly  to  Moses  (a  figure,  I  think,  of  the  humiliation 
of  Israel,  grounded  on  the  value  of  the  intercession  of 
Christ,  identifying  Himself  with  the  position  of  the 
people).  God's  answer  is,  that  Miriam  should  be 
humbled  and  chastened,  shut  out,  for  a  time,  from 
intercourse  with  Him,  then  restored  to  favour  again. 
The  people  wait  for  her  restoration.  Let  us  remember 
that  the  Lord  here  recalls  this  fact,  that  the  most 
glorious  position   for  Moses  was  that  when  he  was 


NUMBERS.  255 

separated  from  the  people — when  he  pitched  his  tent 
without  the  camp,  and  called  it  the  tabernacle  of  the 
congregation  or  meeting.  The  people  had  but  too 
much  forgotten  this.  When  the  members  of  the  church 
also,  in  the  thought  of  making  themselves  spiritual,  take 
advantage  of  their  glory  and  position  as  prophets  and 
priests  (characters  which  do  indeed  belong  to  them), 
to  disown  the  rights  of  Christ,  as  king  in  Jeshurun, 
having  authority  over  the  house  of  God,  there  is 
room  for  considering  whether  they  are  not  guilty  of 
the  rebellion  here  spoken  of.  For  my  part,  I  believe 
they  are. 

Next,  the  pleasant  land  is  despised.  I  shall  here  call 
the  attention  of  the  reader  to  some  points  mentioned  on 
this  subject  in  other  parts  of  the  Bible.* 

Jehovah  has  brought  the  people  to  the  borders  of 
the  land ;  Moses  tells  them  to  go  up.  The  people  pro- 
pose sending  spies ;  Moses  consents.  It  seems  that  they 
had  God's  sanction,  for  they  went  according  to  the  word 
of  the  Lord.  But  this  request  was  prompted  by  the 
weakness  and  unbelief  of  the  people.  There  are  many 
things  commanded  of  God,  and  which  we  are  bound  to 
do  as  soon  as  they  are  the  object  of  a  command  from 
Him,  in  the  result  of  which  His  ways  are  displayed, 
which,  however,  are  only  owing  to  our  lack  of  faith. 
The  consequence  of  it  is,  that  the  result  abundantly 
confirms  the  faith  of  the  faithful,  of  the  remnant ;  but 
unbelief  reaps  what  it  has  sown.  So  it  is  in  this  case. 
First,  the  report  brought  to  Moses  is  in  a  right  spirit ; 
but  the  difficulties  immediately  present  themselves, 
and  unbelief  measures  them  with  man,  instead  of  with 
God.  Then  the  witnesses  draw  their  words  from  the 
people's  feeling,  and  express  a  judgment  founded  on 
their  unbelief. 

Having  thus  entirely  departed  in  heart  from  the 

*  See  Deuteronomy  i.  20-23. 
XIL,  XIII. 


256  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Lord,  and  fallen  into  the  current  of  the  unbelief  of 
the  people,  through  their  own,  they  belie  the  convictions 
they  had  formed  when  enjoying  the  sight  of  the  good- 
ness of  Jehovah,  and  come  to  declare  that  the  land 
even  is  bad,  and  end  with  justifying  themselves  by 
complaining  of  God.  For  now  it  is  no  longer  Moses 
who  has  brought  them  here,  it  is  God  Himself ;  they 
accuse  Him  of  it.  Moreover,  they  cannot  contain  their 
rage  against  those  whose  faithf id  testimony  condemns 
their  unbelief. 

How  often  is  this  the  case,  that  the  difficulties  which 
draw  out  the  unbelief  of  the  heart  lead  to  speak  evil 
of  the  position  to  which  we  have  been  divinely  called, 
and  of  which  once  we  had  tasted  the  blessedness  !  All 
flowed  from  forgetfulness  of  God.  Was  He  a  grass- 
hopper, in  comparison  with  the  sons  of  Anak  ?  What 
matter  if  walls  were  high,  if  they  fell  down  at  the 
blowing  of  a  ram's  horn  ?  But  now  God  Himself 
interferes.  They  will  be  dealt  with  according  to  their 
faith ;  they  shall  perish  in  the  wilderness,  according  to 
their  wish.  The  faithful  ones  and  the  children  will 
alone  be  brought  into  the  land ;  but  not  without  under- 
going, in  their  march,  the  consequences  of  the  unbelief 
of  the  mass.  However,  other  hopes  and  other  consola- 
tions will  be  their  portion. 

The  effect  of  the  intercession  of  Moses  is  to  obtain 
from  God  that  the  people  should  be  spared ;  but  this  is 
His  declaration — He  will  be  glorified  in  judgment  over 
a  rebellious  people  who  despise  the  promises,  and  the 
earth  shall  thus  he  filled  with  His  glory.  Moses  here 
appeals  to  the  revelation  of  the  name  of  Jehovah,  on 
which  footing  He  governs  the  people,  and  not  to  the 
promises  made  to  the  fathers ;  and  the  answer  he  re- 
ceives is  in  keeping  with  that  name.  Caleb  prefigures 
the  faithful  remnant ;  Joshua  is  not  named  (ver.  24), 
for  he  represents  Christ  introducing  the  people  into 
the  land  of  promise. 


NUMBERS.  257 

At  the  end  of  the  forty  years  Caleb  was  obliged  to 
subdue,  name  for  name,  the  same  persons  who  had 
filled  the  souls  of  the  spies  wHih  terror.  Unbeliei, 
when  in  spite  of  it  we  are  to  enjoy  the  effects  of  the 
promise,  does  not  make  us  escape  the  difiiculties.  In 
fine,  when  we  have  judged  the  folly  of  unbelief,  and 
we  see  the  consequences  of  it,  it  is  of  no  avail,  because 
of  these  last,  to  undertake  a  work.  God  is  not  with 
us;  and,  if  we  persist  in  going  up,  we  shall  find  the 
enemy  such  as  our  unbelief  has  pictured  him  to  us. 

After  all  this  unbelief  of  the  people,  when  God  had 
declared  that  the  earth  should  be  filled  with  His  glory, 
by  the  cutting  off  of  the  rebellious  congregation,  and 
when  one  might  have  supposed  they  had  forfeited  the 
land  for  ever,  it  is  perfectly  beautiful,  in  chapter  xv., 
to  see  the  Lord  returning  into  the  perfect  rest  of  His 
fore-ordained  counsels,  and  of  His  immutable  being, 
and  giving  instructions  relative  to  the  time  when  the 
people  shall  have  entered  the  land  He  has  given  them. 
It  speaks  of  the  offerings  of  righteousness  they  are  in- 
vited to  bring  to  Him  of  their  free-will,  and  of  the 
wine  of  joy  which  was  to  accompany  these  offerings ; 
and  as  this  is  grace,  the  love  of  God  reaches  out  beyond 
Israel,  and,  bringing  the  stranger  near  to  His  people, 
He  makes  one  law  for  both.  The  firstfruits  belong  to 
Him.  The  sins  of  ignorance  are  forgiven  by  means  of 
the  sacrifice  required  by  the  perfectness  of  the  ways 
of  God.  The  sin  committed  presumptuously  alone 
brings  destruction.  God  orders  them  to  put  upon  the 
fringe  of  the  borders  of  their  garments  a  riband  of 
blue,  that  they  may  remember  His  commandments, 
and  be  kept  from  that  which  would  render  them  pro- 
fane. The  heavenly  principle  must  enter  into  the 
minutest  details  of  life,  even  into  those  that  are  nearest 
to  the  earth,  if  we  wish  to  escape  the  serious  evils 
which  bring  down  the  judgment  of  God.  The  intro- 
duction of  the  stranger  in  this  chapter  is  of  the  highest 
VOL.  I.  XIV.,  XV.  S 


258  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

interest,  as  a  testimony  to  grace.  But  we  have  not, 
as  yet,  seen  the  final  apostasy  which  brings  down  the 
judgment  at  the  very  moment  when  it  is  accomplished. 

Chapter  xvi.  contains  the  open  rebellion  against 
Moses  of  Dathan  and  Abiram,  but  especially  the  pre- 
tension of  the  ministry  in  Israel  to  arrogate  priest- 
hood to  itself.  Some  of  the  chiefs  of  the  people  were 
indeed  parties  in  this  rebellion,  and  for  a  moment  all 
the  people,  but  too  well  prepared,  were  led  away  by 
the  ambition  of  a  man  who  discharged  the  functions  of 
the  ministry.  The  New  Testament  calls  it  "  the  gain- 
saying of  Core;"  he  is  the  first  addressed  by  Moses; 
and  the  main  point  of  the  sin,  as  Moses  insists  on  it, 
was  this  taking  too  much  upon  them  by  the  sons  of 
Levi.  He  drew  others  in  by  flattering  them,  but  to 
the  assumption  of  official  priesthood.  Dathan  and 
Abiram's  was  a  side  question  of  Moses's  authority,  of 
the  word  of  God  by  him,  and  the  judgment  was  a 
thing  apart.  But  this  claim  of  priesthood  by  the 
ministry  is  identified  with  open  rebellion  against  God 
in  the  authority  of  His  word  as  borne  by  Moses.  It 
is  not,  however,  the  corruption  of  ministry  in  teach- 
ing error  itself,  as  the  distinction  made  by  Jude 
shews  us. 

In  Cain  we  see  natural  wickedness ;  in  Balaam,  who 
taught  error  for  a  reward,  religious  corruption  in  teach- 
ing ;  in  Core,  the  gainsaying  which  brings  destruction. 
Let  us  remember  that  Jude  treats  of  the  results,  and 
the  end  reserved  to  the  corruption  and  the  corrupters 
of  Christianity.  The  gainsaying  of  Core  is  a  revolt 
against  the  authority  of  Christ,  and  the  distinctive 
character*  of  His  priesthood:  a  revolt  excited  by  a 
man,  who,  occupying  the  position  of  a  minister,  pre- 

*  It  is  ecclesiastical  evil ;  but  as  regards  the  rebellion,  the  evil 
went  farther.  It  was  the  pretension  of  ministry  to  be  priesthood. 
That  is  the  evil  pointed  out  by  Moses,  though  Core  brought  others 
near  also.  (Vers.  8-10.) 


NUMBERS.  259 

tends  that  he  is  a  priest,  and  sets  aside  in  doing  so  the 
only  true  heavenly  priesthood  of  Christ. 

Reuben  was  the  eldest  son  of  Israel,  and  Core  was  of 
the  most  favoured  family  among  the  Levites.  The  tribe 
of  Reuben  and  the  family  of  Core  were  near  each  other 
in  the  camp ;  but  nothing  of  this  is  apparent  in  the 
motives  which  led  them  to  act. 

In  a  word,  it  was  open  rebellion  and  audacity  pre- 
senting itself  before  God  Himself.  God  soon  put  an 
end  to  their  pretensions,  for  "  Who  hath  hardened  him- 
self against  him  and  hath  prospered  ?"  Moses  appeals 
to  Him.  Dathan  and  Abiram  take  advantage  of  the 
effect  of  the  unbelief  of  the  assembly,  who  might  have 
been  in  Canaan  already,  to  throw  the  blame  of  it  upon 
Moses.  As  to  Core,  Moses  announces  that  God  will 
shew  who  is  holy  and  whom  He  has  chosen.  Core  and 
the  two  hundred  and  fifty  princes  of  the  assembly  are 
consumed ;  Dathan,  Abiram,  and  theirs  swallowed  up. 
But  the  spirit  of  rebellion  had  laid  hold  of  the  whole 
assembly.  On  the  morrow  they  murmur  against 
Moses  and  Aaron,  saying :  "  Ye  have  killed  the  people 
of  the  Lord" — a  convenient  name  to  aggrandise  them- 
selves. Now,  the  priesthood  and  the  intercession  of  Aaron 
are  made  evident.  Aaron,  with  a  censer,  stands  be- 
tween the  dead  and  the  living,  and  the  plague  is  stayed. 

We  shall  see  the  importance  of  this  last  remark  in 
what  follows,  and  what  is  the  principle  on  which  alone, 
considering  sins  and  the  flesh,  God  can  bring  His 
people  through  the  wilderness.  There  that  priesthood 
is  needed  which  Core  had  despised ;  but  it  is  by  priest- 
hood alone  that  man  can  get  through  the  wilderness 
with  God.*  Moses,  in  replying  to  Core,  declares  that 
God  will  shew  whom  He  had  chosen  for  this  end ;  and 

*  There  is  no  question  here  of  union  with  Christ  (it  was  yet 
the  hidden  mystery),  nor  even  of  being  sons  ;  it  is  the  passage 
of  pilgrims  through  the  wilderness.  In  this  character  we  are 
viewed  as  apart  from  Christ,  as  in  Hebrews.     I  add  here  that 

XVI. 


2|^0  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

this  He  soon  does  in  fact.  Moses,  vexed  at  the  contempt 
and  the  injustice  of  Dathan  and  Abiram,  appeals  to 
the  justice  and  the  judgment  of  God.  God  intervenes 
by  a  judgment  of  pure  destruction.  But  the  glory 
and  the  house  of  God  are  at  stake,  when  the  question 
is,  By  whom  is  He  to  be  approached  ?  Now,  authority 
is  insufficient  to  conduct  such  as  we  are  through  the 
wilderness.  The  flesh  is  rebellious,  and  the  last  re- 
source of  authority  is  destruction.  But  this  does  not 
lead  a  people  to  a  good  end  for  the  glory  of  God,  though 
He  is  therein  glorified  in  righteousness. 

Moses,  then,  in  that  character  of  authority  which 
strikes  in  righteousness,  is  powerless  as  regards  bring- 
ing the  people  into  Canaan.  It  is  priesthood,  which 
the  rebellion  had  so  despised,  which  is  invested  with 
authority  over  His  rebellious  people.  It  is  Christ  the 
priest,  in  His  grace  and  goodness,  who  leads  us  through 
the  wilderness.  This  is  the  conclusion  we  come  to  at 
the  end  of  the  narrative  we  have  of  the  journeying  of 
the  people  of  God. 

From  chapter  xvii.  to  xx.  this  subject  is  set  forth 
with  the  circumstances  relative  to  it.  First,  the 
authority  of  Aaron  is  established  by  signs  shewn  by 
the  power  of  God,  in  his  rod,  put  tvith  the  others  near 
God — the  source  of  all  authority.  The  power  of  life 
and  blessing  displays  itself  with  a  rapidity  which 
makes  manifest  the  presence  of  God.  The  buds,  the 
flowers,  and  the  fruit  grow  on  dry  wood.  Priesthood, 
living  and  victorious  over  death,  through  divine 
efficacy,*  must  lead  the  people;  God's  authority  is 
entrusted  to  it. 

we  get  a  difference  between  priesthood  and  advocacy.  (Heb. 
and  John.)  In  Hebrews  it  is  priesthood  for  mercy,  and  grace 
to  help  in  time  of  need;  advocacy  is  to  restore  communion 
when  we  have  sinned. 

"^  That  is  grace ;  righteous  judgment  could  destroy,  but  not 
bring  through ;  grace  alone  can. 


NUMBERS.  261 

The  carnal  people,  always  astray,  bold  just  before  in 
the  presence  of  the  majesty  of  God,  are  afraid  of  His 
presence  now  that  His  grace  manifests  itself,  and  say 
that  they  cannot  draw  near  Him.  This  opens  the  way 
for  still  deeper  views  on  the  place  that  priesthood  holds 
in  general. 

In  chapter  xviii.  the  place  of  priesthood  is  clearly 
defined,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Levites.  The  priests 
alone  draw  near  to  the  holy  place;  they  alone  are 
allowed  this  intimacy  with  God.  But,  in  consequence 
of  their  position,  there  are  sins,  iniquities  which  they 
are  called  to  bear,  as  an  effect  of  this  proximity,  which 
would  not  be  remarked  among  those  who  are  outside. 
That  which  is  unbecoming  the  presence  and  the  sanc- 
tuary of  God  does  not  become  His  priests.  They  bear 
the  iniquity  of  the  holy  place.  If  the  people  disobeyed 
the  law,  doubtless  they  were  punished ;  but  that  which 
defiled  the  sanctuary  fell  upon  Aaron  and  his  sons. 
What,  then,  is  the  measure  of  holiness  given  to  the 
children  of  God — alone  true  priests  ?  It  is  the  purifica- 
tion of  the  sanctuary  itself,  not  what  is  fit  for  man, 
but  what  is  fit  for  God.  The  service  of  the  Levites, 
and  the  Levites  themselves  were  given  as  a  gift  to  the 
priests.  Priesthood  also  was  a  pure  gift  to  Aaron  and 
his  sons.  Because  of  the  anointing,  the  most  holy 
things  were  given  them  to  eat,  which  was  a  special 
privilege  of  the  priests.  The  same  thing  is  true  with 
regard  to  us. 

Whatever  is  precious  in  the  offering  of  Christ,  in 
every  point  of  view — in  His  life  and  in  His  death; 
in  that  bread  come  down  from  heaven,  contemplated  in 
His  life  of  devotedness  and  grace  here  below ;  and  in 
His  death  for  us — all  is  the  food  and  nourishment  of 
our  souls,  in  that  communion  with  God  in  which  we 
ourselves  are  kept  in  our  priesthood.  The  priests  alone 
ate  the  holy  things,  and  they  ate  them  in  a  holy  place. 
It  is  only  in  the  sense  of  the  presence  of  God,  and 
XVII.,  xvm. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

under  the  efficacy  of  that  oil  which  is  not  poured  on 

flesh,  that  we  can  truly  realise  what  is  precious  in  the 
work  of  Christ. 

Verse  10  presents  something  very  remarkable ;  for 
what  is  here  said,  and  nowhere  else,  is  that  they  were  to 
eat  them  in  the  most  holy  place,  the  holy  of  holies. 
There  is  no  difficulty  in  the  terms.  I  have  sometimes 
thought  that  it  might  mean,  from  among  the  most  holy 
things ;  but  if  it  be  not  that,  the  meaning  is  then  in  the 
holy  of  holies,  and  only  relates  to  the  antitype.  That  is, 
it  is  only  in  the  presence  and  before  the  throne  of  the 
sovereign  God  Himself  that  we  can  really  feed  on  that 
precious  food.  Historically  the  priests  were  not  there ; 
being  in  the  sanctuary  of  God,  they  were  accounted  as 
being  there. 

There  were  things  which,  though  truly  belonging  to 
the  priestly  family,  were  not  properly  eaten  in  the 
priestly  character,  such  as  the  heave-offerings,  the 
wave-oflTerings;  the  daughters  ate  of  them  as  well  as 
the  sons :  all  that  were  clean  in  the  house  could  par- 
take of  them.  Thus,  in  the  joys  of  the  children  of  God, 
there  are  some  that  belong  to  them  as  a  family.  We 
enjoy  our  blessings  and  all  that  is  offered  by  man  to 
God.     It  is  a  joy  for  the  soul. 

All  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ  works  to  the  glory  of 
God,  even  in  His  members,  and  still  more  what  He  has 
done  in  Christ  Himself,  is  the  food  of  the  soul  of  the 
household  of  God,  and  strengthens  them.  Do  not  our 
souls  enjoy  those  firstfruits,  the  best  of  the  new  wine 
and  the  wheat — the  firstfruits  of  that  noble  harvest  of 
God,  the  produce  of  His  seed  on  the  soil  of  His  elec- 
tion ?  Yes,  we  enjoy  them  in  thinking  of  them.  But 
the  sin-offering,  the  trespass-offerings,  the  meat-offer- 
ings, all  that  in  which  we  share  in  spirit  in  the  deep 
work  of  Christ,  is  only  eaten  in  the  character  and  the 
spirit  of  a  priest. 

We  must,  according  to  the  efficacy  of  this  work  of 


NUMBERS.  263 

Christ,  enter  into  the  spirit  in  which  He  presents  Him- 
self after  His  sacrifice,  moved  by  His  perfect  love,  in 
the  presence  of  the  Most  High — enter  into  the  senti- 
ments of  love,  of  devotedness  in  the  consciousness  of 
the  holiness  of  God ;  in  a  word,  into  the  feelings  with 
which  He  presents  Himself  as  a  priest  before  Him, 
in  order  to  connect,  by  love  and  the  eflacacy  of  His 
ofTering,  the  holiness  of  God,  with  the  blessing  of  him 
who  has  sinned — to  realise  that  which  is  precious  in 
Christ  in  that  work,  to  share  in  it  (for  so  it  is)  in 
grace.  And,  eftectively,  that  only  takes  place  in  the 
most  holy  place,  in  the  presence  of  God,  where  He 
appears  for  us. 

In  fine,  whether  the  joys  of  the  family  of  God's 
house,  or  this  holy  participation  in  spirit  in  the  work 
of  Christ,  all  we  have  just  been  speaking  about  be- 
longs to  the  priesthood.  Even  the  Levites  were  to 
recognise  in  all  that  God  gave  them  as  strangers  in 
the  land  of  promise,  the  rights  and  the  authority  of 
the  priests. 

Now,  if  we  make  the  distinction  between  the  two, 
all  believers  are  priests ;  ministers,  in  their  capacity  of 
ministers,  are  only  Levites.  Their  service  (besides  that 
which  is  towards  the  world,  a  character  which  the  dis- 
pensation did  not  bear,  and  which,  therefore,  is  not  the 
subject  here)  is  to  minister  to  the  priestly  joy  and 
service  of  the  saints  with  God.  Our  service  will  meet 
with  reward  in  heaven,  our  priestly  place  will  be  near- 
ness to  God  and  joy  in  Him. 

It  is  evident  that  partaking  in  spirit  (to  partake  in 
it  in  reality  is  of  course  impossible)  in  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ  for  sin,  in  eating  of  it  as  a  priest,  is  a  very  holy 
thing,  a  privilege  enjoyed  in  a  very  holy  place ;  every- 
thing is  specially  holiness  here. 

But  if,  on  the  one  hand,  priesthood  must  lead  the 
people  through  the  wilderness,  and  if  Moses's  rod  of 
authority  cannot  do  this,  if  it  can  only  smite  ;  on  the 
xvm. 


264  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

other,  there  must  be  a  provision  connected  with  it  fof 
removing  the  defilements  taking  place  during  the 
journey,  that  the  communion  of  the  people  with  Grod 
may  not  be  interrupted.  That  is  the  reason  why  the 
sacrifice  of  the  heifer  is  placed  here,  apart  from  all  the 
others,  because  it  was  prescribed  in  order  to  meet  the 
defilements  of  the  wilderness. 

But  if  the  consideration  of  Christ  (even  though  it 
be  Christ  offered  for  sin,  and  the  participation  in  His 
priestly  work,  in  connection  with  that  sacrifice)  was  a 
most  holy  thing  realised  in  the  communion  of  the  most 
holy  place  ;  being  occupied  with  that  sin,  even  in  a 
brother,  and  that  to  purify  him,  defiled  even  those  who 
were  not  guilty  of  it. 

These  are  the  subjects  of  chapter  xix.  What  follows 
is  the  ordinance  given  on  this  occasion.  To  touch  a 
dead  body  was  indeed  being  defiled  with  sin ;  for  sin 
is  here  considered  under  the  point  of  view  of  defile- 
ment which  precluded  the  entrance  into  the  court  of 
the  tabernacle.  Christ  is  presented  in  the  red  heifer 
as  unspotted  by  sin,  and  as  never  having  borne  the 
yoke  of  it  either;  but  He  is  led  forth  without  the 
camp,  as  being  wholly  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  The  priest 
who  brought  the  heifer  did  not  kill  it;  but  it  was 
killed  in  his  presence.  He  was  there  to  take  know- 
ledge of  the  deed. 

The  death  of  Christ  is  never  the  act  of  priesthood. 
The  heifer  was  completely  burned  without  the  camp, 
even  its  blood,  except  that  which  was  sprinkled  directly 
before  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  that  is,  where 
the  people  were  to  meet  God.  There  the  blood  was 
sprinkled  seven  times  (because  it  was  there  that  God 
met  with  His  people),  a  perfect  testimony  in  the  eyes 
of  God  to  the  atonement  made  for  sin.  They  had  access 
there  according  to  the  value  of  this  blood. 

The  priest  threw  into  the  fire  cedar- wood,  hyssop, 
and  scarlet  (that  is,   all  that  was  of  man,  and  his 


NUMBERS.  265 

human  glory  in  the  world).  "  From  the  cedar  down 
to  the  hyssop,"  is  the  expression  of  nature  from  her 
highest  elevation  to  her  lowest  depth.  Scarlet  is  ex- 
ternal glory  (the  world,  if  you  please).  The  whole  was 
burned  in  the  fire  which  consumed  Christ,  the  sacri- 
fice for  sin. 

Then,  if  anybody  contracted  defilement,  though  it 
were  merely  through  neglect,  in  whatever  way  it  might 
be,  God  took  account  of  the  defilement.  And  this  is 
a  solemn  and  important  fact:  God  provides  for  cleansing, 
but  in  no  case  can  tolerate  anything  in  His  presence 
unsuited  to  it.  It  might  seem  hard  in  an  inevitable 
case,  as  one  dying  suddenly  in  the  tent.  But  it  was  to 
shew  that  for  His  presence  God  judges  of  what  is 
suited  to  His  presence.  The  man  was  defiled  and  he 
could  not  go  into  God's  tabernacle. 

To  cleanse  the  defiled  person,  they  took  some 
running  water,  into  which  they  put  the  ashes  of  the 
heifer,  and  the  man  was  sprinkled  on  the  third  and  on 
the  seventh  days ;  then  he  was  clean :  signifying  that 
the  Spirit  of  God,  without  applying  anew  the  blood  to 
the  soul  (that  in  the  type  had  been  sprinkled  once  for 
all  when  the  people  met  God),  takes  the  sufferings  of 
Christ  (the  proof  that  sin  and  all  that  is  of  the  natural 
man  and  of  the  world  have  been  consumed  for  us  in 
His  expiatory  death),  and  applies  them  to  it. 

It  is  the  proof,  the  intimate  conviction,  that  nothing 
is  nor  can  be  imputed.  It  was  in  this  respect  wholly 
done  away  in  the  sacrifice,  whose  ashes  (the  witness 
that  it  was  consumed)  are  now  applied.  But  it  pro- 
duces upon  the  heart  the  deeply  painful  conviction 
that  it  has  got  defiled,  notwithstanding  redemption, 
and  by  the  sins  for  which  Christ  has  suffered  in  ac- 
complishing it.  We  have  found  our  will  and  pleasure, 
if  only  for  a  moment,  in  what  was  the  cause  of  His 
pain ;  and  this  in  the  face  of  His  sufferings  for  sin,  but, 
alas !  in  f orgetfulness  of  them — even  for  that  sin  the 

XIX. 


266  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

motions  of  which  we  yield  to  so  lightly  now :  a  feeling 
much  deeper  than  that  of  having  sins  imputed.  For 
it  is  in  reality  the  new  man,  in  his  best  feelings,  who 
judges  by  the  Spirit  and  according  to  God,  and  who 
takes  knowledge  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  of  sin, 
as  seen  in  Him  on  the  cross. 

The  first  feeling  is  bitterness,  although  without  the 
thought  of  imputation — ^bitterness,  precisely  because 
there  is  no  imputation,  and  that  we  have  sinned  against 
love  as  well  as  against  holiness,  and  that  we  must 
submit  to  that  conviction.  But  lastly  (and  it  seems  to 
me  it  is  the  reason  why  there  was  the  second  sprink- 
ling), it  is  the  consciousness  of  that  love,  and  of  the 
deep  grace  of  Jesus,  and  the  joy  of  being  perfectly 
clean,  through  the  work  of  that  love.  The  first  part 
of  the  cleansing  was  the  sense  of  the  horror  of  sinning 
against  grace ;  the  second,  the  mind  quite  cleared  from 
it  by  the  abounding  of  grace  over  the  sin. 

We  may  remark  that,  as  it  is  merely  the  needed 
purifying  for  the  way,  nothing  else  is  noticed;  no 
sacrifices,  as  in  the  case  of  the  leper.  There  it  was 
drawing  nigh  to  God,  according  to  the  value  of  Christ's 
work,  when  cleansed  from  sin.  Here  it  is  the  practical 
restoration  of  the  soul  inwardly.  There  is  no  sprink- 
ling with  blood :  the  purifying  is  by  water,  Christ's 
death  being  fully  brought  in  in  its  power  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  details  shew  the  exactness  of  God,  as  to 
these  defilements,  though  He  cleanses  us  from  them. 
They  shew  also  that  any  one  who  has  to  do  with 
the  sin  of  another,  though  it  be  in  the  way  of  duty 
to  cleanse  it,  is  defiled ;  not  as  the  guilty  person,  it 
is  true,  but  we  cannot  touch  sin  without  being  de- 
filed. The  value  of  grace  and  of  priesthood  is  also 
made  evident. 

Miriam  the  prophetess  dies ;  this  character  of  testi- 
mony is  closed.  Israel  grows  old,  so  to  speak,  in  the 
wilderness  ;  and  the  voice  which  sang  songs  of  triumph 


NUMBERS.  267 

in  coming  up  from  the  depths  of  the  Red  Sea  is  silent 
in  the  tomb.  Also  they  lacked  water.  The  journey- 
was  still  prolonged.  The  resources  were  far  from  in- 
creasing ;  on  the  contrary,  what  there  had  been  of  joy 
and  testimony  was  vanishing.  They  gather  themselves 
together  against  Moses  and  against  Aaron.  God  directs 
them  to  the  provision  He  had  made  against  murmur- 
ings.  If  we  have  just  witnessed  His  holiness,  we  see 
now  His  resources  and  His  blessing. 

"  Take  the  rod"  says  God — He  knows  of  no  other 
now — "  and  speak  unto  the  rock,  and  it  shall  give  forth 
its  water."  There  is  nothing  to  be  done  but  to  shew 
the  sign  of  grace  (of  priesthood  intervening  on  the 
part  of  God  in  the  grace  with  which  He  has  clothed 
His  authority),  and  to  speak  the  word,  and  the  wants 
of  the  people  shall  be  immediately  supplied.  It  was 
not  precisely,  that  grace  which  had  followed  the  people 
from  the  Red  Sea  to  Sinai ;  nor  was  it,  either,  authority 
punishing  sin  ;  but  it  was  grace  taking  priestly  know- 
ledge of  sin  and  wants ;  restoring  from  the  defilements 
of  the  one,  and  obtaining  all  that  met  the  others. 

But  Moses,  whilst  taking  the  rod  according  to  the 
commandment  of  God,  soured  by  the  rebellion  of  the 
people,  thinks  of  his  authority  and  their  rebellion ;  he 
does  not  apprehend  the  counsels  of  grace,  and  speaks 
unadvisedly:  "Must  we  fetch  you  water  out  of  this 
rock  ?"  Before,  it  was,  "  What  are  we  that  ye  murmur 
against  us  ?"  The  rebellion  of  the  people  and  the  con- 
tempt of  his  authority  have  got  a  firmer  hold  on  his 
mind  than  the  intelligence  of  the  grace  of  God;  "he 
smites  the  rock  with  his  rod."  The  first  time  this 
must  needs  have  been  done.  Christ  needs  to  have 
been  smitten,  that  water  might  come  out,  in  the  behalf 
of  His  people ;  but  there  can  be  no  repetition  of  this 
smiting. 

Now  under  the  priesthood  we  have  only  to  speak 
according  to  the  living  power  of  this  priesthood,  which 

XIX.,  XX. 


THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

God  has  established,  and  there  is  an  answer  in  grace  to 
all  our  wants.  The  fruit  and  the  blossom  would  be 
spoiled,  if  I  may  so  speak,  by  smiting  with  it.  It  is 
not  the  thought  presented  in  it.  Moses  did  not  sanctify 
God ;  he  did  not  sufficiently  value  the  character  which 
God  had  assumed ;  he  did  not  respect  God  in  the  posi- 
tion He  had  deigned  to  take ;  but  God  sanctified  Him- 
self the  more,  by  acting  in  grace  and  quenching  the 
thirst  of  the  people  in  spite  of  this.  Moses  glorified 
himself,  and  before  God  he  was  abased.  He  did  not 
know  how  to  abandon  the  position  he  had  been  placed 
in,  to  have  sympathy  with  the  thoughts  of  the  abound- 
ing, sovereign,  and  good  grace  of  his  God,  which  sur- 
passed in  compassion  the  justice  and  authority  under 
which  He  had  placed  His  people.  God,  however,  does 
not  forsake  His  poor  servant.  How  insignificant  we 
are  in  comparison  with  His  grace !  The  grace  of  priest- 
hood can  alone  bring  such  a  people  as  we  are  through 
the  wilderness.* 

But  the  wandering  of  Israel  is  drawing  towards  its 
close ;  and  we  now  come  to  the  enemies  who  oppose 
its  ending,  and  the  entering  of  the  people  into  the 
desired  land,  that  land  of  promise,  so  long  sought 
after.  Edom,  full  of  jealousy,  will  not  let  the  way  be 
shortened ;  Israel  turns  away  from  him.  There  are 
people  who  oppose  us,  and  from  whom  it  is  right  to 
turn  away,  on  account  of  some  external  relation  exist- 
ing between  them  and  ourselves,  though  they  are 
animated  with  an  implacable  hatred :  we  must  know 
how  to  discern  them.  God  will  judge  them  in  His  own 
time ;  our  hand  must  not  be  upon  them.     As  to  the 

*  This  is  the  character  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews :  per- 
fectness  through  Christ's  offering  as  to  conscience ;  but  going 
through  the  wilderness,  and  so  constant  dependence  but  infallible 
faithfulness  in  Him  on  whom  we  depend.  The  mediatorial  cha- 
racter of  this  is  priesthood,  consequent  upon  our  sins  being  put 
away. 


NUMBERS.  269 

enemies  of  God,  they  must  be  our  enemies ;  where  the 
power  o£  the  enemy  is  evident,  it  is  God's  war.  But 
we  meet  in  the  way  with  those  who  are  descended 
from  the  sources  of  promise,  although  after  the  flesh, 
and  who  are  characterised  by  the  flesh ;  we  leave  them 
to  God :  it  is  His  prerogative  to  judge  of  them.  The 
occasion  for  war  is  not  apparent;  it  would  not  be 
legitimate  for  the  people.  Now  Aaron  also  departs. 
Service  in  the  end  takes  another  character.* 

The  question  is  not  here  to  conduct  the  people  with 
patience  through  the  wilderness,  where  the  flesh  mani- 
fested itself ;  but  there  are  enemies  and  difficulties  to 
be  met;  for  there  are  difficulties  distinct  from  the 
conduct  and  the  patience  of  life.  The  Israelites  fight 
with  the  Canaanites  in  the  south,  though  they  have 

*  With  his  death  the  wilderness  history  closes.  Provision  for 
defilement  on  the  way  had  been  given.  Moses  clings  to  law,  and 
does  not  avail  himself  of  Aaron's  rod  (priesthood  grace),  and  on 
this  footing  cannot  take  the  people  into  the  land.  We  have  this 
order  in  this  transition  period :  provision  for  defilement  on  the 
way  (chap,  xix.) ;  the  priesthood  given  up,  and  so  no  entrance 
into  the  land ;  then  the  perpetual  hatred  of  the  elder  brother, 
the  outward  fleshly  descendant  of  the  risen  man  in  relentless 
opposition  to  the  called  people.  Aaron  dies,  and  wilderness 
grace  closes ;  the  power  of  Satan  overcome,  and  through  weari- 
ness (their  own  fault  and  want  of  faith)  the  deadliness  of  sin 
comes  in,  and  the  great  remedy ;  Arad's  power  being  resisted  is 
destroyed.  But  fi-om  chapter  xxi.  4,  it  is  the  state  of  the  soul, 
the  heart  gone  back  to  Egypt;  Christ  (the  manna)  is  despised.  The 
power  of  the  enemy  when  they  were  faithful  was  nothing.  Un- 
faithfulness, murmuring  against  God,  brings  them  into  the  sting 
of  death.  If  they  despise  the  bread  of  life,  they  get  the  fatal 
sting  of  death  in  judgment.  There  was  healing' by  the  look  of 
faith  on  Christ  lifted  up  for  us.  This  is  not  priesthood  for  the 
journey,  but  an  absolute  remedy  for  death  by  sin.  It  is  in 
general  what  God  is  for  the  people  outside  wilderness  care. 
Then  the  refreshings  of  the  Spirit  and  word — the  digged  well.  We 
have,  further,  victorious  power  over  all  their  enemies,  though 
outside  Jordan  and  uncircumcised.  It  is  God  for  His  people  in 
spite  of  their  imperfect  state  ;  closing  with  theu'  hill  justification. 
character,  and  blessing  as  in  God's  mind. 
XX.,  XXL 


270  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

not  got  into  the  land.  But  the  king  of  the  Canaanites 
has  been  informed  of  their  coming  by  the  presence  of 
the  spies.  This  was  another  fruit  of  the  want  of  bold- 
ness of  faith  which  had  caused  them  to  be  sent.  How 
little  we  gain  by  the  prudence  of  unbelief !  It  gives 
occasion  to  the  power  and  attacks  of  the  enemy. 

However,  though  these  enemies  seem  to  prevail  at 
first  when  Israel  allow  themselves  to  be  attacked,  when 
the  Israelites  are  ready  utterly  to  destroy  them  God 
delivers  them  up  to  them.  Take  notice  of  this.  But 
the  people,  wearied,  murmur  again,  for  the  way  was 
long.  They  were  fighting  with  the  Canaanites  with- 
out yet  possessing  the  land;  the  question  was  only 
about  destroying  their  power  and  yet  possessing 
nothing.  It  was  the  power  of  evil  and  that  only,  and 
resisted  and  put  down  as  such.  It  was  for  God's  sake 
and  His  glory  only.  On  their  murmurs  God  interferes 
and  makes  them  feel  all  the  power  of  the  enemy,  the 
old  serpent.  Christ  made  sin  for  us  is  the  only  per- 
fectly efficacious  remedy.  The  mere  sight  of  that 
wonder  procures  healing,  for  the  efficacy  is  in  the 
thins:  itself  before  God.  Faith  sees  Christ  made  sin 
for  us. 

The  question  is  not  here  about  leading  the  people, 
but  of  answering  the  judgment  of  God,  either  final  or 
in  the  way  of  chastening,  and  the  power  of  the  enemy 
against  us  in  the  face  of  that  judgment,  and  even  as 
the  effect  of  that  judgment.  In  such  a  case  the  ques- 
tion is  between  our  souls  and  God  ;  it  is  a  question  of 
death,  or  simply  of  the  death  of  Jesus.  We  must 
submit  to  that,  as  being  In  an  irremediable  condition, 
and,  submitting  to  God's  righteousness,  look  to  His 
ordinance — that  is,  to  Christ  lifted  up  for  us. 

Next,  Israel  goes  forward,  but  they  are  not  yet  in 
the  land.  God  relieves  and  refreshes  them  of  His  own 
free  grace,  without  their  murmuring.  He  gathers  the 
people.     Israel  celebrates  anew,  close  by  the  land,  the 


NUMBERS.  271 

wells  which  are  found  in  the  wilderness.  They  can 
now  say  themselves,  "  Spring  up,  0  well ;"  no  more 
rock  to  smite,  no  more  murmurings  near  the  land. 
Life  at  the  end  of  their  course  is  no  longer  the  ques- 
tion; it  is  salvation  from  the  deadly  wound  of  the 
serpent.  They  are  healed ;  they  walk  and  drink  with 
joy  and  songs  of  praise.  They  dug — for  their  activity 
displayed  itself  in  the  presence  of  the  grace  of  God — 
and  the  water  sprang  up  in  the  wilderness. 

We  meet  with  people  with  whom  we  do  not  wish  to 
have  war,  but  they  will  not  let  us  pass  peaceably.  Our 
warfare  is  with  the  possessors  of  our  inheritance  be- 
yond Jordan.  If  we  are  attacked,  we  must  defend 
ourselves;  but  we  are  not  to  be  aggressors.  Israel 
wishes  to  pass  quietly  through  the  land  of  the  Amor- 
ites ;  but  these  will  not  allow  it,  and  they  suffer  the 
consequences  of  the  war  they  had  sought  against  the 
people  of  God.  Israel  takes  their  cities,  and  begins 
already  on  this  side  Jordan  to  realise,  as  if  beforehand, 
the  possession  of  the  promise. 

Moab  also  opposes  in  vain.  Now  they  are  in  the 
plains  of  Moab,  having  only  Jordan  between  them  and 
the  land  of  their  rest.  But  had  they  a  right  to  enter 
there  ?  If  the  enemy  cannot  oppose  by  force,  he  will 
try  another  way,  by  putting  under  the  curse  the  people 
who  well  deserved  it. 

Balak  sends  for  Balaam.  The  grand  question  in  this 
touching  scene  is  this,  "  Can  Satan  succeed  in  cursing 
the  people  of  God,  so  as  to  prevent  their  entrance  into 
the  land  of  promise  ?"  *   It  is  not  merely  a  question  of 

*  It  is  of  the  highest  interest  to  see  the  special  character  of 
this  prophecy. 

It  is  God  who,  of  His  own  will,  interferes  to  take  the  part  of 
His  people  against  the  enemy,  and  that  even  without  their 
knowing  it,  or  asking  for  it.  It  is  not,  as  ahnost  all  prophecies 
are,  an  appeal  to  the  conscience  of  the  people,  accompanied  by 
promises  calculated  to  sustain  the  faith  of  the  remnant  in  the 
XXIL 


272  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

redemption  and  of  the  joy  of  redemption  at  the  begin- 
ning of  their  course,  but  in  the  end,  when  all  their 
unfaithfulness  has  been  manifested — their  unfaithful- 
ness even  after  the  Lord  has  brought  them  to  Himself. 
Can  Satan  succeed  then  ?    No. 

When  Moses,  in  those  same  plains,  has  to  say,  with 
regard  to  their  conduct  towards  God,  "  Ye  have  been 
rebellious  against  the  Lord  from  the  day  that  I 
knew  you,"  (and  indeed,  they  had  been  excessively 
froward,  a  most  stiff-necked  people ;  do  we  not  know 
this  well  ?),  God  says  by  the  mouth  of  Balaam,  the  in- 
voluntary witness  of  the  truth,  "  He  hath  not  beheld 
iniquity  in  Jacob,  neither  hath  he  seen  perverseness  in 
Israel."  What  a  testimony  !  What  wonderful  grace ! 
What  perfection  in  the  ways  of  God  !  God  sees  aright  ; 
He  makes  no  mistakes.  He  speaks  the  truth  according 
to  the  perf  ectness  of  His  infinite  intelligence ;  and  it  is 
because  it  is  infinite,  that  He  can  see  no  iniquity  in  the 
redeemed  people.  How  could  He  see  any  in  those  who 
are  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  ?  Nor  is  it  His 
mind  to  see  it. 

In  His  own  dealings  with  the  people  He  will  see 
everything,  take  knowledge  of  everything ;  but  with 
the  accuser  it  is  a  question  of  righteousness.  God  only 
sees  this,  that,  according  to  the  counsels  of  His  grace, 
He  has  given  a  ransom ;  the  sins  of  His  people  have 
been  atoned  for.     He  could  not  in  justice  see  those 

midfft  of  the  gainsayers.  The  people  know  nothing  about  it ; 
they  are  perhaps  still  nmrmuring  in  their  tents  (so  beautiful  in 
the  eyes  of  him  who  had  the  vision  of  the  Almighty)  against  the 
ways  of  God  with  them.  It  is  God  declaring  His  own  thoughts 
and  confounding  the  mahce  of  Satan,  the  enemy  He  has  to  do 
with.  That  is  the  reason  why  this  prophecy  is  so  complete ;  pre- 
senting to  us,  in  spirit,  our  whole  portion  (literally  it  is  that  of 
Israel,  as  in  the  fourth  prophecy  is  evident),  separation,  justifica- 
tion, beauty  in  the  eyes  of  God  (all  that  corresponds  with  the 
presence  of  the  Spirit  of  God),  and  the  crown  of  glory  in  the 
coming  of  the  star  of  Jacob,  of  Christ  Himself,  in  glory. 


NUMBERS.  273 

sins.  The  mouth  of  the  accuser  is  therefore  obliged 
to  confess  that  there  are  none,  and  that  there  is  no 
power  of  the  enemy  against  Jacob.  And  the  ground 
is  clearly  taught :  according  to  this  time  it  shall  be  said 
of  Jacob  and  Israel,  what  hath  God  wrought  ?  Not 
said  of  Gcd,  but  of  Israel ;  and  not  what  hath  Israel 
wrought,  but  what  hath  God  wrought  ?  Israel  had  the 
place,  but  the  work  was  God's  work.  This  is  very 
perfect. 

What  is  peculiarly  blessed  and  comforting  in  this  is, 
that  God  acts  and  judges  from  His  own  thoughts. 
From  beginning  to  end  He  has  had  thoughts  about  us ; 
He  has  done  what  was  needed  to  reconcile  all  His 
ways,  in  the  accomplishment  of  them,  with  eternal 
righteousness ;  but  He  has  these  thoughts,  and  acts 
towards  us  according  to  them.  It  is  these  faith  appre- 
hends, accepts,  and  builds  on.  Hence  joy  and  peace  ; 
while  the  presence  of  God  in  the  midst  of  an  accepted 
people  to  whom  a  new  nature  has  been  given,  and  His 
judging  all  there  secures  practically  the  holiness 
which  He  cannot  dispense  with,  or  judges  departure 
from  it,  so  as  to  vindicate  His  name.  But  here  it  is 
God  acting,  judging,  in  spite  of  all,  according  to  His 
own  thoughts. 

Balaam  was  a  sad  character.  Forced  to  see  from 
afar  off  the  blessing  of  God  upon  His  people,  when  he 
is  near,  and  actuated  by  his  own  heart  and  will,  he  sees 
nothing  but  the  way  of  error,  into  which  he  wishes  to 
drag  them  that  they  might  forfeit  that  blessing  (if  this 
were  possible),  reasoning  upon  this  ground,  that  the 
righteous  God  could  not  bless  a  sinful  people.  One 
cannot  think  of  any  iniquity  worse  than  that. 

We  shall  say  a  few  words  as  to  his  typical  character. 
Let  us  pursue  the  history.  Balak  seeks  him.  Balaam 
wishes  to  inquire  of  Jehovah  either  from  instinctive 
fear,  or  to  attach,  in  the  sight  of  others,  the  importance 
of  the  name  of  Jehovah  to  what  he  does.  Effectively 
L.  I.  XXII.  T 


274  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

God  does  interfere,  and  even  goes  first  to  Balaam.  He 
takes  the  matter  in  hand,  and  has  power  over  the  unjust 
mind  of  Balaam  against  his  will ;  for  Balaam  has  no 
understanding  of  the  mind  of  God.  God  said,  "  Thou 
shalt  not  go :  they  are  hlessedJ'  What  is  his  answer  ? 
"  Jehovah  refuseth  to  give  me  leave  to  go."  He  would 
gladly  have  gone ;  his  heart  was  set  upon  the  reward 
of  Balak ;  but  he  fears  before  God.  The  blessing  of 
the  people  does  not  come  into  his  mind ;  he  is  a  com- 
plete stranger  to  the  generosity  of  grace — insensible 
to  the  thought  of  their  being  blessed  of  God,  of  delight 
in  His  blessing  on  His  people. 

Consequently,  when  there  is  a  renewal  of  the  tempta- 
tion, he  says  that  he  cannot  transgress  the  command- 
ment of  Jehovah  his  God :  he  puts  on  piety,  and,  in 
reality,  he  was  not  entirely  without  sincerity,  for  God 
held  him  close,  and,  indeed,  allowed  all  this.  But,  at 
the  same  time,  Balaam  induces  the  messengers  of  Balak 
to  tarry  and  see  what  God  would  say  further.  What 
did  he  want  to  know  more  about  an  invitation  to  curse 
that  people,  who,  God  had  told  him,  were  blessed  ?  He 
had  no  sympathy  whatever  with  the  thoughts  of  the 
heart  of  God,  none  with  Himself ;  he  was  governed  by 
the  fear  of  consequences.  Otherwise,  he  would  have 
been  so  happy  in  the  blessing  of  the  people,  that  he 
would  have  shuddered  at  the  idea  of  cursing  what  God 
had  blessed.  God,  however,  will  use  him,  to  give  a 
glorious  testimony  on  behalf  of  His  people,  whilst,  at 
the  same  time,  condemning  the  crooked  ways  of  the 
prophet,  for  they  were  indeed  crooked.  He  shews  him 
his  perverseness,  his  folly,  to  be  more  stupid  than  the 
ass  he  was  riding ;  but,  at  the  same  time.  He  makes 
him  go  on  his  way. 

This  meeting  in  the  way  does  serve  to  force  him, 
through  fear,  to  utter  faithfully  what  God  should  put 
into  his  mouth.  Balaam  goes  to  meet — he  does  not 
say  what.     It  is  plain  (chap.  xxiv.  1)  that  he  had 


NUMBERS.  275 

mixed  enchantments  with  the  profession  of  the  name 
of  Jehovah,  and  that  he  had  thus  been  the  enemy's 
instrument,  with  the  credit  of  Jehovah's  name — a 
deeply  solemn  case.  He  was  thus  going  to  meet  the 
mysterious  power  which  came  there,  and  Elohim  came 
to  meet  him.  God  restrains  and  hinders  on  the  behalf 
of  His  people  all  power  of  the  enemy,  and  causes 
Balaam  to  say  what  He  wishes  to  be  said.  Balaam 
looks  upon  Israel  from  above,  and  utters  his  prophecy. 

This  prophecy  is  divided  into  four  parts.  It  has 
Israel  for  its  object;  but,  as  to  the  principle  of  it,  it 
applies  also  to  the  assembly. 

The  first  prophecy  announces  the  separation  of  the 
people  from  the  world.  "  The  people  shall  diuell  alone," 
separated  unto  God,  a  people  not  reckoned  among  the 
nations. 

The  second  prophecy  declares  that  God  does  not  re- 
pent. God  has  blessed  them ;  shall  He  not  confirm 
what  He  has  just  said  ?  The  people  are  justified,  and 
without  sin  in  the  eyes  of  God.  God  it  was  who  had 
brought  them  out  of  Egypt.  This  people  had  "the 
strength  of  the  unicorn,"  and  the  enemy,  whom  he 
had  sought  (in  his  enchantments),  had  no  power  against 
them. 

Balaam,  seeing  at  last  that  God  was  bent  upon  bless- 
ing, yields  to  the  power  of  God,  goes  no  longer  to  the 
meeting  of  enchantments,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  comes 
upon  him.  The  justification  of  the  people  being  now 
declared,  the  Spirit  of  God  can  bear  testimony  to  them, 
instead  of  confining  His  testimony  to  the  thoughts 
and  intentions  of  God.  Balaam  sees  them  from  above ; 
seeing  the  vision  of  the  Almighty,  he  sees  the  people 
according  to  the  thoughts  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  seen 
in  the  mind  of  God  from  above.  The  eyes  of  the 
prophet  are  open.  And  remark,  here,  that  it  is  neither 
the  anticipation  of  Canaan,  nor  Israel  in  their  perma- 
nent habitations :  Balaam  turns  his  face  towards  the 

XXIII.,  XXIV, 


276  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

wilderness  and  sees  Israel  abiding  in  their  tents.  There 
the  Spirit  sees  them,  and  declares  the  beauty  and  the 
order  of  the  people  in  the  eyes  of  God.  The  water  of 
the  refreshing  of  God  was  also  always  with  them 
there ;  they  were  as  trees  that  Jehovah  had  planted, 
therefore  will  they  be  great  amongst  the  nations,  a 
source  of  power  and  joy.  They  drink  from  the  sources 
of  God,  and  pour  out  from  them  abundantly  for  others. 
God  had  brought  them  out  of  Egypt,  they  were  the 
work  of  God,  and  the  power  of  God  was  to  go  with 
them  against  their  enemies. 

We  get  here,  thirdly,  then,  beauty,  a  freshness  the 
sources  of  which  do  not  dry  up,  and  power  (what  the 
Spirit  does  for  the  assembly). 

Then,  in  the  fourth  place  is  the  coming  of  Christ, 
the  Star  of  Jacob,  who  crowns  the  glory  of  the  people. 
Only,  as  it  comes  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  it  is  in  judg- 
ment. With  regard  to  us,  it  will  be  to  take  us  hence, 
in  order  to  make  us  participate  in  the  joy  of  His  pre- 
sence, to  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb. 

In  a  word,  we  see  the  separation  of  the  people  from 
the  world ;  their  justification ;  their  order,  their  beauty, 
as  planted  by  God  near  the  everlasting  sources  of  the 
river  of  God;  and  then  the  coming  of  Christ.  The 
prophecy  is  perfectly  beautiful.  Remark,  too,  the 
prophecies,  in  the  renewed  effort  to  bring  a  curse  on 
them,  are  not  repetitions.  Each  such  effort  brings  out 
something  more  of  what  God  had  in  His  mind  for  His 
people  for  blessing.  It  is  not  without  interest  to  see 
how  Balak  uses  all  human  and  superstitious  means  to 
bring  the  curse  on  them.  He  had  no  idea  of  God,  and 
it  was  with  God  he  had  to  do. 

It  is  very  important  for  us  to  see  sometimes  the 
church  from  above,  in  the  wilderness,  but  in  the  beauty 
of  the  thoughts  of  God,  a  pearl  without  price.  In  the 
midst  of  the  camp  below,  in  the  desert,  what  murmur- 
ings,    complainings ;    how    much    indifference,   what 


NUMBERS.  277 

carnal  motives,  would  have  been  witnessed  and  heard! 
From  above,  for  him  who  has  the  vision  o£  God,  who 
has  his  eyes  open,  everything  is  beautiful.  "  I  stand  in 
doubt  of  you,"  says  the  apostle ;  and  immediately  after, 
"I  have  confidence  in  you,  through  the  Lord!'  We 
must  get  up  to  Him,  and  we  shall  have  His  thoughts 
of  grace,  who  sees  the  beauty  of  His  people,  of  His 
assembly,  through  everything  else,  for  it  is  beautiful. 
But  for  this,  one  would  be  either  entirely  discouraged  or 
satisfied  with  evil.  This  vision  of  God  removes  these 
two  thoughts  at  once. 

We  see  the  final  judgment  of  the  ships  of  Chittim 
(that  is,  of  the  west,  north  of  the  Mediterranean),  and 
that  of  their  chief,  after  he  has  afilicted  Asshur  and 
Eber  also.  It  will  be  the  terrible  judgment  of  God  at 
the  end  of  this  age. 

A  few  words  more  on  the  position  of  Balaam. 

At  the  end  of  a  dispensation  based  on  any  know- 
ledge whatever  of  God,  when  faith  is  lost  and  profes- 
sion retained,  this  last  obtains  a  renown  of  which  men 
glory  (as  now,  of  the  name  of  Christianity).  Satan 
uses  it :  power  is  sought  from  him.  They  go  to  meet 
enchantments  ;  because,  whilst  glorying  in  the  revealed 
name  of  God,  they  seek  to  satisfy  their  own  lusts ;  and 
the  importance  of  the  name  of  God  is  tacked  on  to 
the  work  of  the  devil.  However,  God  is  acknowledged 
up  to  a  certain  point.  They  fear  Him,  and  He  may 
interfere ;  hut  the  system  is  diabolical,  under  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  with  a  ]oartial  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  a 
dread  ivhich  recognises  Him.  as  an  object  of  fear.  The 
people  of  God  are  preserved ;  but  it  is  a  very  solemn 
thought,  and  it  is  truly  the  history  of  the  christian 
system. 

At  last,  the  unhappy  Balaam,  whose  heart  was  in 
the  bond  of  iniquity,  seeing  that  he  cannot  curse  by 
the  power  of  Satan,  seeks  to  frustrate  the  blessing  of 

XXIV. 


278  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

God  by  leading  the  people  into  sin  and  idolatry.  As 
regards  the  people,  he  is  but  too  successful.  God  sends 
chastisement;  and,  while  the  people  are  humbling 
themselves,  the  enormity  of  the  evil  excites  the  indig- 
nation of  Phinehas,  who,  acting  with  an  energy  suitable 
to  the  circumstances,  stops  the  plague  and  acquires  a 
perpetual  priesthood  in  his  family. 

The  journey  being  now  ended,  God  numbers  afresh 
His  people,  and  counts  them  by  name,  as  heirs  ready  to 
take  possession  of  the  inheritance.  He  has  kept  them 
through  everything,  and  brought  them  as  far  as 
Canaan;  their  raiment  even  did  not  wax  old.  He 
settles  the  details  of  the  inheritance,  and  appoints  a 
leader  in  the  room  of  Moses  to  introduce  them  into 
the  land  of  promise.  Chapter  xxvi.  presents  us  with 
the  numbering. 

In  the  beginning  of  chapter  xxvii.  are  details  upon 
the  order  according  to  which  they  were  to  inherit. 
Moses  is  favoured  with  a  view  of  the  land,  and  the 
people  are  placed  under  the  conduct  of  Joshua  to 
enter  therein.  Moses  and  Aaron  had  led  them  through 
the  wilderness ;  but  here  it  is  a  new  scene,  and  Joshua 
(as  to  the  assembly,  Christ  in  the  power  of  His  Spirit) 
is  appointed  to  conquer  the  land.  But  he  is  dependent 
on  the  priesthood  in  his  progress  onward ;  as  effectively 
the  presence  and  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are 
dependent  on  the  presence  of  Christ  in  the  holy  place. 

In  chapters  xxviii.  and  xxix.  we  have  the  worship  of 
the  people,  the  sacrifices  which  are  the  meat  of  God. 
We  shall  dwell  a  little  on  these  chapters.  They  are  not 
the  ways  of  God,  and  the  gathering  together  the  people 
to  Himself,  as  in  chapter  xxxu.  of  Leviticus,  but  the 
offerings  themselves  as  offered  to  God  and  especially 
those  of  sweet  savour,  made  by  fire,  except  that  which 
was  purely  accessory. 

First,  there  are  lambs  for  the  regular  daily  service ; 


NUMBERS.  279 

that  is,  for  that  of  the  morning  and  evening,  and,  for 
that  of  the  sabbath,  two  lambs;  then,  bullocks  and 
goats  also  for  the  extraordinary  feasts.  The  lamb  has 
the  most  simple  meaning ;  it  is  the  constant  presenta- 
tion of  the  value  of  Christ  and  so  of  believers  in  Him, 
the  true  Lamb  of  God — the  sweet  savour  of  His  sacri- 
fice ascending  continually,  by  day  and  by  night ;  and 
when  the  true  sabbath  is  come,  its  efficacy  will  only 
ascend  more  abundantly,  as  a  matter  of  intelligence 
and  application.  This  can  be  said  as  regards  God  Him- 
self, as  to  the  increased  display  of  the  fruit  of  the 
travail  of  the  Saviour's  soul. 

The  bullocks  seem  to  me  to  represent  rather  the 
energy  of  the  devotedness  of  persons  in  their  estimate 
of  that  sacrifice.  It  was  the  largest  thing  that  could 
be  offered :  still  having  regard  to  the  sacrifice  of  Christ 
and  the  price  set  upon  it. 

The  ram  was  always  a  victim  of  consecration,  or  of 
amends  for  some  violation  of  the  rights  of  consecration. 

As  to  the  number  of  these  two  last  kinds,  there  were 
in  general  two  bullocks,  a  ram,  and  seven  lambs ;  an 
additional  bullock  and  ram  the  first  day  of  the  seventh 
month ;  one  bullock,  one  ram,  seven  lambs  the  tenth  of 
that  month;  and  the  decreasing  number  of  the  feast  of 
tabernacles. 

It  appears  to  me  that  all  this  gives  the  testimony  of 
the  worship  rendered  to  God  upon  the  earth. 

Thus,  when  the  testimony  is  renewed,  when  God 
revives  the  light  which  produces  it,  the  first  feast 
noticed  here,  the  answer  on  the  part  of  man  is  simple 
and  perfect — the  two  bullocks  (as  there  were  two 
lambs  on  the  sabbath  day),  the  full  and  complete  testi- 
mony to  the  devotedness  of  man,  for  two  gave  a  valid 
testimony.  The  ram  of  consecration  is  the  estimate  of 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  fully  developed.  Man  being 
still  down  here,  and  sin  not  out  of  question,  the  goat 
was  added  as  an  offering  for  sin. 

XXV.-XXVIII. 


280  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

If  the  worship  of  the  people  was  in  connection  with 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  (chap,  xxviii.  17),  it  was  the 
same  thing ;  so  in  the  case  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
in  gathering  together.  (Ver.  26.)  It  was  the  exercise 
of  power  on  the  part  of  God  which  made  an  oppor- 
tunity for  worship;  the  answer  on  the  part  of  the 
people  was  the  same. 

The  first  day  of  the  seventh  month  had  reference 
to  the  recall  of  Israel,  which  was  a  speciality,  the 
renewal,  according  to  the  value  of  Christ's  work,  of 
God's  connection  with  the  earth,  and  especially  with 
Israel.  Hence  besides  the  regular  recognition  of  grace 
on  the  first  of  the  month,  an  additional  bullock,  ram, 
and  seven  lambs  were  offered.  The  general  testimony 
or  answer  to  Christ's  work  was  offered,  but  a  special 
and  partial  one  besides,  for  the  earthly  restoration  of 
Israel.  So  on  the  day  of  atonement,  when  Israel, 
seeing  the  Lord,  will  be  fully  restored  in  grace.  The 
general  and  complete  testimony,  when  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which 
allowed  the  Gentiles  also  to  come  in  and  thus  extended 
to  the  perfect  testimony  of  the  relations  between  God 
and  man,  produced,  as  thus  witnessed  in  the  offer- 
ings, an  answer  from  below  which  fully  recognised  the 
good  which  God  had  done,  and  the  relations  established 
thereupon,  in  being  to  Him  according  to  the  sweet 
savour  of  Christ,  either  in  consecration  or  in  the  in- 
telligent estimate  of  the  offering  of  Christ.  The 
unction  of  the  Spirit  and  joy  accompanied  it.  And 
the  offering  took  place  all  the  seven  days  of  the  feast, 
a  testimony  to  its  completeness. 

In  the  former  case,  then,  that  is  at  the  feast  of  the 
first  day  of  the  seventh  month,  there  was  one  bullock 
added  as  witness  of  a  special  and  peculiar  (but  at  the 
same  time  partial)  work,  but  the  general  testimony  to 
the  value  of  Christ's  sacrifice  on  which  it  depended 
was  maintained. 


NUMBERS.  281 

It  is  evident  that  the  same  principle  applies  to  the 
tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month.  It  is  the  application 
of  the  atonement  of  Christ  to  Israel  on  earth.  But  it 
was  the  simple  apprehension  of  the  worth  of  Christ's 
sacrifice ;  its  proper  value  before  God.  The  principle 
of  consecration  and  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  sacrifice 
remained  the  same. 

The  feast  of  tabernacles  introduced  another  order  of 
ideas,  at  least  a  new  development  of  those  ideas ;  it  is 
the  coming  dispensation.  There  is  no  perfection  in 
that  which  is  offered  joyfully  of  one's  own  free  will  to 
God;  but  that  is  nearly  realised — thirteen  bullocks 
are  oflfered.  The  millennium  will  bring  upon  earth  a 
joy  of  worship  and  thanksgiving,  which  (Satan  being 
bound,  and  the  blessing  of  the  reign  of  Christ  being 
spread  everywhere)  will  be,  externally  at  least,  almost 
perfect. 

The  two  rams  manifest  the  testimony  of  abundant 
consecration,  and  perhaps  outwardly  the  introduction 
of  Jews  and  Gentiles  (not  consecrated  in  one  body, 
but)  adequate  witnesses  upon  earth  in  a  distinct  manner 
of  this  consecration  to  God. 

Then  the  testimony  of  the  perfectness  of  the  work 
of  Christ  being  full,  upon  earth,  either  for  Israel  or 
for  the  blessing  of  the  Gentiles,  its  complete  efiicacy 
was  manifested  upon  earth  ;  and  the  question  here  is 
only  about  this  manifestation  upon  earth  (understood 
by  faith,  however).     There  were  fourteen  lambs. 

There  is,  however,  declension  in  this  devotedness  of 
joy  and  testimony  towards  God ;  it  does  not  cease  from 
being  complete,  it  is  true ;  but  its  abundance  gradually 
ceases  to  manifest  itself  as  it  did  at  the  beginning. 
The  thing,  as  established  of  God,  remains  in  its  perfec- 
tion. (Ver.  32.)  This  was  found  in  the  seventh  day, 
which  completed  the  part  purely  earthly. 

On  the  eighth  day,  we  have  only  one  bullock,  one 
ram,  and  seven  lambs.    It  was  the  counterpart  of  what 

XXIX. 


282  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

was  special  to  the  day  of  atonement,  and  the  first  day 
of  the  seventh  month :  for,  if  this  last  designated  Israel 
alone  brought  back  to  God,  the  eighth  day,  on  the 
other  hand,  designates  that  which  was  outside  earthly 
perfection,  and  the  heavenly  people  apart.  This,  it 
seems  to  me,  is  the  general  idea  of  what  the  Spirit  of 
God  gives  us  in  this  passage. 

Chapter  xxx.  is  the  case  of  the  vows  of  women, 
which  has  reference  also  to  the  fate  of  Israel,  who  have 
indeed  taken  these  vows  upon  themselves,  in  the 
hearing  of  God,  and  He  has  not  disannulled  them  in  His 
government  here  below;  and  Israel  have  continued 
responsible  to  the  vow  wherewith  they  have  bound 
themselves,  and  of  which,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
precious  Saviour  has  been  obliged  to  take  the  burden 
upon  Himself. 

War  is  found  in  the  wilderness  (though  it  is  not 
characteristic  of  it)  whenever  we  fall  into  the  snares 
the  enemy  there  lays  for  us.  There  are  always  conflicts 
in  the  heavenly  places  in  order  to  the  enjoyment  of  the 
things  promised  there.  But  in  the  wilderness  it  is 
patience  which  is  in  exercise. 

But  if  there  be  failure,  if  we  fall  into  idolatry, 
if  we  commit  fornication  with  the  world  by  yielding 
to  its  baits,  if  in  any  way  whatever  we  contract 
friendship  with  the  world  in  the  desert,  we  make  wars 
for  ourselves,  without  having  even  the  advantage  of 
acquiring,  in  this  kind  of  warfare,  any  spiritual  ground. 
God  is  obliged  to  make  our  relations  with  the  world 
undergo  a  total  change.  If  we  had  not  formed  intima- 
cies with  them,  we  should  not  have  had  that  trouble ; 
but,  since  as  our  friends  they  deceive  us,  we  must 
become  enemies.  Having  no  relations  whatever  with 
them  is  our  proper  and  peaceful  position. 

How  often  we  must  act  the  part  of  enemies  with 
the  world,  because  we  have  sought  to  have  to  do  with 
them  as  friends,  and  they  were  a  snare  to  our  souls  I 


NUMBERS.  283 

However,  God  gives  a  complete  victory  as  soon  as  we 
treat  them  as  foes:  only,  all  that  seduced  must  be 
utterly  destroyed.  There  must  be  nothing  spared,  no 
concession. 

The  Lord  orders  also  concerning  the  joy  resulting 
from  the  wars  of  His  people  with  their  enemies.  He 
chooses  whom  He  will  for  the  war,  and  honours  them  ; 
but  He  will  also  honour,  in  their  place,  those  who  have 
been  left  behind  according  to  His  sovereign  will,  and 
who  have  faithfully  discharged  the  perhaps  less 
arduous  task  allotted  to  them ;  but  who  have,  however, 
done  it  according  to  His  will.  God  Himself  is  also 
recognised  there  in  the  Levites  and  the  priests. 

There  is  another  tiling  connected  with  this :  if  we 
have  occasioned  wars  out  of  Canaan,  it  is  also  through 
the  indispensable  wars  of  the  people  of  God  against 
those  who  opposed  their  march  through  the  wilderness, 
that  they  have  acquired  a  good  land,  and,  up  to  a  cer- 
tain point,  rest,  on  this  side  Jordan,  that  river  of  death 
which  serves  as  a  boundary  to  the  true  land  of  promise. 

Having  possessions  down  here  to  which  the  heart 
clings,  the  heart  clings  also  to  the  blessings  which  are 
on  this  side  Jordan,  to  that  measure  of  rest  which  the 
people  of  God  have  acquired  out  of  Canaan.  "  Bring 
us  not,"  they  say,  ''  over  Jordan."  Moses  felt  the  bear- 
ing of  this  wish.  If  he  could  not  enter  the  land,  ac- 
cording to  the  government  of  God,  his  heart  was  there 
nevertheless.  He  recalls  the  contempt  of  the  pleasant 
land  at  Kadesh-barnea,  and  severely  rebukes  Reuben 
and  Gad. 

However,  the  tribes  engaging  to  go  equally  forward 
until  the  land  were  conquered,  he  grants  their  request 
and  settles  them  in  the  land,  with  the  half -tribe  of 
Manasseh.  Nevertheless,  the  history  of  the  holy  book 
shews  us  that  these  tribes  were  the  first  to  suffer,  and 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.  "Know  ye 
not,"  says  Ahab,  "  that  Ramoth  in  Gilead  is  ours,  and 
xxx.-xxxn. 


284  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  Syrians  possess  it  ?"  Happy  they  who  patiently 
wait  for  the  blessings  of  God,  till  they  have  gone  over 
Jordan,  and  who,  in  the  meanwhile,  take  patience  for 
their  portion,  rather  than  the  blessings  which  are  on 
this  side !  Though  they  are  the  gifts  of  the  providence 
of  God,  they  are  less  secure;  and  even  spiritual  bless- 
ings, if  the  assembly  take  this  world  as  the  seat  of 
them,  though  real,  yet  deceive  the  hopes  of  the  saints. 
There  are  no  frontiers  like  Jordan,  appointed  by  God 
as  such  in  His  counsels  of  grace. 

If  God  numbers  His  people  name  by  name.  He 
shews,  at  the  same  time,  His  government  and  H[is 
faithfulness;  for,  though  He  had  kept  them,  as  a 
people,  yet  there  were  none  of  the  first  numbering 
left,  save  Caleb  and  Joshua.  He  remembers,  also,  all 
their  long  journey  through  the  wilderness  ;  each  stage 
is  before  His  eyes  and  in  His  memory ;  and  now  He 
lays  down,  in  principle,  the  possession  of  the  land  by 
the  people,  and  the  total  destruction  of  the  inhabitants, 
who  were  to  be  entirely  driven  away  and  not  to  abide 
in  the  midst  of  Israel :  else  those  who  were  left  would 
be  a  torment  for  the  people,  and  God  also  would  do 
unto  Israel,  as  He  had  done  to  those  nations. 

It  is  a  dangerous  charity,  then,  that  which  spares  the 
enemies  of  God,  or  rather  which  spares  itself,  through 
unbelief,  in  its  conflicts  with  them,  and  which  is  soon 
led  to  form  with  them  connections  that  bring  the  judg- 
ment which  those  enemies  have  inherited,  and  them- 
selves also  deserved. 

Finally,  God  takes  care  of  His  people  in  all  respects; 
He  marks  the  limits  of  the  country  they  were  to  enjoy. 
He  settles  the  taking  possession,  the  portion  of  His 
servants,  the  Levites,  who  were  not  to  have  any  in- 
heritance. 

Six  of  their  cities  were  to  be  refuges  for  those  who 
had  unintentionally  committed  murder ;  a  precious  type 
of  God's  dealings  with  Israel,  who,  in  their  ignorance, 


NUMBERS.  285 

killed  the  Christ.  In  this  sense,  God  judges  them  to 
be  innocent.  They  are  guilty  of  blood  which  they 
could  not  bear,  but  guilty  in  their  ignorance,  like 
Saul  himself,  who  is  a  striking  figure,  as  one  born  out 
of  due  time  (eKrpwjua,  1  Cor.  xv.  8),  of  this  same 
position.  Such  a  murderer,  however,  remains  out  of 
his  possession  until  the  death  of  the  priest  living  ii. 
those  days. 

And  so  it  will  be  with  regard  to  Israel.  As  long  as 
Christ  retains  His  actual  priesthood  above,  Israel  will 
remain  out  of  their  possession,  but  under  the  safe 
keeping  of  God.  The  servants  of  God  at  least,  who 
have  no  inheritance,  serve  as  a  refuge  to  them,  and 
understand  their  position,  and  recognise  them  as  being 
under  the  keeping  of  God.  When  this  priesthood 
above,  such  as  it  now  is,  ends,  Israel  will  return  into 
their  possession.  If  they  did  before,  it  would  be  to 
pass  over  the  blood  of  Christ,  as  if  the  shedding  of  it 
were  no  matter,  and  the  land  would  be  defiled  thereby. 
Now,  the  actual  position  of  Christ  is  always  a  testi- 
mony to  this  rejection,  and  of  His  death  in  the  midst 
of  the  people. 

God  maintains  the  inheritance,  however,  as  He  has 
appointed  it.     (Chap,  xxxvi.) 

This  last  part,  then,  of  the  book  presents,  not  the 
passage  itself  through  the  desert,  but  the  relationship 
between  that  position,  and  the  possession  of  the  pro- 
mises and  of  the  rest  which  follows.  It  is  in  the  plains 
of  Moab  that  Moses  bore  testimony,  and  a  true  testi- 
mony, to  the  perverseness  of  the  people;  but  where 
God  justified  them,  shewing  His  counsels  of  grace,  in 
taking  their  side  against  the  enemy,  without  even  their 
knowledge,  and  pursued  all  the  designs  of  His  grace 
and  of  His  determinate  purpose  for  the  complete 
establishment  of  His  people  in  the  land  He  had  pro- 
mised them.  Blessed  be  His  name !  Happy  are  we  in 
being  allowed  to  study  His  ways  ! 

XXXIII.-XXXVI. 


DEUTERONOMY. 

We  now  come  to  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  a  book 
full  of  interest  in  its  moral  warnings  as  to  testimony, 
but  presenting  fewer  subjects  for  interpretation  and 
exegesis  than  those,  the  summary  of  which  we  have 
hitherto  sought  to  give. 

This  book  takes  up  Israel  just  on  the  borders  of 
Canaan,  and  insists  upon  the  faithful  maintenance  of 
their  relationship  with  God,  and  on  obedience  to  His 
commandments,  as  the  only  ground  on  which  Israel 
can  enter  and  continue  therein,  adding  warnings  as  to 
the  consequence  of  failure  in  obedience.  It  takes,  in 
the  main,  the  ground  of  their  historical  state  (not  of 
typical  forms,  presenting  the  thoughts  of  God,  as  the 
books  we  have  just  been  considering  do).*  The  body 
of  it,  after  recalling  the  history  of  the  wilderness, 
deals  with  the  ordering  of  Israel  in  the  land  under 
God  without  a  head  on  earth.  The  people  are  under 
responsibility  to  walk  in  obedience,  with  only  God  as 
their  king  and  ruler.  In  immediate  reference,  the 
people  are  in  enjoyment  of  the  promised  land  under 

*  After  Genesis  and  the  earlier  chapters  of  Exodus,  there  is 
very  little  of  which  the  object  is  historical  in  the  previous  books 
of  Moses.  And  even  in  Genesis  and  the  beginning  of  Exodus 
principles  and  types  are  the  most  important  aspect  of  what  is 
related.  As  to  the  history  of  Israel,  the  apostle  tells  us  this  ex- 
pressly in  1  Corinthians  x.  11.  And  this  appreciation  of  the 
character  of  these  books  greatly  aids  us  in  understanding  them. 
There  is  no  proof  that  one  sacrifice  was  offered ;  possibly  the 
fixed  ones  were ;  but  Amos,  quoted  by  Stephen,  would  say  the 
contrary.  Those  born  in  the  wilderness  were  not  circumcised, 
and  could  not  rightly  keep  the  passover. 


DEUTERONOMY.  287 

condition  of  obedience ;  but  feasts,  and  such  like  ordi- 
nances, look  forward  to  millennial  times.  At  the  end 
the  distinction  between  possessing  the  land  under 
condition  of  legal  obedience,  and  by  the  grace  which 
accomplishes  its  purpose  in  spite  of  failure  is  definitely- 
brought  out. 

The  book  may  be  divided  into  three  parts.  The  first 
eleven  chapters  insist  upon  obedience,  presenting 
various  motives  to  lead  uhe  people  to  it.  Then  come, 
as  far  as  the  end  of  the  twenty-ninth,  divers  com- 
mandments ;  to  which  are  added,  by  way  of  sanction, 
the  consequences  of  obedience  and  the  curse  upon  dis- 
obedience. From  the  thirtieth  to  the  end  we  have 
things  to  come,  the  blessing  of  the  people,  and  the 
death  of  Moses. 

But  this  division  requires  more  development,  which 
will  much  aid  our  understanding  of  the  book.  The 
first  part  recounts  their  history,  and  this  as  insisting 
on  the  unity  of  an  invisible  God,  their  obligation  to 
Jehovah  who  has  called  them,  through  reclemption, 
to  be  with  Him.  This  closes  with  chapter  iv.,  where 
three  cities  are  secured  for  the  two  tribes  and  a  half. 
Moses  cannot  enter  into  the  land ;  Jehovah  their  God 
is  a  jealous  God.  They  are  placed  under  the  cove- 
nant of  Sinai,  but  He  is  a  merciful  God,  and  in 
their  tribulation  they  can  look  to  the  God  of  their 
fathers.  In  chapter  v.  all  Israel  are  called  to  hear 
as  to  their  present  place,  and  put  upon  the  basis 
of  the  covenant  of  Sinai — to  observe  it  in  the 
land  into  which  they  were  going  to  possess  it.  The 
land  had  been  promised,  but  they  held  it  under  the 
covenant  of  legal  obedience,  but  on  the  basis  of  de- 
liverance wrought  by  Jehovah  out  of  Egypt.  Him 
they  were  exclusively  to  serve,  and  He  was  a  jealous 
God.  They  were  to  have  no  kind  of  connection  with 
the  nations  found  in  the  land.  Further,  we  have  the 
terms  of  the  government  of  mercy,  still  of  righteous- 


288  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

ness,  established  in  Moses's  second  ascent  of  Sinai.  Thus 
we  have  the  government  of  God — His  ways  taken  into 
account ;  and  so  the  character  of  their  ways  and  their 
object.  (Chap,  viii.)  If  they  did  not  give  heed  they 
would  perish.  This  leads  to  recalling,  in  order  to  humble 
them,  how  they  had  failed  ar  through  in  the  desert.  The 
second  governmental  covenant  is  referred  to,  and  the 
Lord's  love  that  had  chosen  them  in  pure  grace,  and  that 
in  spite  of  their  failures,  had  already  so  largely  blessed 
tliem.  They  must  circumcise  their  hearts  to  serve  Him 
and  Him  only :  one  only  exclusive  God,  and  a  God  of 
government.  All  is  summed  up  hortatively  in  chapter 
xi.  Over  Jordan  they  were  going,  there  they  were  to 
keep  all  that  was  commanded.  Here  Ebal  and 
Gerizim  are  brought  in.  To  the  end  of  chapter  iv. 
it  is  Israel  outside  Jordan ;  chapter  v.  inside  the  land. 
The  first  part  presents  the  one  invisible  Jehovah  of 
Horeb,  jealous  but  merciful,  though  His  ways  in 
general  with  the  people  are  there  too  ;  the  second,  the 
covenant  of  the  ten  words  with  Jehovah,  and  His 
government  on  the  ground  of  their  responsibility. 

Of  the  first  eleven  chapters,  the  first  four  form  thus 
a  rather  distinct  part. 

That  which  strikes  one  in  the  first  chapters  is,  the 
pains  that  Jehovah  takes  to  present  all  possible  motives 
to  that  poor  people  to  lead  them  to  obedience,  in  order 
that  they  may  be  blessed.  These  things,  which  ought 
at  least  to  have  touched  the  heart,  served,  alas  !  only  to 
prove  its  hardness,  and  to  shew  that,  if  man  is  to  be 
blessed,  God  must  give  him  a  new  heart,  as  it  is  written 
in  the  chapter  which  closes  the  second  part  of  His  ex- 
hortations to  obedience :  "  Yet  Jehovah  hath  not  given 
you  a  heart  to  perceive,  and  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to 
hear,  unto  this  day."     (Chap.  xxix.  4.) 

Deuteronomy  is,  then,  of  all  the  books  of  Moses, 
that  which  is  the  most  essentially  conditional — that 


DEUTERONOMY.  289 

is  to  say,  the  first  two  divisions  which  I  have  pointed 
out. 

Chapter  xxix.,  which  is  the  last  of  the  second  division, 
ends,  consequently,  by  saying, "  The  secret  things  be- 
long unto  Jehovah  our  God:  but  those  tilings  which  are 
revealed  belong  unto  us,  and  to  our  children  for  ever, 
that  we  may  do  all  the  words  of  this  law." 

The  chapters  which  follow  throw  this  into  greater 
prominence,  by  unfolding  the  secret  things  which  were 
to  happen  after  the  people  had  completely  failed  in  the 
fulfilment  of  the  law,  as  chapter  xxx.,  and,  still  more 
strikingly,  chapter  xxxii.,  by  speaking  of  righteous- 
ness by  faith.  For  the  discussion  as  to  righteousness 
by  the  law  ended  with  chapter  xxix. ;  and  chapter  xxx. 
supposes  the  people  in  a  position  in  which  the  securing 
of  righteousness  by  the  law  was  impossible,  and  where 
there  could  only  be  question  of  the  spirit  and  end  of 
the  law,  in  the  counsels  of  God. 

Now,  Christ  was  the  end  of  it,  and  it  is  thus  the 
apostle  applies  the  passage.  (Rom.  x.)  It  is  interesting 
also  to  see  that  the  Lord  always  quotes  Deuteronomy 
in  answering  Satan.  He  put  Himse  I  f  on  the  true  ground 
where  Israel  stood,  in  order  to  possess  and  keep  the 
land  ;  being  not  only  the  faithful  man,  but  the  Jew,  the 
true  Son  called  out  of  Egypt,  put  to  the  test  as  to  His 
faithfulness,  in  the  conditions  under  which  the  people 
were  placed  by  Deuteronomy. 

Let  us  examine  a  little  more  closely  these  chapters, 
which  shew  the  pains  the  Spirit  took,  to  set  before  the 
eyes  of  the  people  all  the  motives  which  could  induce 
them  to  walk  faithfully  in  the  career  which  now  lay 
before  them. 

He  begins  with  the  narrative  of  what  had  occurred 

since  the  sojourn  of  the  children  of  Israel  at  Sinai; 

and   Moses   reminds   them   of   the  commandment  to 

leave   that   place   and   to   go   to   the   mount   of   the 

VOL.  I.  U 


290  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Amorites  *  to  go  up  and  possess  the  land.  They  get 
there,  and,  discouraged  by  the  spies,  they  will  not  go 
up ;  then,  trying  to  do  so  without  God,  they  are 
smitten  before  their  enemies.  Passing  by  the  borders 
of  Esau  and  Moab,  God  gives  them  the  land  of  Sihon 
and  of  Og. 

We  learn  too  here  that,  though  sanctioned  by  God, 
the  sending  the  spies  was  the  effect  of  unbelief  among 
tlie  people — an  instructive  lesson.  God  may  allow, 
and  so  far  sanction  a  course,  wise  humanly,  in  His 
^vays — His  government,  which  yet  bears  the  fruit  of 
the  unbelief  which  is  at  the  root  of  it. 

In  a  word,  Moses  recalls  to  them,  in  general,  what 
had  taken  place  in  the  journey  which  led  to  their 
entrance  into  the  land  of  which  they  are  to  take 
possession — the  patience  and  the  goodness  of  God. 

In  reminding  them  of  Horeb,  he  insists  on  the 
privilege  they  had  enjoyed  in  nearness  to  God,  who 
Himself  had  spoken  to  them  out  of  the  midst  of  the 
i  ire,  when  they  saw  no  similitude  ;  on  the  authority  of 
the  word — its  majesty — excluding  thus  all  thought 
of  idolatry.  He  shews  them  that  all  that  were  of  full 
age  had  perished,  as  a  consequence  of  their  unbelief ; 
that  he  himself  could  not  enter  into  that  good  land ; 
that  God  is  a  jealous  God,  a  consuming  fire  ;  and  that, 
if  they  made  any  graven  image,  they  would  utterly 
perish  from  off  the  land  they  were  about  to  enter,  and 
would  be  scattered  amongst  the  nations  and  left  to 
Rsrve  the  gods  they  had  loved ;  that,  nevertheless,  they 
should  find  God  if  they  sought  Him  with  all  their 
heart,  for  He  is  a  merciful  God,  who  would  not  forsake 
them ;  that  if  Sinai  had  been  the  brightness  of  His 
majesty,  it  was  also  true  that  such  a  God  of  majesty 
had  never  vouchsafed  to  come  so  near  to  a  people,  elect 

*  It  is  interesting  to  put  together  the  second  and  third  verses. 
For  an  eleven  days'  journey  Israel  took  forty  years.  Alas !  how 
£)iten  is  it  thus  with  us,  owing  to  our  unfaithfulness 


DEUTERONOMY.  291 

•and  chosen  for  their  fathers'  sakes.      Such  is  the  basis 
of  the  government  of  this  people. 

Moses  sets  apart  three  cities  of  refuge,  as  a  token  of 
possession,  on  the  part  of  God,  of  what  was  on  this 
side  Jordan.     These  four  chapters  are  introductory. 

In  chapter  v.  Moses  reminds  them  of  the  ten  com- 
mandments given  in  Horeb ;  and  it  is  to  be  remarked 
that  the  deHverance  out  of  Egypt  (not  the  rest  of  God 
after  the  work  of  creation)  is  the  reason  he  gives  for 
the  sabbath  :  it  became  a  sign  of  His  covenant  with 
Israel.  (Compare  Ezek.  xx.)  These  were  the  basis  of  a 
regular  covenant ;  and  God  here,  as  we  have  seen, 
governs  the  people  in  the  land  of  promise  according  to 
their  responsibility,  as  a  jealous  God.  Mercy,  beyond 
law,  only  comes  in  in  chapter  xxx.  There  had  been 
mercy  (chap,  x.)  in  giving  them  back  the  law,  and 
placing  them  under  sparing  mercy  still.  These  chap- 
ters give  us  the  great  principles  of  God's  government 
in  the  land ;  chapters  xii.-xxix.  the  terms  of  it. 

He  reminds  them  of  their  fear  in  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  ;  engages  them,  in  chapter  vi.,  to  love  God  with  all 
their  heart ;  and  exhorts  them  to  remember  His  words 
in  every  way,  and  to  keep  them,  when  they  should 
enjoy  the  land,  having  nothing  to  do  with  other  gods. 

When  they  should  have  cast  out  their  enemies,  as 
Jehovah  had  spoken,  and  when  their  children  should 
ask  the  meaning  of  the  ordinances,  they  were  to  tell 
them  of  the  deliverances  and  of  the  signs  wrought  in 

They  were  to  destroy  every  vestige  of  false  gods, 
,  being  a  people  holy  to  Jehovah.  Nor  did  God  set  His 
love  upon  them  on  account  of  their  own  importance, 
but  because  of  the  election  and  love  of  God.  He 
assures  them  that  their  faithfulness  would  also  be  the 
channel  of  blessing,  for  God  would  recompense  them 
according  to  their  ways.  Neither  ought  they  to  fear, 
after  all  the  signs  they  had  seen.     Thus  they  were  a 

I.-VII. 


292  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

people  separate  to  Jehovah.  As  to  Him  all  was 
sovereign  grace,  but  sure  faithfulness.  As  to  them 
the  ground  they  were  on  was  the  government  of  God ; 
hence  all  then  depended  on  their  holding  fast  to  Jeho- 
vah, and  faithful  obedience. 

In  chapter  viii.,  in  the  most  instructive  and  touching 
language  as  to  the  care  God  had  taken  of  them,  while 
keeping  them  in  dependence,  and  His  object  in  doing 
so,  he  also  brino's  to  mind  the  dealino-s  of  God  with 
them  by  the  way,*  as  a  motive ;  and  how  God  had 
humbled  and  had  exercised  them,  lest,  through  the 
enjo3^ment  of  the  blessings  of  the  good  land  into 
which  He  was  bringing  them,  they  should  be  puffed 
up  (for  it  was  God  who  gave  them  the  needed  strength) ; 
that  otherwise  God  would  destroy  them,  as  He  had 
destroyed  the  nations.  On  the  other  hand  (chap,  ix.), 
He  reminds  them  of  their  continual  perverseness,  in 
order  to  shew  them  that  it  was  not  on  account  of  their 
righteousness,  but  because  of  the  wickedness  of  the 
nations,  that  God  drove  them  out  before  them.-f- 

This  he  applies  to  them  (chap,  x.),  reminding  them 
that  God  had  renewed  the  tables  of  the  law,  urginof 
them  to  circumcise  their  hearts,  to  care  for  the  stranger, 
remembering  how  God  had  enlarged  them  since  they 
went  down  as  strangers  to  Egypt. 

Then,  in  chapter  xi.,  he  brings  to  their  remembrance 
the  judgments  upon  the  Egyptians,  and  those  upo^i 
Dathan  and  Abiram  ;  and  declares  to  them  the  beauty 
and  excellency  of  the  land  into  which  they  are  about, 
to  enter,  a  land  upon  which  the  eyes  of  Jehovah  ever 
rested  ;t  and,  lastly,  he  puts  before  them  the  blessing 

"!=  See  particularly  verses  2-4;  15,  16. 

t  It  is  important  to  keep  this  in  mind.  Israel  was  the  rod  in 
God's  hand  to  get  rid  of  intolerable  evil.  Therefore  also  they 
were  not  to  spare. 

X  The  terms  in  which  this  is  expressed  present  a  perfectly 
beautiful  contrast  between  the  carefulness  of  man  in  seeking  for 
blessing,  and  the  grace  from  above. 


DEUTERONOMY.  293 

and  the  curse  which  there  awaited  them,  according  to 
their  conduct,  when  brought  in;  charging  them  to 
keep  carefully  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,  and  to 
teach  them  to  their  children.  And  it  is  added,  that,  by 
keeping  the  commandments  of  God,  they  would  be  able 
to  take  possession,  according  to  the  full  extent  of  the 
promise. 

But  here  all  depends  on  their  obedience  to  this  con- 
ditional covenant  which  made  them  Jehovah's,  whose 
exclusively  they  were  to  be ;  sovereign  restoring  grace 
does  not  come  till  chapter  xxx. 

The  second  division  begins  with  chapter  xii.,  and 
contains  the  statutes  and  ordinances  they  were  bound 
to  observe.  It  is  not  a  repetition  of  the  old  ordi- 
nances, but  what  specially  referred  to  their  conduct  in 
the  land,  that  they  might  keep  it  and  be  blessed  in  it. 
It  is  a  covenant,  or  the  conditions  of  their  relation- 
ship with  God,  and  of  the  enjoyment  of  His  pro- 
mises, added  to  what  had  been  said  before.  (See  chap, 
xxix.  1.) 

The  ordinances  tended  in  general  to  this,  that  they 
were  a  people  belonging  to  Jehovah,  and  that  they 
were  to  give  up  every  other  relationship  in  order  to  be 
His ;  and  keep  themselves  from  all  that  could  seduce 
them  to  form  such  relationships,  or  defile  them  in  those 
which  they  had  with  Jehovah.  At  the  same  time, 
directions  are  given  as  to  the. details  of  the  mainten- 
ance of  those  relationships.  One  thing  specially  cha- 
racterises this  part:  a  fixed  place  where  Jehovah 
would  put  His  name  to  which  they  were  to  go  up  to 
worship. 

But  in  all  this,  and  in  the  whole  book,  this  point  is 
treated  as  a  question  of  a  direct  relationship  of  the 
people  itself  with  God.  The  priests  are,  in  general, 
mentioned,  more  as  being  the  objects  of  the  care  of  the 
people  when  in  the  land,  according  to  ordinances 
already  given.    The  people  were  to  behave  in  such-and- 

VIII.-XII. 


294  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

such  a  way  towards  them;  but  the  relationship  is 
immediate  between  the  people  and  God. 

The  first  principle  laid  down  to  confirm  these  rela- 
tionships is  the  choice  of  a  place  as  the  centre  of  their 
exercise.  They  were  to  go  thither  with  all  their  offer- 
ings ;  they  might  eat  flesh  elsewhere — without  the 
blood ;  but  the  consecrated  things  could  only  be 
eaten  in  the  place  chosen  of  God.  They  were  not 
to  forget  the  Levites.  They  were  not  even  to  inc[uire 
about  the  ways  of  those  who  had  been  driven  out  of 
the  land. 

If  the  signs  of  a  prophet,  who  would  entice  them  to 
serve  other  gods,  came  to  pass,  or  if  a  relative,  or  the 
beloved  of  their  souls,  enticed  them,  such  were  to  be 
put  to  death ;  if  any  of  a  city,  the  whole  city  was  to 
be  reduced  to  a  heap  of  stones.  No  relationship  with 
any  but  with  the  true  God  was  to  be  allowed — no  for- 
bearance toward  that  which  ensnared  them  to  follow 
another. 

Chapter  xiv.  forbids  that  the  people,  as  being  the 
children  of  the  living  God,  should  imitate  the  profane 
customs  which  indicated  the  devotedness  of  idolaters  to 
the  impure  beings  they  worshipped.  God  had  chosen 
Israel  for  Himself.  Neither  were  they  to  defile  them- 
selves by  eating  abominable  things.  They  were  a  holy 
people.  The  tithes  and  all  the  firstfruits  were  to  be 
offered  to  God. 

Thus  consecrated,  each  one  might  eat  them  in  the 
place  where  God  had  put  His  name.  The  same  com- 
mand had  been  given  (chap,  xii.)  with  regard  to  the 
place  where  they  were  to  be  eaten,  with  the  addition 
that  the  children,  menservants,  and  maidservants, 
might  partake  of  them,  applying  it  also  to  the  vows, 
the  free-will-offerings  and  the  heave-offering.  These 
ordinances  are  very  remarkable.* 

*  It  is  generally  explained  that  there  was  a  double  tithe ;  that 
IS,  that  this  does  not  refer  to  the  regular  tithe  paid  to  the  Levites, 


DEUTEKONOMY.  205 

Another,  found  at  the  end  of  chapter  xiv.,  may  be 
added  here.  The  tithe  of  the  third  year  was  to  be  laid 
up  within  their  gates,  and  the  Levite,  the  fatherless,  ani  1 
the  stranger,  were  to  come  and  eat  of  it ;  and  he  who 
did  thus  would  be  blessed  of  Jehovah  in  all  the  work 
of  his  hands. 

Here  everything  was  sanctified,  as  having  been  pre- 
sented to  Jehovah.  There  was  thus  the  recognition,  on 
the  one  hand,  that  the  people  were  His,  on  the  other, 
that  all  they  had  was  of  Him  ;  but  in  giving  Him  back 
what  He  had  given  them,  they  enjoyed,  in  fellowship 
with  Him,  and  their  families,  the  things  common  to  God 
and  the  people,  given  by  Him,  offered  to  Him,  and 
cnjo}'ed  in  His  presence  in  communion  one  with  another, 
God  Himself  partaking  of  them,  for  the  whole  was 
offered  to  Him. 

It  was  not  here  the  priests  opening  out  a  way  for 
the  people  to  draw  near  to  God :  God  was  honoured  by 
the  offering.     God  enjoyed  the  piety  of  the  people, 


as  ordered  in  the  other  places  in  the  law,  and  that  the  Levitical 
tithes  remained  as  they  were  according  to  the  previous  prescrip- 
tions of  the  law ;  and  it  is  to  be  remarked  they  were  to  be  locally 
paid  to  the  Levites,  not  where  Jehovah  had  placed  His  name. 
Two  years  they  carried  the  different  offerings  to  the  place  chosen 
of  Jehovah,  and  ate  and  rejoiced,  but  the  third,  invited  the 
Levite  and  the  poor  at  home.  Tobit  i.  7  gives  us  historically  all 
these  different  tithes  and  offerings ;  only  it  appears  that,  the 
1  en  tribes  being  in  rebellion  and  apostasy,  pious  people  carried 
ihe  Levitical  tithes  to  Jerusalem.  Amos  iv.  4  shews  there  was 
some  special  habit  of  tithing  every  third  j'ear,  then  at  Bethel. 
At  any  rate  what  characterises  Deuteronomy  is  their  enjoying 
God's  goodness  together,  and  making  the  poor  enjoy  it  with 
them,  Levites  and  strangers;  while  priests,  though  named,  are 
on  these  points  wholly  ignored.  (See  chap.  xii.  6,  7,  11,  12,  17, 
18 ;  xiv.  -i'^-'iS.)  The  priests'  portion  is  in  chapter  xviii.  3,  4. 
But  firstKngs  and  firstlruits  in  ciiapter  xii.  are  not  the  same 
word ;  nor  is  chapter  xiv.  23.  But  the  whole  tone  of  Deuter- 
onomy is  fellowshij)  and  enjoyment  only  before  the  Lord,  not 
priestlj^  or  altar  service. 

XIII.,   XIV. 


296  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

and  the  people  themselves  offered  with  joy.  Seated 
before  God  Himself,  in  the  joy  of  communion  with 
Him,  as  at  the  same  table,  it  was  the  people  who 
enjoyed  the  privilege. 

In  the  case  of  the  tithe  of  the  third  year,  it  is  not 
the  family  joy  of  the  people  with  God,  but  rather  the 
grace  that  brought  enjoyment  to  those  who  were 
strangers  or  in  want,  and  to  the  servants  of  God  who 
had  no  inheritance.  It  was  within  their  gates  that 
this  took  place.  They  had  the  privilege  of  acting  in 
grace  from  Jehovah,  in  communicating  to  His  poor 
what  He  had  given  them.  They  did  not  go  to  the 
house  of  Jehovah,  but  they  invited  the  widow,  the 
orphan,  and  the  Levite,  to  their  house  to  rejoice,  and 
Jehovah  blessed  them.  The  immediate  relationship  of 
the  people  with  God  in  family  fellowship  and  in  grace 
here  is  very  remarkable.  The  priests  are  out  of  the 
scene  ;  the  Levites  being  the  objects  of  the  liberality 
of  the  people,  as  having  no  inheritance.  (Compare 
xii.  19.) 

Chapter  xv.  teaches  each  one  among  the  people  to 
consider  with  liberality  and  grace  their  poor  brethren 
(this  consideration  being  besides  made  sure  to  them  by 
the  year  of  release,  which  applied  to  debts  and  to  the 
Hebrew  slaves).  The  dependence  of  him,  who  thus  re- 
spected Jehovah  in  His  poor,  was  to  be  placed  in  God, 
who  would  bless  him  in  thus  acting  according  to  His 
commandment ;  for  the  poor  were  His  poor. 

Chapter  xvi.  connects  the  people  with  the  dwelling- 
place  of  Jehovah,  by  solemnities  in  which  He  sur- 
rounds Himself  with  His  people,  blessed  and  happy  in 
the  deliverance  which  He  has  granted  them  under  His 
reign. 

It  gives  us  three  solemn  feasts — the  Passover,  Pente- 
cost, and  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  The  spirit  of  each 
of  these  feasts  suggests  a  few  remarks.  The  Passover 
recalled    deliverance,    deliverance   from   bondage    in 


DEUTERONOMY.  297 

Egypt* — for  us  under  sin  and  Satan.  The  unleavened 
bread,  truth  in  the  inward  parts,  was  here  the  bread  of 
affliction.  The  knowledge  of  Christ,  or  the  applica- 
tion of  Christ  to  the  heart,  though  coupled  with 
deliverance  and  salvation,  when  it  takes  the  form  of 
repentance  (and  this  is  the  case,  when  the  question  is 
of  remembering  one's  deliverance),  has  always  some- 
thing bitter  in  it.  Joy  is  not  the  point  here.  One  has 
gone  out  in  haste,  by  the  mighty  arm  of  God ;  and  if 
one  is  happy,  it  is  only  as  having  escaped,  feeling  that 
it  is  through  the  power  of  God  alone,  and  conscious  of 
the  state  which  required  it  all.  They  ate  it  during  the 
night,  and  every  one  returned  in  the  morning  to  his 
tent.  They  went  home  with  the  sense  of  the  goodness 
of  God,  with  the  sense  that  it  was  a  deliverance  from 
the  evil  under  which  they  had  been  by  their  own  fault 
and  to  their  o\ati  ruin. 

Holiness  is  presented  in  repentance  and  deliverance 
from  the  power  of  evil,  under  the  form  of  conscience 
and  judgment  of  sin;  it  is  an  obligation.  One  dares 
not  remain  any  longer  in  evil.  They  were  cut  off  if 
leaven  was  found  in  the  house ;  whereas  this  holiness 
is  in  itself  the  joy  of  the  redeemed.  They  were  bound 
to  keep  the  feast  wherever  God  should  put  His  name. 
God  gathered  the  people  around  His  dwelling-place, 
and  linked  them  with  His  name  and  with  Himself. -f* 
Their  nationality  and  all  their  recollections  were  con- 
nected with  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  It  was  another 
safeguard  against  idolatry.  (Vers.  5-7.) 

Seven  weeks  having  elapsed,  the  people  were  again 
to  gather  around  Jehovah.  They  numbered  seven 
weeks  from  the  time  they  began  to  put  the  sickle  to 
the  corn,  from  the  day  they  began  to  reap  the  fruit  of 


*  Egypt  signifies  properly  the  flesh,  but  that  involves  sin  and 
Satan. 

t  This  we  have  seen  was  part  of  Deuteronomic  worship. 
XIV.-XVI. 


298  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

the  land  of  promise.  They  waited  for  the  perfect  time 
of  the  work  of  God. 

That  which  first  of  all  characterised  this  feast  was, 
that  every  one  offered  a  free-will-offering,  according  to 
the  blessing  wherewith  Jehovah  his  God  had  blessed 
him.  It  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  blessing  flowing 
from  Him,  which  this  type  presents  to  us.  It  is  not 
onl}'  redemption,  but  the  power  of  the  things  which  are 
the  result  of  it — not  in  full,  however  ;  they  were  only 
firstfruits  offered  to  God.  The  presentation  of  these 
firstfruits  to  God  is  the  effect  of  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  They  are  the  remnant  of  Israel,  historically 
in  the  beginning  of  Christianity,  on  the  principle  of 
i-edemption  and  of  the  new  covenant ;  but,  in  fact, 
Christians  themselves  become  the  firstfruits  of  the 
creation  of  God.  But  the  effect  produced  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  effect  of  His  presence  in  general,  is  that 
which  characterises  this  feast. 

There  was  no  mention  of  free-will-offerings  at  the 
passover ;  they  ate  in  haste  and  returned  home.  But 
the  Holy  Spirit  has  made  the  renewed  heart  willing ; 
and  according  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  the 
promise — according  to  the  measure  of  the  blessing  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  it  can  and  will  render  to  God  the 
firstfruits  of  the  heart,  and  of  all  that  He  has  given 
us.  Therefore  (and  it  is  what  always  accompanies 
this  free-will — fruit  of  the  Holy  Spirit)  they  were 
to  rejoice  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah  their  Gocl. 

The  fruits  of  grace  and  of  the  Spirit  manifest  them- 
selves in  joy  and  in  grace.*  Blessing  manifests  itself 
in  the  spirit  of  blessing,  in  the  joy  and  the  good- will 
of  grace.  Blessed  and  precious  results !  Joy,  and 
the  desire  for  the  joy  of  others,  always  flow  from 
2;Tace,  known  according  to  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
God. 

*  This  also  characterises  Deuteronomic  worsliip. 


DEUTERONOMY.  299 

Thus  the  worshipper,  his  son  and  his  daughter,  his 
manservant  and  his  maidservant,  the  Levite  within  his 
gates,  the  stranger,  the  orphan,  and  the  widow,  were  to 
rejoice  together  in  the  place  where  Jehovah  had  set  His 
name.  God  surrounded  Himself  with  joy,  the  fruit  of 
grace  and  of  His  blessing, 

The  remembrance  of  having  been  themselves  bond- 
men was  to  touch  the  heart  and  influence  the  conduct 
of  Israel ;  and,  by  comprehending  the  grace  which 
had  delivered  them  when  they  were  in  that  condition, 
they  were  to  be  led  to  act  in  grace  towards  those  who 
were  bondmen  to  them.  They  are  admonished,  at  the 
same  time,  to  observe  the  statutes  of  Jehovah ;  for 
the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whilst  ministering 
joy,  leads  to  watchfulness  and  obedience.  We  enjoy 
the  earnest  and  the  firstf ruits  before  God ;  but  still  it 
is  down  here,  where  watchfulness  and  restraint  are 
needed. 

When  the  ingathering  of  the  harvest  and  vintage 
were  ended  (that  is,  God  having  gathered  in  His  own, 
hidden  them  in  His  garner,  and  trodden  His  enemies  in 
the  winepress),  then  came  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles ;  a 
feast,  the  antitype  of  which  we  have  not,  it  is  certain, 
yet  seen. 

Although  all  the  effects  of  the  Passover  and  Pentecost 
are  not  yet  accomplished,  yet  they  have  been  fulfilled 
as  to  the  event  marked  by  them ;  but  there  has  been 
as  yet  no  fulfilment  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  This 
will  take  place  when  Israel,  restored  to  their  land  after 
the  end  of  this  dispensation,  will  fully  enjoy  the  effect 
of  the  promise  of  God.  Consequently  joy  is  put  in 
the  foreground,  whilst  in  that  which  prefigured  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  earth  the  free-will- 
ofiering  came  first. 

This  feast  was  to  be  kept  during  seven  consecutive 
days.  It  is  joy,  full  and  complete  joy ;  not  according 
to  the  measure  of  the  blessing,  as  in  Pentecost,  but 

XVI. 


300  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE  BIBLE. 

because  God  had  blessed  them  in  all  the  works  of  their 
hands  :  therefore  they  certainly  ought  to  rejoice.  The 
spirit  of  that  day  belongs  to  us,  although  the  fulfilment 
of  it  has  not  yet  taken  place.* 

There  is  a  joy  that  manifests  itself  in  us  in  con- 
nection with  the  measure  of  the  present  effect  of  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  joy  which  requires 
watchfulness  and  to  walk  in  the  narrow  way,  and 
in  which  the  remembrance  of  our  former  condition 
strengthens  in  us  the  spirit  of  grace  towards  others, 
and  the  presence  of  the  Lord  is  specially  marked. 

There  is  a  joy  known  to  the  heart,  although  the 
things  which  cause  it  have  not  yet  had  their  accom- 
plishment, a  joy  connected  with  the  time  of  rest,  when 
labour  will  be  ended,  and  when  there  will  no  longer  be 
any  need  of  vigilance,  nor  of  the  remembrance  of  our 
misery,  to  urge  us  to  share  our  blessings  with  others. 
The  feast  itself  will  suffice  for  the  joy  of  all :  "  Thou 
shalt  rejoice  in  thy  feast."  The  Lord  recalls  the  great 
principle  of  the  three  feasts,  namely,  to  appear  before 
Jehovah  three  times  in  a  year,  bringing  offerings  to 
Jehovah. 

Verse  18  begins  a  new  subject :  the  pains  taken,  and 
the  instruments  used,  to  preserve  the  blessing  and 
execute  the  judgments  necessary  to  that  effect.  The 
thought  is  still  to  maintain  the  people  in  relationship 
with  God  alone.  They  were  to  appoint  judges  and 
officers  in  their  gates.     Whatever  led  to  idolatry  was 


*  But  it  is  to  be  remarked  here,  that  in  the  account  of  taber- 
nacles in  this  chapter,  there  is  no  reference  to  an  eighth  day  as 
elsewhere.  All  refers  properly  to  Israel  placed  in  the  land  in 
present  responsibility,  but  with  promise  of  yet  better  things 
under  the  new  covenant.  To  us  it  is  anticipatively  the  eighth 
day,  that  great  day  of  the  feast.  See  John  vii.  where  we  get 
what  to  us  is  now  in  the  place  of  the  feast,  connected  with  the 
glory  of  a  rejected,  but  exalted,  Christ — the  outflowing  fulness  of 
the  Holy  Ghost. 


DEUTERONOMY.  301 

forbidden ;  he  who  enticed  them  to  it  was  to  be  stoned. 
(Chap,  xvii.)  If  the  matter  were  too  hard,  they  were 
to  come  to  the  priests  and  the  judges,  and  the  people 
were  to  abide  by  their  judgment. 

The  case  of  the  people  desiring  a  king  is  antici- 
pated ;  and  they  are  told  that  he  must  be  of  the  people, 
and  not  act  so  as  to  open  the  way  for  intercourse 
with  Egypt,  nor  so  as  to  lead  the. people  to  idolatry; 
but  he  is  to  write  a  copy  of  the  book  of  the  law  with 
his  own  hand,  and  read  therein  all  the  days  of  his 
life,  being  subject  to  it,  so  as  not  to  despise  his 
brethren. 

Chapter  xviii.  The  priests  and  the  whole  tribe  of 
Levi  have  their  portion  assigned  to  them.  The  people 
are  forbidden  to  do  after  those  abominations,  on  ac- 
count of  which  the  nations  which  inhabited  the  land 
were  driven  out  before  Israel,  inquiring  of  those  who 
used  divination,  Jehovah  would  raise  up  a  prophet 
like  unto  Moses,  unto  whom  the  people  should  hearken. 
These  ordinances  foresee  in  the  people  the  lack  of  the 
faith  needful  in  order  to  walk  simply  with  the  Lord. 
Christ  is  the  true  and  only  answer.  They  were  not  to 
fear  a  prophet  who  gave  a  sign  which  did  not  come  to 
pass,  for  Jehovah  had  not  spoken  by  him. 

One  word  here  as  to  the  portion  of  the  priests. 
First,  the  normal  condition  of  the  people  was  that  of 
being  guided  by  the  priests,  and,  in  case  of  need,  by 
judges  raised  up  in  an  extraordinary  way;  and  to 
abide  under  the  keeping  of  God  in  the  land,  enjoying 
His  blessing.  It  was,  properly  speaking,  theocracy. 
The  laws  of  God  directed  the  people ;  they  enjoyed 
the  blessing  of  God ;  and  the  priests  settled  any  ques- 
tions which  arose,  a  judge  being  raised  up  in  excep- 
tional cases. 

The  priests  are  introduced  here  in  connection  with 
that  which  was  necessary  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  land, 
not  as  a  means  of  drawing  near  to  God.  Consequently, 

XVI.-XVIII. 


302  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

they  were  there  to  fulfil  their  ministry  before  God, 
and  a  certain  portion  belonged  to  them. 

The  king  was  only  thought  of  in  the  case  when  the 
people  would  ask  one,  in  order  to  be  like  the  nations ; 
and  in  that  case  he  was  to  remain,  as  much  as  possible, 
simple  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  that  the  law  of  God 
might  have  its  full  authority.  The  people  are  always 
accounted  to  be  themselves  responsible  before  God,  and 
enjoying  the  land  under  this  responsibility,  though  for 
that  reason  subject  to  the  decisions  of  the  priests. 
They  had  the  land  from  God.  The  position  spoken  of 
here  is  not  that  of  drawing  near  to  Him,  but  acknow- 
ledging His  deliverance  and  His  goodness,  as  in  the 
feasts  which  we  have  considered. 

Thus  he  who  went  up  to  the  place  which  Jehovali 
had  chosen  ate  with  his  family,  and  sometimes  witli 
the  Levite,  the  stranger,  &c.,  the  tithes*  of  each  yeai- 
(in  the  third  year  there  were  some  for  the  Levite  and 
the  poor),  the  firstling  of  the  herd  and  of  the  flock,  the 
vows,  the  free-will-off'erings,  and  the  heave-offerings, 
all  before  Jehovah.  But  at  the  same  time  that  they 
offered  them  to  Jehovah,  the  offerer  partook  of  the 
enjoyment  of  them  (see  chap.  xiv.  23,  28,  29 ;  xii.  7, 
11,  12,  17) ;  whilst,  in  chapter  xviii.  the  priest  had  a 
certain  portion  of  the  sacrifice,  the  firstfruit  of  the 
corn,  of  the  wine,  and  the  oil,  and  the  first  of  the 
fleece  of  the  sheep. 

The  first  part  of  these  ordinances  is  so  much  the 
more  remarkable  that  in  the  book  of  Numbers  (chap, 
xviii.),  the  firstborn, t  the  heave-offerings,  all  sorts  of 
offerings  for  sin,  and  the  meat-offerings,  are  given  to 

*  See  note  in  chapters  referred  to ;  they  were  second  tithes, 
not  Levitical  ones.  The  people  never  paid  tithes  to  the  priests  ; 
but  to  the  Levites  at  home,  they  to  the  priests.  The  tithes  of 
the  third  year  (not  Levitical)  were  eaten  at  home.  We  have 
nothing  of  Levitical  tithes  in  Deuteronomy. 

t  Firstborn  males.    See  notes  to  chapter  xii.,  xiv. 


DEUTERONOMY.  303 

the  priests,  and  the  tithes  to  the  Levites.  But  these 
are  assumed,  not  reordained  here,  tliat  the  true  cha- 
racter of  Deuteronomic  worship  may  be  maintained, 
rejoicing  before  Jehovah  in  the  enjoyment  of  what  He 
gives,  not  drawing  near  to  Him  in  the  holiest. 

We  may  remark  here  the  difference  between  that 
which  was  in  this  case  for  the  priests,  and  that  which 
in  Deuteronomy  the  people  are  to  eat  of  before  the 
Lord,  and  in  the  other  books  what  is  given  to  the 
priests.  We  have  already  pointed  out  the  difference  of 
position. 

In  the  three  preceding  books,  what  is  brought  before 
the  mind  is  drawing  near  to  God,  and  the  priests  alone 
are  looked  upon  as  able  to  do  this  ;  and  thus,  in  the 
relationship  of  priests,  they  ate  in  the  holy  place  all 
that  was  offered.  They  alone  were  near  God,  and  that 
which  was  offered  to  God  (according  to  the  force  of 
the  word,*  that  which  was  brought  near  to  God)  was 
theirs,  as  being  near.  They  were  all  as  one  company 
in  the  camp,  and  the  whole  was  essentially  typical. 

Thus  all  the  arrangements  of  the  tabernacle  were 
made  for  a  people  who  found  themselves  in  the  wil- 
derness— strangers  there;  and  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  Paul,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  never  speaks 
of  anything  but  the  tabernacle,  never  of  the  temple. 
The  relationship  he  speaks  of  is  that  of  pilgrims  with 
God. 

It  is  no  longer  thus  in  Deuteronomy.  There  the 
dwelling  of  the  people  in  the  land  of  promise  is  con- 
sidered;  and,  consequently,  the  people  are  accounted, 
not  as  needing  to  learn  how  to  draw  near  to  God,f  but 

"  The  word  translated  "an  offering"  (that  is,  corhan)  comes 
from  a  word  which  means  "to  draw  near,"  and,  in  the  form 
Hiphil,  "  to  bring  near." 

t  This  very  important  difference  characterises  the  book.  It  is 
no  question  how  near  we  can  get  to  the  holiest,  to  God  Himself, 
but  communion  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  fruits  of  His  promise 
XVIII. 


304  THE    BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

as  enjoying,  from  God,  the  effect  of  His  promise  in  Hia 
presence  and  before  Him,  so  that  the  people  are  directly 
concerned  in  the  sacrifices.  They  are  in  the  enjoyment 
of  the  promises,  in  the  presence  of  God,  and  they 
realise,  in  the  communion  of  Jehovah,  all  the  means 
through  which  it  is  enjoyed,  and  they  partake,  in  com- 
munion, of  all  that  is  devoted  to  Him,  as  a  sign  of  the 
i-edemption  through  which  this  enjoyment  was  procured 
for  them. 

It  is  otherwise  with  regard  to  the  firstfruits  of  the 
land — that  which  it  yields.  Enjoying  those  fruits  of 
the  goodness  of  God,  the  people  gave  Him  back  the 
firstfruits,  as  a  testimony  that  all  came  from  Him,  and 
that  all  was  His,  and  that  His  grace  had  communicated 
it  to  them.  (See  chap,  xxvi.)  Therefore  the  firstfruits 
were  not  for  the  people  to  eat :  they  offered  them  to 
God,  and  ate  of  all  the  rest.  It  was  the  recognition  of 
God,  while  sharing  His  blessings.  The  firstfruits  then 
were  offered  to  God,  and  thus  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
priests  as  their  portion. 

Chapter  xix.  opens  with  ordinances  which  contem- 
plate the  people  in  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the 
land ;  they  were  to  observe  them,  that  the  land  might 
not  be  defiled,  and  that  the  people  might  walk  in  the 
strength  of  Jehovah. 

Three  cities  of  refuge  are  appointed,  and  he  who 
kills  his  neighbour,  without  hating  him,  is  distinguished 
from  the  murderer :  an  important  principle,  as  to  the 
fate  of  the  Jewish  nation,  which  makes  a  distinction 
between  those  who  have  taken  a  voluntary  part  in  the 
death  of  the  Lord,  or  who  afterwards  heartily  approve 
the  deed,  and  those  who  have  done  it  ignorantly.  The 
regulations  of  righteousness  also  ao-ainst  false  witnesses 
are  given  here. 

in  His  presence  and  in  the  spirit  of  grace.  It  is  not  wilderness 
connection  with  God,  a  yet  deeper  principle  of  connection  with 
Him. 


DEUTERONOMY.  305 

In  chapter  xx.  we  have  the  ordinances  relative  to 
war. 

In  chapter  xxi.  we  have  three  interesting  cases, 
because  of  the  principles  which  apply  to  the  ways  of 
God  with  Israel :  the  case  of  the  man  found  slain ; 
that  of  the  child  of  the  hated  wife;  and  that  of  the 
rebellious  son.  The  land  of  Jehovah  must  be  kept 
pure.  Israel  will  have  to  make  this  confession  in  the 
latter  days,  and  to  clear  themselves  of  the  blood  of 
Messiah. 

If  the  case  of  the  two  wives  applies  to  Israel  upon 
earth,  it  applies  still  more  closely  to  Christ  (Head  of 
the  Gentiles)  and  the  assembly  with  whom  He  will 
inherit  all  things,  although  upon  earth  Israel  be  the 
wife  beloved. 

However,  Israel,  as  a  rebellious  son  under  the  old 
covenant,  is  condemned  and  cut  off;  as  regards  the  re- 
deemed, the  curse  of  the  law  has  fallen  upon  another. 
Those  who  read  the  Bible  are  too  well  acquainted  with 
the  application  of  the  end  of  this  chapter  to  make  it 
needful  for  me  to  dwell  upon  it.  The  point  here  under 
consideration  is  the  defiling  of  the  land,  which  Jehovah 
had  given  for  an  inheritance  to  the  people ;  the  hard- 
ness of  heart  of  the  priests  in  applying  the  precept 
under  the  circumstances  is  appalling,  yet  natural. 

I  will  now  briefly  sum  up  the  subjects  we  have 
lookf^d  at  from  chapter  xvi.  18.  We  have  the  means, 
in  point  of  authority,  employed  of  God  to  maintain 
the  people  in  His  ways,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  His 
will,  that  they  might  enjoy  the  land  in  peace.  Judges 
and  ofiicers  were  to  be  appointed,  and  to  judge  with 
uprightness.  The  priest  and  the  judge,  raised  up  in 
an  extraordinary  manner,  were  to  communicate,  in 
case  of  need,  the  judgment  and  will  of  God,  and  the 
people  were  to  obey  them.  In  case  the  people  wished 
for  a  king,  directions  are  given  respecting  his  conduct. 

Directions  are  given  for  those  Levites  who  should 

VOL.  I.  XIX.,   XX.  X 


306  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

devote  themselves  to  the  service  of  Jehovah,  in  the 
place  chosen  by  Him  as  His  dwelling-place.  The  peopV, 
seeking  to  know  the  will  of  God,  were  not  to  consult 
diviners.  Jehovah  would  raise  up  a  prophet.  After- 
wards there  is  provision  made  to  keep  the  land  from 
being  polluted  with  blood  ;  the  elders  of  the  city  were 
to  take  knowledge  of  the  deed,  whether  the  slayer  had 
killed  without  set  purpose. 

The  cities  of  refuge  present  a  beautiful  type  of  the 
state  of  Israel,  as  to  their  sin,  in  having  killed  the 
Lord  Jesus,  whether  ignorantly  (as  the  grace  of  God 
looks  upon  it  with  regard  to  those  who  repent),  or 
knowingly  (as  perseverance  in  rejecting  Him  would 
be  the  proof  of) :  this  is  the  principle  upon  which  God 
will  judge  them.  So,  in  this  last  point  of  view,  the 
people  were  placed  under  the  searching  severity  of 
the  law. 

In  chapter  xx.  provision  is  made  to  reconcile  any 
war  that  might  arise  with  the  enjoyment  of  the  land 
and  the  blessing  of  God,  either  individually  or  in  case 
of  conquest;  and  directions  are  given  to  secure  the 
presence  of  the  power  of  God,  and  to  shew  how  the 
enemies  were  to  be  treated  according  to  the  mind  of 
God ;  all  mercy  towards  the  nations  of  Canaan  being 
prohibited,  in  order  that  Israel  might  not  learn  the 
abominations  they  were  guilty  of. 

Chapter  xxi.  gives  another  provision  for  preventing 
the  land  from  defilement  by  blood,  while  declaring  (as 
elsewhere)  that  life  belongs  to  God — that,  when  His 
rights  are  infringed,  He  will  not  wink  at  it.  We 
cannot  fail  to  see  that  the  blood  of  Christ  is,  above  all, 
that  of  which  Israel  is  here  (chap,  xxi.)  guilty  (see 
Psalm  li.),  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  the  only  atone- 
ment for  the  sin  which  shed  it.  The  elders  excuse  them- 
selves by  pleading  their  ignorance  of  what  had  been 
done.  The  same  thing  will  take  place  with  regard  to 
Israel.   So  pleads  also  Paul.   However,  there  is  nothing 


DEUTERONOMY.  807 

bat  the  blood  of  the  heifer  which  never  bore  the  yoke 
that  can  wipe  away  sin.  Thus  will  the  guilt  of  innocent 
blood  be  taken  from  off  the  people. 

The  following  directions  are  indeed  practical  direc- 
tions for  Israel ;  but  they  seem  to  me  to  contain,  at  the 
same  time,  some  of  God's  principles  towards  His  people. 
Thus  Israel  upon  earth,  and  the  assembly  in  heaven, 
have  both  been  the  true  firstborn,  whom  God  will  not 
disinherit.  And  the  rebellious  son  presents  also  Israel 
in  final  disobedience  to  God. 

Chapter  xxii.  appears  to  contain  ordinances  to  guard 
the  people  from  want  of  benevolence  and  mercy,  and  of 
that  which  would  offend  the  sensibilities  of  nature, 
either  with  regard  to  tenderness  or  purity.  So  also  all 
mixture  was  forbidden  in  ploughing  or  sowing.  We 
find  the  same  with  regard  to  women :  they  were  pro- 
tected against  the  dishonour  done  to  them  by  a  brutish, 
inconsiderate  husband ;  whilst  impurity  was  punished 
with  death. 

Thus  (chap,  xxiii.)  the  people  are  taught  what  senti- 
ments became  them,  according  to  God,  with  reference 
to  the  nations  (taking  the  ways  and  doings  of  those 
nations  into  consideration)  in  case  of  war.  They  are 
also  instructed  in  what  was  proper,  as  to  the  purity  of 
the  camp  in  case  of  war,  seeing  God  was  there.  So 
with  reo-ard  to  all  sorts  of  thinojs,  such  as  the  slave  that 
was  escaped  from  his  master ;  things  morally  impure; 
even  the  neighbour's  vineyard ;  and  (chap,  xxiv.)  a 
more  serious  thing,  divorce,  and  everything  relative  to 
it ;  delicacy  towards  the  poor,  the  hire  of  labourers, 
the  gleaning  for  the  poor. 

The  spirit  of  all  these  ordinances  is  very  instructive, 
and  the  goodness  and  the  tenderness  of  God,  who 
deigns  to  take  knowledge  of  all  these  things,  and  to 
teach  His  people  delicacy,  propriety,  consideration  for 
others,  sensitiveness,  and  those  feelings  which,  by 
removing  brutality,  and  softening  the  hardness  of  the 

XXI.-XXIV. 


308  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

heart  of  man,  fashion  his  ways  according  to  that  love 
with  which  the  Spirit  of  God  clothes  Himself  when 
He  acts  in  the  heart  of  man.  Here,  it  is  true,  every- 
thing is  imperfect.  There  are  things  taken  for  granted 
here,  which  form  the  basis  of  these  ordinances,  which 
the  full  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  would  entirely 
take  away;  divorce,  for  instance,  and  other  things 
endured,  owing  their  existence  to  the  hardness  of 
man's  heart.  But  the  limitations  and  conditions,  as- 
signed by  the  law  of  God,  keep  in  check  the  wicked- 
ness of  that  will  which  hardens  itself,  while  it  oppresses 
others. 

Chapter  xxv.  adds  ordinances  which  are  a  continua- 
tion of  what  we  have  already  read;  taking  care  that 
none  of  their  brethren  should  be  dishonoured  in  their 
eyes,  and  that  no  family  should  perish  from  among  the 
people  (there  being,  at  the  same  time,  the  maintenance 
of  purity  and  uprightness). 

As  to  the  inveterate  enemies  of  God  and  His  people, 
Israel  was  never  to  seek  peace  with  them.  Human 
amiability  is  often  enmity  with  God.  This  ordinance 
is  so  much  the  more  remarkable,  because  it  follows  so 
many  others  which  made  provision  for  kindness,  even 
to  a  bird. 

Jehovah  had  taken  care  that  an  Egyptian  should 
find  the  entrance  into  the  assembly  of  God ;  but  those 
affections  were  to  be  in  exercise  towards  the  Egyptians 
for  the  good  of  the  souls  of  the  Israelites  themselves. 
They  were  not  to  harden  their  hearts  against  those  in 
whose  midst  they  had  sojourned.  But  to  spare  the 
Amalekites  (who  came  to  meet  Israel  to  shut  up  their 
way  and  destroy  the  feeble  ones  among  them)  was  to 
forget  what  was  due  to  God,  who  brought  them  back ; 
and,  as  regarded  the  people,  it  would  have  proved  in- 
difference of  heart  to  evil,  and  not  the  effusion  of  a 
natural  affection;  neither  was  it  yielding  to  remem- 
brances, with  which  charity  might  mingle  for  good,  by 


DEUTEEONOMT.  309 

a  becoming  forgetfulness  of  wrongs  formerly  received.* 
Where  there  is  nobleness  of  sentiment,  men  who  know 
(though  they  have  injured)  each  other,  still  will  own 
one  another  when  the  evil  is  over. 

But  there  is  a  spirit  which  claims  nothing  but  dis- 
gust :  to  tolerate  it  is  only  sparing  oneself,  and  admit- 
ting that  very  spirit  into  one's  heart  so  as  to  partake 
of  it.  Wliat  is  in  question  is  not  judging,  but  the 
state  of  one's  own  heart.  The  distance  of  an  Egyptian 
from  God  was  recognised ;  but  if  he  were  in  relation- 
ship with  Him  during  three  generations,  why  should 
he  be  kept  at  a  distance  ?  why  should  he  remain  a 
stranger  ?  But  Amalek  did  not  fear  God — did  not 
recognise  Him.  What  then  could  be  recognised  in 
such  a  nation  ?  We  must  bring  God  into  our  affairs — 
our  relationships;  and  charity,  firmness,  justness  in  oiir 
judgments,  will  each  find  its  place,  and  be  reproduced 
in  all  our  ways. 

To  close  this  succession  of  ordinances,  we  have 
(chap,  xxvi.)  a  most  beautiful  picture  of  the  worship 
consequent  on  the  enjoyment  of  the  land  according 
to  the  promises  of  God,  a  picture  full  of  instruction 
for  us  too. 

First,  we  find  the  main  subject  of  this  book  appears 
as  everywhere  else :  Israel  is  in  the  land  whieh  God 
had  given  him  for  an  inheritance. 

But,  as  to  worship,  it  is  not  looked  at  here  in  the 
light  of  drawing  near  to  God  in  the  holy  place,  by 
means  of  sacrifices  which,  supposing  sin,  opened  the 
way  for  the  people  into  the  presence  of  Jehovah.  This 
characterises  the  whole  book.  Then  the  question  was, 
could  they,  or  how  far  could  they,  or  how  near  could 

*  The  Egyptians  were  merely  that  in  which  Israel  was  held 
naturally.  The  Amalekites  were  positive  active  enemies  against 
them  when  the  redeemed  people  of  God.  One  was  really  man, 
though  fallen  man  without  God — I  honour  all  men ;  the  other, 
the  positive  direct  power  of  the  enemy. 
XXV.,  XXVI. 


310  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

they  or  the  priests — draw  near  to  Jehovah  in  the  sanc- 
tuary of  His  holiness.  What  Deuteronomy  presents  is, 
while  acknowledging  their  previous  state,  the  festal 
enjoyment  of  the  effect  of  all  the  promises,  only  as 
coming  from,  and  they  themselves  identified  with 
Jehovah.  (So  in  chaps,  xii.  and  xiv.)  *  They  enjoy  the 
promise,  and  present  themselves  as  worshippers,  giving 
thanks  as  enjoying  it.  In  presenting  the  firstfruits  of 
the  land  of  promise,  they  were  to  go  up  to  the  place 
where  the  Lord  had  placed  His  name.  What  then  was 
the  spirit  of  that  worship  ? 

First,  it  was  based  on  the  open  confession  that  they 
were  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  effect  of  the  promise 
of  God.  "  I  profess  this  day  unto  Jehovah  that  I  am 
come  unto  the  country  which  Jehovah  sware  unto  our 
fathers  to  give  us."  That  is  the  first  feature  of  that 
worship — the  full  profession  of  being  in  the  enjoyment 
of  the  effect  of  the  promise.  It  was  the  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  faithfulness  of  God  in  the  present  commu- 
nion of  His  goodness.  Thereupon  the  offering  was 
presented. 

Then,  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  the  worshipper 
made  confession  of  the  redemption  and  deliverance  of 
the  people.  A  Syrian,  ready  to  perish,  was  his  father ; 
and  afterwards,  when  his  children,  oppressed  by  the 
Egyptians,  cried  unto  Jehovah,  Jehovah  had  heard  and 
delivered  them  with  an  outstretched  arm,  and  had,  by 
a  display  of  His  power,  brought  them  up  into  the  land 
they  were  enjoying. 

*  These  two  characters  on  worship,  the  wilderness  worship- 
per's approach  to  Jehovah,  and  the  enjoyment  of  promises  in 
the  land,  are  not  separated  for  Christians  as  they  are  in  these 
books,  because  we  have  entered  into,  and  are  in,  the  hoHest,  in 
heavenly  places,  and  the  things  we  enjoy  are  the  things  that  are 
there.  It  is  all  one,  though  we  shall  reign  over  a  subject  in- 
heritance, but  our  undefiled  inheritance  is  there  where  we  are 
entered.  This  is  a  blessed  truth.  It  is  with,  not  from.  We 
have  from ;  but  we  joy  in  God. 


DEUTERONOMY.  811 

The  second  feature,  then,  is  the  confession  of  what 
their  misery  had  been,  of  their  impotency  in  time  past, 
and  that  their  redemption  has  been  accompHshed  by 
Jehovah  alone,  to  whom  they  were  indebted  for  all 
these  blessings.  Thereupon  the  worshipper  directly 
addresses  Jehovah,  presenting  Him  with  the  firstfruits 
of  those  blessings.  It  was  the  recognition  of  God  in 
the  blessings  (the  infallible  effect  of  a  work  of  God  in 
the  heart),  and  the  only  means  of  truly  enjoying  them ; 
for  God's  blessings  turn  the  heart  away  froin  Him,  if 
their  first  effect  is  not  to  turn  it  to  Him.  That  is  the 
history  of  Israel,  and  a  thousand  times  alas !  in  the 
details  of  life,  that  of  our  own  hearts.  A  pious  heart 
acknowledges  God  Himself  in  the  blessing,  before 
enjoying  it.  See  a  beautiful  example  in  the  conduct  of 
Eliezer,  the  servant  of  Abraham,  sent  to  fetch  a  wife 
for  Isaac. 

Then  it  is  added,  "  And  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  every 
good  thing  which  Jehovah  thy  God  hath  given  unto 
thee."  They  were  to  enjoy  them  with  God ;  and,  con- 
sequently, observe  here,  that  in  this  the  spirit  of  grace 
]  manifests  itself  at  once :  "  Thou,  the  Levite,  and  the 
stranger  that  is  within  thy  gate."  It  is  impossible 
truly  to  rejoice  in  the  blessing  of  God  before  ffim, 
without  the  spirit  of  grace  being  present — without 
returning  blessing  for  cursing,  knowing  that  we  are 
called  to  inherit  His  blessing.  The  same  truth  is  found 
again  in  the  tithes  of  the  third  year,  given  to  the  poor, 
the  Levite,  &c.,  according  to  the  spirit  which  we  have 
just  spoken  of. 

Another  feature  of  the  state  of  heart  of  the  true 
worshipper  was  holiness  in  consecrating  to  Jehovah, 
with  uprightness  of  heart,  that  which  was  due  to  Him 
according  to  grace.  He  was  not  to  be  robbed  in  any- 
thing for  appropriation  to  oneself :  nothing  was  to  be 
profaned  by  applying  it  to  self — to  defiled  or  interested 
uses. 

XXVI. 


312  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

In  a  word,  the  conscience  was  good  as  regarded  con- 
secration to  Jehovah,  in  the  things  by  which  the 
worshipper  acknowledged  Him  as  the  true  and  sole 
Author  of  all  the  blessings.  And  if  Jehovah  was  the 
Author  of  them,  communion  with  Him,  in  acknowledg- 
ing Him,  was  enjoyed  in  the  spirit  of  holiness,  of  con- 
secration to  Him,  and  in  the  spirit  of  goodness  and 
grace  that  was  in  Him  towards  His  poor  and  forsaken 
ones.  The  character  of  God  is  introduced  again  and 
again,  and  His  name  brouoht  in,  in  that  which  is  re- 
cognised  in  the  communion  of  His  people;  if  over- 
looked, the  people  were  guilty  and  defiled,  in  that 
they  had  profaned  the  name  of  the  Lord.  This  con- 
secration in  purity  to  God,  and  this  expression  of  His 
goodness,  are  singularly  beautiful.  Then  the  blessing 
of  God  was  implored,  not  only  upon  oneself,  from  God 
who  cared  for  all  His  people,  but  upon  all  Israel,  upon 
the  land  which  was  the  proof  of  the  faithfulness  of 
God  and  of  the  riches  of  His  goodness. 

This  chapter  is  of  great  importance,  and  a  kind  of 
summing  up  of  the  spirit  proposed  of  God  in  the 
whole  book :  it  is  the  last  chapter  of  the  body  of 
its  contents.  It  refers  to  no  promises  to  Abraham, 
Isaac,  &c.,  but  takes  the  history  of  Israel  from 
Jacob's  going  down  into  Egypt,  a  Syrian  ready  to 
perish  ;  oppressed  in  Egypt  they  cried  to  the  God  of 
their  fathers,  historically  so  known  (not  the  pro- 
mises), and  they  were  delivered  with  great  signs, 
and  Jehovah  had  brought  them  into  that  good  land 
where  they  were,  and  they  brought  the  firstfruits  of 
the  land  Jehovah  had  given  them.  It  was  the  ac- 
knowledgment of  the  possession  of  blessing  in  the 
land  given  by  Jehovah  through  grace.  This  was  their 
worship ;  and  they,  and  Levites,  and  strangers  rejoiced 
together  there  in  all  the  good  Jehovah  had  given.  They 
did  so  also,  when  they  had  given  to  fatherless,  widows, 
Levites,  strangers,  the  tithes  of  the  third  year,  which 


DEUTERONOMY.  313 

were  eaten  within  their  gates,  they  declare  their  clean- 
ness and  uprightness  ;  there  had  been  no  profanation, 
but  obedience  in  all  things  as  to  their  ordinances;  and 
thereupon  an  appeal  to  God  for  blessing  on  the  people 
and  the  land.  The  land  possessed,  its  firstfruits  offered 
to  Jehovah ;  then  comes  rejoicing  in  all  the  good  Jehovah 
gave ;  then  fellowship  in  grace  with  all  in  need  every 
third  year,  and  with  this,  avowal  of  purity  of  ways, 
thoroughness  in  doing  it,  and  obedience,  and  so  a  bless- 
ing looked  for.  It  is  a  picture  of  the  true  state  of  the 
people  with  Jehovah,  and  in  the  land,  and  walking 
uprightly,  considering  the  needy,  that  the  blessing 
might  rest  upon  them ;  and  on  this  ground  they  now 
entered  into  covenant  with  Jehovah  to  possess  and 
enjoy  the  land  in  obedience,  and  be  fully  blessed  and 
exalted. 

This  worship  was,  then,  a  bond  between  the  people 
and  God,  in  the  communion  of  what  He  was ;  that  is,  a 
bond  in  worship, by  acknowledging  what  He  was;  and 
by  bearing  witness  to  it.  Thus,  according  to  the  com- 
mandments of  Jehovah,  looked  at  as  the  conditions  of 
this  bond,  God  had  that  day  acknowledged  the  people, 
and  the  people  had  acknowledged  Jehovah  for  their 
God.     This  closes  the  teaching  of  the  book. 

Now  comes  the  sanction — that  is  to  say,  that  which 
gives  vigour  to  His  law — in  the  consequences  (blessings 
and  curses)  which  were  to  correspond  with  obedience 
or  disobedience.  This  is  brought  out  in  chapter  xxvii. 
and  two  following  chapters. 

Chapter  xxvii.  is  by  itself,  however,  and  is  of  rather 
wide  scope  in  the  understanding  of  the  word  of  God. 
If  individual  piety  expressed  itself  in  the  manner  we 
have  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter,  the  public  relations 
of  the  people  with  God  were  based  on  the  threats  of 
the  law.  When  the  people  should  have  gone  over 
Jordan  to  take  possession  of  the  land  of  promise  (an 
idea  which  constantly  presents  itself),  having  set  up 

XXVI.,  XXVII. 


314  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

great  stones  and  plastered  them  with  plaster,  they 
were  to  write  the  law  upon  them.  This  law  contained 
the  conditions  on  which  the  land  was  to  be  enjoyed. 

The  people  were  to  divide  themselves  into  two  com- 
panies of  tribes,  part  being  placed  upon  Mount 
Gerizim  to  bless,  the  other  upon  Ebal  to  curse.  Upon 
the  latter  was  an  altar  to  be  erected  to  Jehovah,  not 
for  sin-ofFerings,  but  for  burnt-offerings  and  peace- 
offerings  :  a  worship  pre-supposing  a  righteous  people 
in  communion  with  Jehovah,  but  placed  under  the 
curse  if  they  should  break  the  law.  The  announce- 
ment of  the  curses  follows,  ending  with  that  curse 
which  would  rest  on  every  one,  not  continuing  in  all 
the  things  which  were  written  in  the  book  of  the  law 
to  do  them.  But  the  blessings  of  Gerizim  are  entirely 
omitted. 

It  is  needless  to  insist  upon  the  importance  of  this 
blank.  The  apostle  seizes  on  it  as  the  place  of  all 
under  the  law.  "As  many  as  are  of  the  works  of 
the  law*  are  under  the  curse,"  says  the  apostle :  "  for 
it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not 
in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the 
law."  There  is  no  possibility  of  escape.  No  one, 
except  the  Lord  Jesus,  has  accomplished  it;  and  He, 
if  one  may  so  speak,  did  not  raise  an  altar  for  burnt- 
offering,  an  altar  of  worship  for  a  righteous  man  who 
had  fulfilled  the  law — for  Himself  alone;  but  He 
offered  Himself  for  us  on  that  mountain  of  cursing  as 
an  offering  for  sin,  and  has  thus  silenced  for  ever  all 
those  threats  and  curses.  The  blessing  of  Gerizim, 
consequently,  is  not  sufficient  either.  Heaven,  and, 
moreover,  for  Him,  the  Father's  throne,  are  the  only 
worthy  answer  and  reward  for  what  He  has  accom- 

*  This  expression  does  not  contemplate  the  conduct,  but  the 
principle  on  which  we  stand  before  God.  Those  who  are  of  faith 
are  linked  with  faithful  Abraham  ;  those  that  are  of  the  works  of 
the  law  are  under  the  curse,  for  the  law  saith,  "Cursed,"  &c. 


DEUTERONOMY.  315 

plished  by  suffering  for  our  sins.  But  this  is  the 
righteousness  of  God,  giving  to  Christ,  and  so  conse- 
quently to  us,  what  He  was  fully  entitled  to  in  having 
glorified  God,  and  to  us  what  He  has  obtained  for  us. 

The  connection  between  the  principles  of  chapter 
xxvi.  and  those  of  chapter  xxvii.  is  deeply  interesting  : 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 
land,  the  basis  of  thanksgivings  and  of  the  worship 
which  has  its  source  in  redemption;  afterwards  the 
altar,  the  service  to  be  rendered  to  God,  a  service 
linked  to  His  law,  the  violation  of  which,  in  a  single 
point,  brought  the  curse.  This  was  the  condition  of 
their  enjoyment  of  it. 

It  is  in  that  point  of  view,  the  only  one  which  went 
to  the  root  of  the  question,  that  the  apostle  looks  at 
it.  It  is  on  the  ground  of  this  covenant  of  Deuter- 
onomy that  the  people  became  the  people  of  Jehovah 
on  their  entering  the  land.  (Compare  vers.  2,  10,  and 
chap.  xxix.  1.) 

In  chapter  xxviii.  we  have  the  principles  of  God's 
government  in  the  midst  of  that  people,  and  the  im- 
mediate consequences  of  obedience  or  disobedience — 
consequences  so  solemnly  fulfilled  in  the  fate  of  that 
unhappy  people,  still  beloved  for  the  fathers'  sakes. 
The  consequences  of  the  violation  of  the  law  as  a 
principle  of  relationship  with  God,  as  to  the  point  of 
a  righteousness  which  was  adequate  ground  of  God's 
acceptance,  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  tempor- 
ary consequences  of  disobedience  under  the  govern- 
ment of  God.  It  is  to  these  latter  that  chapter  xxviii. 
has  reference.  We  may  notice  for  ourselves  the  deep 
instruction  of  verses  47,  48.  As  to  Israel,  universal 
history  presents  to  us  the  accomplishment  of  the 
threats  of  the  chapter. 

Chapter  xxix.  is  the  personal  application  to  the  con- 
science of  the  people,  both  collectively  and  individu- 
ally, of  all  that  precedes,  that  there  may  be  no  bitter 

XXVII.-XXIX. 


316  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

root  of  sin.  (Compare  Heb.  xii.  15,  the  application  of 
this  exhortation  to  the  discipline  and  the  loving  care 
of  saints  now.) 

Verse  29  requires  to  be  noticed.  We  find  in  it  the 
contrast  between  the  consequences  thus  revealed  of 
obedience  and  disobedience,  and  the  purposes  of  God 
in  behalf  of  the  people,  notwithstanding  their  dis- 
obedience— purposes  which  evidently  could  not  be  a 
rule  for  their  conduct.  The  rule  was  found  in  the 
ordinance  of  the  law.  The  meaning  of  this  verse  has 
been  so  twisted,  that  it  is  worth  while  thus  to  point 
out  its  force.  The  secret  things  are  the  purposes  of 
God  with  regard  to  the  people,  though  they  should 
have  been  disobedient  and  driven  out  of  the  land; 
but,  although  they  are  not  the  rule  of  conduct,  they 
are  revealed  and  are  of  deep  interest.  In  what 
follows,  God  begins  already  to  present  them  to  our 
attention,  and  surely  it  becomes  us  to  consider  them. 

Thus  we  have,  in  these  chapters,  the  relationship  of 
the  pious  Jew  with  God,  grounded  upon  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers,  in  the 
present  enjoyment  of  the  land ;  the  relationship  of  the 
people  with  God,  in  view  of  the  curse  pronounced  upon 
the  violation  of  the  law ;  the  relationship  of  the  people 
with  God,  according  to  the  principles  of  His  govern- 
ment, the  consequences  brought  in,  either  by  their 
obedience  or  disobedience:  and,  finally,  after  the  dis- 
obedience, and  when  this  has  produced  its  fruit,  the 
designs  of  God  according  to  His  purpose,  which  nothing 
could  alter. 

We  must  now  dwell  a  little  on  this  last  point.  Chap- 
ter XXX.  furnishes  us  with  an  important  principle.  It 
supposes  that  the  people  have  already  incurred  the 
consequences  of  disobedience,  and  they  are  seen  as 
driven  out  of  the  land,  and  strangers  among  distant 
nations.    The  law  could  not  be  followed  out  in  such  a 


DEUTERONOMY.  317 

case;  and,  indeed,  the  violation  of  the  law  had  even 
then  produced  its  fruits. 

But  then  quite  a  new  principle  is  introduced :  the 
return  of  the  hearts  of  the  people  to  Jehovah,  and 
obedience,  one  must  add,  in  spirit.  Thereupon  Jeho- 
vah brings  them  back  into  their  land,  and  blesses  them 
in  it.  The  curse  is  put  on  their  enemies ;  and  they 
are  to  observe  in  the  land  the  ordinances  of  Jeho- 
vah, enjoying  anew  His  full  blessing ;  for  the  com- 
mandment was  neither  in  heaven,  nor  beyond  the 
seas,  but  in  the  mouth  and  in  the  heart.  This  was 
not  the  new  covenant,  but  faith  laying  hold  of  the 
spirit  of  the  law  in  principle,  and  turning  the  heart 
towards  Jehovah,  when  the  law  was  externally  im- 
practicable. 

The  establishment  of  the  new  covenant,  based  on 
this  return  of  the  heart,  at  a  time  appointed  of  God, 
will  be  something  well  defined.  Here  we  have  the 
principle  of  their  return  when  under  the  curse  of  the 
law  they  had  broken.  Hence,  the  apostle  quotes  this 
passage  for  the  basis  of  the  principle,  as  a  testimony 
given  to  what  righteousness  by  faith  was,  applying  it 
to  Christ  Himself — the  return  of  the  heart  to  the 
object  and  end  of  the  law,  when  judgment  was  on 
them  for  its  violation,  and  hope  of  righteousness  by 
its  accomplishment  impossible — how  Christ  was  the 
end  of  the  law  for  righteousness.  The  principle  is 
found  here.  The  apostle  brings  in  Christ  as  the  true 
accomplishment  of  it.  At  the  end  of  the  chaptei, 
Moses  declares  that  he  has  now  set  before  them  the 
good  and  the  evil,  and  that  they  would  have  to  bear 
the  consequence  of  their  choice. 

In  clxapter  xxxi.  he  introduces  Joshua,  as  the  leader 
under  whom  the  people  were  to  take  possession  of  the 
promised  land.  He  orders  that  the  law  should  be 
read  before  all  every  seventh  year,  in  order  that  every 
one  might  take  notice  of  it,  in  that  solemn  moment 

XXIX.-XXXI. 


318  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE  BIBLE. 

when,  enjoying  afresh,  as  it  were,  the  blessing  which 
it  secured  to  them,  they  submitted  to  it  as  a  testimony 
that  the  land,  as  well  as  everything,  belonged  to 
Jehovah.  Afterwards,  when  Joshua  is  established 
in  his  charge,  Moses  is  ordered  to  communicate  to 
the  people  a  song  inspired  of  God,  which,  based 
upon  the  certainty  of  the  iniquity  of  the  people, 
announces  the  ways  of  the  Lord  towards  them;  com- 
manding the  Levites,  at  the  same  time,  to  put  the 
written  law  by  the  side  of  the  ark,  as  a  witness  against 
the  people. 

Chapter  xxxii.  We  have  the  prophetic  song,  which 
is  based  on  the  foreknown  fall  of  the  people.  First, 
it  declares  the  perfectness  of  Jehovah,  whatever  may 
take  place  ;  it  is  Israel  who  have  corrupted  themselves. 
(Compare  Ps.  xxii.  8.  Christ  can  say,  "  Why  ? ")  At 
the  same  time  (ver.  8)  we  have  an  all-important  decla- 
ration; namely,  that  God,  in  His  government  of  the 
world,  had  made  Israel  the  centre,  and  had  arranged 
the  nations  of  the  earth,  in  their  various  localities,  as 
having  respect  to  the  bounds  of  Israel  as  being  the 
first  object  of  those  ways.  For  His  earthly  people 
are  Jehovah's  portion.  His  inheritance  upon  earth. 
But  Jeshurun  (Israel)  waxed  fat,  and  kicked,  and  for- 
sook the  Rock  of  his  strength.  Consequently  God 
moves  them  to  jealousy  with  those  that  are  not  a 
people.  It  is  the  call  of  the  Gentiles,  according  to 
Romans  x.  19. 

The  judgment,  nevertheless,  falls  upon  Israel,  so  that 
God  would  have  destroyed  them,  had  not  the  glory  of 
His  name  hindered  Him,  for  the  Gentiles  proved 
themselves  perfectly  wicked.  Then,  the  people  being 
distressed,  without  strength  and  without  hope,  He  re- 
members them,  and  finally  takes  vengeance  on  their 
enemies,  those  idolatrous  Gentiles.  But,  though  aveng- 
ing Himself,  it  is  then  that,  having  restored  His  people 
Israel,  He  will  cause  the  Gentiles  to  rejoice  in  Him. 


DEUTERONOMY.  319 

This  principle  is  true  already ;  but  the  testimony  it 
furnishes  will  be  fully  accomplished  when  Israel  is 
again  restored  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  promises ;  when 
God  will  manifest  His  mercy  towards  His  land,  as 
well  as  towards  His  people.  The  whole  course  of  His 
dealings,  in  respect  of  the  people  who  form  the  centre 
of  His  ways  upon  earth,  is  thus  fully  brought  out. 
Afterwards,  Moses  puts  obedience  (the  great  end  of 
this  book,  Israel  being  placed  under  the  condition  of 
obedience  for  continuance  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 
promises)  before  them  again,  and  reminds  them  that 
thereby  they  would  prolong  their  days  in  the  land 
which  they  were  going  up  to  possess. 

At  last  poor  Moses  has  to  go  up  Mount  Nebo,  to  see 
the  land  into  which  he  cannot  enter,  not  having 
answered  the  requirement  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the 
wilderness,  nor  sanctified  His  name  by  faith.  It  is  the 
unavoidable  consequence  of  the  just  government  of 
God  towards  a  servant — I  mean  under  the  law.  He 
does  not  get  into  the  enjoyment  of  the  promise.  A 
single  fault  deprives  him  of  it. 

We  have  also  the  blessings  of  this  man  of  God,  pro- 
nounced over  the  people  before  his  death.  (Chap, 
xxxiii.)  The  blessings  of  Jacob  were  more  historical 
regarding  the  future.  Here  they  are  rather  relation- 
ship with  God  according  to  His  government.  Twelve 
is  still  the  number  of  the  tribes  (Simeon  being  omitted 
to  make  room  for  two  tribes  of  the  posterity  of  Joseph, 
the  firstborn  as  to  the  inheritance,  instead  of  Reuben). 
Here  it  is  according  to  the  blessing  of  God,  and  not 
according  to  the  rights  of  nature.  Upon  this  latter 
principle,  Israel,  represented  by  Reuben,  will  be  dimi- 
nished, but  will  not  die. 

Jehovah  is  there  in  majesty,  with  the  terror  of  the 
law  in  His  right  hand ;  but  He  loves  the  people,  that 
is  to  say.  His  saints  there  surroundin-g  Him  to  receive 
His  words.     The  people  receive  a  law,  through  the 

XXXII.,   XXXIII. 


320  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

mediation  of  Moses,  which  is  the  inheritance  of  the 
congregation  of  Jacob.  This  Moses  is  there  as  king. 
These,  then,  are  the  relationships  on  which  these 
blessings  are  based. 

The  blessings  are  not  here  presented  historically  as 
those  of  the  children  of  the  fathers,  and,  consequently, 
in  connection  with  Shiloh,  the  Rock  of  Israel,  nor  as 
a  complete  view  of  God's  ways  in  Israel,  as  in  Genesis; 
but  the  subject  is  the  relationship  of  Jehovah  with 
the  people,  as  in  possession  of  the  land  (as  in  the  rest 
of  the  book),  and  placed  under  the  government  of 
God :  Jehovah  blessing,  but  blessing  according  to  the 
majesty  of  Sinai,  and  of  His  revelation  of  Himself 
in  the  bush  ;  Moses,  the  king,  being  the  channel  of 
these  blessings,  which  had  thus  refei^ence  to  the 
nation,  and  were  based  upon  this  relationship  with 
God. 

Thus  Levi  is  blessed,  having  been  faithful  to  Jeho- 
vah ;  Joseph  has  the  blessing  and  the  goodwill  of  Him 
that  dwelt  in  the  bush,  having  been  separated  from 
his  brethren,  fearing  God,  and  being  the  vessel  of  His 
purposes.  This  was  accordingly  the  position  of  the 
two  tribes  in  the  land,  as  Simeon,  not  mentioned  here, 
was,  so  to  speak,  lost  in  the  land ;  his  portion  was 
where  the  Philistines  dwelt. 

We  must  also  remark  here,  that  the  chief  blessings 
rest  upon  him  who,  for  the  sake  of  God,  neither  knew 
his  father  nor  his  mother,  that  is,  Levi ;  and  upon 
Joseph,  who,  for  the  glory  of  God,  was  separated  from 
his  own.  Both  were  His.  Levi  has  the  most  excellent 
place ;  his  separation,  which  should  actually  take 
place,  was  a  fruit  of  faithfulness.  Joseph  has,  perhaps, 
more  sensible  enjoyment ;  he  was  faithful  to  God  in 
his  involuntary  separation.  Both  these  are  completely 
realised  in  Christ. 

If  the  blessing  of  God  preserves  life  to  Reuben, 
with  but  few  men,  Judah  is  presented  to  Jehovah, 


DEUTERONOMY.  321 

that  he  may  be  heard,  and  that  the  help  of  Jehovah 
may  be  with  him.  The  expression,  "  Bring  him  unto 
his  people,"  deserves  careful  notice,  in  the  relations 
which  have  existed  between  that  people  and  God, 
seeing  the  position  of  Judah  in  their  history,  under 
the  government  of  God,  and  its  present  dispersion, 
and  in  that  which  is  yet  to  take  place,  when  the 
union  of  the  whole  people  will  be  restored  in  their 
own  place. 

Levi  occupies  the  third  place,  Simeon  being  left 
out.  The  request  of  the  prophet-king  for  him  (Levi) 
is  the  everlasting  priesthood  of  the  people  of  God 
(upon  earth,  of  course).  "His  holy  one"  is  used  in 
the  sense  of  piety  towards  God — grace  in  the  heart. 
He  requests  that  light  and  perfection  (Urim  and 
Thummim)  in  the  intelligence  of  the  relations  which 
would  in  reality  exist  at  all  times  between  the  people 
and  God,  and  between  God  and  the  people  in  return, 
might  be  with  the  man  of  grace  and  piety,  officially 
the  priestly  tribe. 

But  the  basis  of  this  request  is  remarkable,  as  to  the 
government  of  God.  Ood  proved  the  people  at 
Massah,  and  strove  with  them  at  Meribah.  Now,  that 
is  precisely  what  is  attributed  to  Israel  historically. 
They  tried  (or  tempted)  God  at  Massah,  and  strove 
with  Him  at  Meribah.  But  where  the  flesh  manifested 
itself  in  Israel,  there  did  God  put  His  priest  to  the 
test ;  and  at  the  waters  of  Meribah,  where  Moses  did 
not  sanctify  Him,  He  was  in  controversy  with  Moses.* 
Painful  circumstances — ^the  being  deprived  of  the  stream 
of  manifest  and  sensible  blessings  in  the  midst  of  the 
people  of  God,  a  state  which  makes  room  for  the  mani- 

*  No  doubt  the  fall  of  this  man  of  Grod  was  the  eflfect  of  his 
previous  state,  for  he  was  a  man.  Trial,  when  we  are  not  going 
on  well,  is  chastening,  but  needful  chastening,  and  a  blessing  in 
result.  Therefore,  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  a  blessing,  it  is 
said,  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation." 

VOL.  I.  XXXIII.  T 


322  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

festation  of  rebellious  flesh,  and  for  murmurs  against 
God  in  the  wilderness,  tempting  God  and  saying,  "  Is 
He  amongst  us  ?" — are  trials  to  which  God  subjects 
His  priests.  The  church,  in  her  priestly  position,  and 
especially  those  who  have  the  good  of  the  church  at 
heart,  are  also  put  to  the  test,  to  see  whether  they 
know  how  to  reckon  upon  the  blessing  of  God,  how- 
ever things  may  be. 

But,  although  Levi  was  put  to  the  test  in  his 
priesthood,  he  had  been  put  to  the  test  in  order  to 
obtain  it ;  and  Levi  had  not  hesitated  one  moment 
in  choosing  between  man  and  God — even  man  in  the 
nearest  relationship  according  to  the  flesh.  That  is 
the  sole  basis  of  all  priesthood.  One  can  only  stand 
before  God  on  the  behalf  of  another,  in  proportion 
as  one  has  oneself  stood  truly  for  God  before  man. 
For  with  what  God  would  one  be  a  mediator  ?  It 
would  not  be  with  the  holy  God,  who  has  a  right 
to  our  whole  being.  There  could  only,  as  to  sinners, 
be  the  sympathy  of  the  flesh,  which  connects  itself 
with  sins. 

One  must  be  accepted  in  the  presence  of  God,  ac- 
cording to  His  holiness,  in  order  to  be  able  to  intercede 
for  man  in  his  weakness.  This  is  absolutely  true  of 
Jesus,  and  of  us  all  in  a  practical  sense.  But  to  be  so, 
there  must  be  the  testimony  when  the  question  is 
raised ;  and  this  must  needs  cost  us  something  before 
men.  One  must  be  for  God,  not  sparing  oneself, 
hating  father  and  mother.  This  instruction  is  impor- 
tant. There  must  also  be  the  distinguishing  between 
the  trial  of  our  priesthood  and  the  trial  of  ourselves 
before  entering  upon  it.  Here  the  practical  trial, 
where  we  are  so,  is  spoken  of,  for  we  are  priests  by 
grace,  yet  fitted  by  full  exercise  of  heart,  separating 
us  to  God. 

It  would  seem  that  the  place  of  Benjamin,  in  rela- 
tion with  Jehovah,  was  in  His  favour;  being  kept  near 


DEUTERONOMY.  323 

J*-Ii:^\  as  has  been  the  case  with  that  tribe,  within  whose 
iiiiiits  was  Jerusalem. 

Joseph  had  his  earthly  blessing  by  the  title  of  first- 
born; as  to  the  inheritance,  his  land  is  blessed,  the 
double  portion  is  assigned  to  him. 

I  have  no  remarks  to  make  on  the  other  blessings, 
except  that  those  of  Zebulun  and  Issachar  seem  to  be 
ycG  iatui-e,  and  those  of  Gad  to  establish  the  relations 
which  existed  already. 

But,  moreover,  if  the  ways  of  God  towards  His 
people  were  connected  with  their  faithfulness  and  the 
manifestation  of  Himself — if  God  suited  His  ways  to 
their  conduct  to  manifest  His  government  and 
Himself — He  also  exalted  Himself  above  all  to  bless 
vjiid  to  keep.  He  would  fall  back  upon  the  title  of 
His  own  glory  in  order  to  be  to  them  an  infallible 
source  of  blessing  and  security;  He  would  make 
known  His  glory  in  the  behalf  of  Israel ;  He  rode 
upon  the  heavens  in  their  help.  Where  His  majesty 
was,  there  was  the  help  of  the  people.  He  would  up- 
hold them  also,  would  destroy  their  enemies,  and  thne 
should  Israel  dwell  in  safety  alone.  The  nation  should 
dwell  in  a  fruitful  land,  on  which  the  heavens  would 
drop  down  blessings  as  dew.  Happy  people !  objects 
of  the  deliverance  of  God,  who  was  unto  them  as  a 
shield  and  a  sword.  Their  enemies  would  be  subdued 
under  them. 

Thus,  whatever  might  be  the  details  of  the  relation- 
ship of  the  people  with  God,  in  His  government  of 
them.  He  would  bless  them  in  the  end,  as  a  people, 
according  to  His  sovereign  glory  and  majesty. 

We  have  now  to  consider  a  little  the  prohibition  to 
which  Moses  was  subjected,  not  to  enter  the  land  of 
promise.  Moses,  the  man  of  God,  might  pronounce  the 
blessings  on  Israel  as  in  the  land ;  but  he  himself,  as 
servant  of  God,  belonged  to  the  wilderness.  There  are 
more  things  than  one  to  be  weighed  here.     As  to  the 

XXXIII. 


324  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

position  of  Moses,  it  was  that  of  the  government  of  a 
people,  placed  under  the  principles  of  Sinai ;  that  is, 
while  under  the  government  of  God,  it  was  in  the  flesh 
that  His  people  were  subjected  to  that  government. 
(Compare  Rom.  ix.  5,  where  the  subject  is  fully  dis- 
cussed.) 

Now,  man  in  the  flesh,  under  the  government  of 
God,  cannot  come  into  the  enjoyment  of  the  promise. 
This  is  true  even  of  a  Christian.  Risen  with  Christ, 
he  is  seated  in  the  heavenly  places,  he  enjoys  the  pro- 
mise in  the  presence  of  God ;  or,  at  least,  his  affections 
look  up  there,  his  life  is  hid  there  with  Christ;*  but, 
as  a  man  upon  earth,  he  is  under  the  government  of 
God,  who  acts  towards  him  according  to  the  mani- 
festation of  the  spiritual  life  here  below ;  and  Christ 
is  between  him  and  God,  exercising  priesthood  and 
advocacy,  which  do  not  establish  righteousness  (that  is 
done  once  for  all),  but  which  maintain  the  relationship 
of  weak  men  with  God  in  the  light — to  the  fellowship 
of  which  they  are  called  in  Christ  who  is  in  it — by 
obtaining  mercy  and  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need  so 
that  they  should  not  fall,  or  to  restore  them  if  they  do, 
through  the  advocacy  by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit 
upon  earth. 

Crossing  Jordan  was  our  death  and  resurrection  with 
Christ  in  a  figure.  Joshua  always  represents  Christ, 
Head  of  His  people,  according  to  the  power  of  the 
Spirit.  But  the  wilderness  is  this  world.  Moses  directs 
and  governs  the  people  there  according  to  God;  con- 
sequently he  does  not  enter  into  Canaan. 


*  The  former  is  the  teaching  of  the  Ephesians,  the  second,  of 
the  Colossians.  In  the  former,  dead  in  sin,  he  is  raised  up  and 
set  in  Christ  in  heavenly  places.  It  is  a  new  creation.  In  the 
latter,  he  has  died  to  sin  and  is  risen  with  Christ,  and  his  affec- 
tions are  to  be  set  on  heavenly  things.  In  this  last  epistle  he  is 
viewed  also  as  dead  in  sins  and  quickened  together  with  Christ, 
but  not  as  sitting  in  heavenly  places. 


DEUTERONOMY.  325 

The  difference  (we  shall  dwell  on  that  more  at  length 
when  we  study  the  Book  of  Joshua)  between  the  Red 
Sea  and  Jordan  is,  that  the  Red  Sea  was  the  efficacy  of 
redemption  through  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Christ  Himself,  and  we  are  viewed,  withal,  in  Him; 
Jordan  was  the  application  of  it  to  the  soul,  as  having 
died  with  Him  in  order  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  pro- 
mises. The  passage  of  the  Red  Sea  was  followed  by 
songs  of  joy;  that  of  Jordan,  by  conflict  and  the 
realisation  of  the  promises. 

As  to  Moses  himself,  personally,  the  fault  which  pre- 
cluded his  entrance  into  the  land  is  well  known.  Pro- 
voked by  the  rebellion  of  Israel,  and  wearied  with 
caring  for  the  people,  instead  of  exalting  God  in  the 
eyes  of  Israel,  he  exalted  himself.  He  made  use  of 
the  gift  of  God  for  that  purpose  ;  he  did  not  sanctify 
Jehovah  in  the  eyes  of  the  people;  he  did  not  give 
Him  His  place.  God  does  not  become  weary  in  His 
goodness ;  and  thus  acting  in  discipline,  for  the  good 
of  His  people,  according  to  His  majesty.  He  can 
always  fall  back  upon  those  ways  of  direct  blessing 
which  flow  from  His  unfailing  grace.  Man,  wearied 
with  the  evil  that  vexes  him,  tries  to  exalt  himself, 
to  put  himself  above  the  evil,  and  to  shelter  himself 
from  it,  because  he  is  not  above  it.  He  no  longer 
glorifies  God  ;  he  exalts  himself  and  he  is  abased. 

If  Moses,  instead  of  acting  according  to  the  flesh, 
had  remembered  that  it  was  not  he  or  his  glory  which 
was  in  question  (and  how  often  had  he  himself  told 
them  so  !)  but  God,  he  would  have  felt  that  the  people 
could  not  touch  the  glory  of  God ;  and  this  unfailing 
glory  would  have  sustained  him,  looking  only  at  that 
glory  which  ever  maintains  itself ;  so  that  if  we  only 
seek  to  maintain  it,  we  may  rest  upon  it. 

But  he  lacked  faith,  and  was  forbidden  to  enter  into 
that  which  only  the  perfection  of  glory  could  open  to 
men ;  and,  indeed,  what  could  lead  Israel  safely  through 

XXXIV. 


326  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  desert  and  into  the  land  of  Canaan  ?  Pure  graoe 
alone.  Moses  was  not  able  to  apprehend  the  height  of 
the  grace  that  conquers  everything.  It  was  according 
to  that  grace,  as  we  have  seen,  that  God  acted  at 
Meribah. 

Now,  the  law  could  not  lead  into  life ;  and,  therefore 
the  flesh,  the  world,  and  the  law,  ever  correlative  in 
the  ways  of  God,  were  found  in  the  journey  through 
the  wilderness ;  and  Moses  remains  there.  He  might, 
as  a  man  of  God  and  a  prophet,  tell  of  grace,  as 
making  sure  the  blessing  of  Israel.  (Chap,  xxxiii. 
26-29.)  Faithful  in  all  his  house,  as  a  servant,  he 
remains  on  this  side  Jordan;  a  proof,  in  these 
touching  circumstances,  that  an  absolutely  new  crea- 
tion is  needed  to  enjoy  the  promises  of  God,  accord- 
ing to  that  grace  which  can  alone,  after  all,  bring  one 
in  safety  even  through  the  wilderness — ^the  unfailing 
grace  of  our  God. 

Moses  dies,  and,  buried  by  Jehovah,  does  not  serve 
as  an  object  of  carnal  veneration  to  a  people  at  all  times 
ready  to  fall  into  this  sin,  when  his  name  gave  them 
honour  according  to  the  flesh ;  just  as  they  continually 
opposed  him,  when  his  presence  according  to  God 
thwarted  the  flesh.  He  was  a  man  honoured  of  God, 
who  scarcely  had  his  equal  (He  of  course  excepted  who 
had  none) ;  but  nevertheless  he  was  man,  and  man  is 
but  vanity. 


JOSHUA. 

We  have  gone  through,  by  the  goodness  o£  God,  the 
five  books  of  Moses.  They  have  set  before  us,  on  the 
one  side,  the  great  principles  on  which  the  relations  of 
man  with  God,  and  of  God  with  man,  in  their  great 
elements,  are  founded,  such  as  redemption,  sacrifice,  and 
the  like ;  and  on  the  other,  the  deliverance  of  a  people 
set  apart  for  Himself,  and  the  different  conditions  in 
which  they  were  placed,  whether  under  grace  in  the 
form  of  promise,  under  law,  or  under  God's  govern- 
ment established  over  them  by  the  special  mediation  of 
Moses. 

We  have  had  occasion  in  them  to  examine  the  history 
of  this  people  in  the  wilderness ;  and  the  pattern  pre- 
sented, by  the  tabernacle,  of  things  to  be  afterwards 
revealed  ;  sacrifices  and  priesthood,  means  of  relation- 
ship with  God  granted  to  sinners,  wherein  is  indeed 
wanting  the  image  of  our  perfect  liberty  to  approach 
God,  the  veil  not  being  then  rent,  but  wherein  the 
shadow  of  heavenly  things  is  placed  before  our  eyes 
with  most  interesting  detail. 

Finally,  we  have  seen  that  God — having  at  the  end  of 
the  journey,  in  the  wilderness,  pronounced  the  definitive 
justification  of  His  people,  and  caused  His  blessing  to 
rest  upon  them  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  their  enemies — 
declares  imder  what  conditions  the  people  should  retain 
possession  of  the  land,  and  enjoy  His  blessing  in  it,  in 
the  liberty  and  grace  of  God's  free  gift  in  immediate 
relationship  with  Himself;  and  what  would  be  the 
consequences  of  disobedience ;  revealing,  at  the  same 
time.  His  purposes  with  respect  to  this  people,  purposes 


328  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

which  He  would  accomplish  for  His  own  glory.*  This 
brings  us  to  the  taking  possession  of  the  land  of  pro- 
mise by  the  people  under  the  guidance  of  Joshua. 

As  the  Book  of  Numbers  set  forth  the  spiritual 
journey  through  the  wilderness  in  which  the  flesh  was 
tested  and  tried,  so  this  book  is  full  of  interest  and  in- 
struction, as  setting  before  us  in  type  the  conflicts  of 
the  inheritors  of  heaven  with  spiritual  wickedness  in 
heavenly  places,  when  we  have  entered  into  them,  with 
a  sure  title,  but  having  to  take  possession  of  them  by 
the  energy  which  overcomes  the  enemies  who  would 
keep  us  out,  which  is  the  other  part  of  the  christian 
life.  Christians  are  blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings 
in  heavenly  places,  as  Israel  was  to  enjoy  temporal 
blessings  in  earthly  places.  It  is  easy  to  understand 
that,  if  we  may  rightly  use  (as  I  do  not  doubt)  the 
name  of  Canaan  as  a  figurative  expression  of  the  rest 
of  the  people  of  God,  that  which  we  have  here  to  do 
with  is  not  the  rest  itself,  but  the  spiritual  conflict 
which  secures  the  enjoyment  of  the  promises  of  God  to 
true  believers.  The  close  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephe- 
sians  presents  that  which  precisely  answers,  indeed 
alludes,  to  the  position  of  Israel  in  this  book.  The 
saints  in  the  assembly  having  been  quickened  and 
raised  up  with  Jesus,  have  their  conflict  in  the  heavenly 
places,  as  it  is  to  those  who  dwell  there  that  the  as- 
sembly is  a  testimony — the  testimony  of  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  if  Jordan  represent  death,  and 
Canaan  rest  and  glory,  how  short  common  christian 
views  must  come  of  some  intended  christian  position ; 
for  the  effect  of  the  crossing  of  Jordan,  and  what 
characterised  what  followed,  was  war.     The  angel  of 

*  Their  typical  revelations  in  these  books,  which  though  inter- 
woven with  the  history  are  their  real  subject,  are  invaluable  to 
us ;  only  the  special  privileges  of  Christians  and  of  the  assembly 
of  God,  in  sovereign  grace,  are  not  communicated. 


JOSHUA.  329 

Jehovah  comes  with  a  drawn  sword  as  captain  of 
Jehovah's  host.  It  leads  us  to  see  that  the  Christian 
is  to  learn  that  he  is  dead  and  risen  while  here,  and  has 
his  place  in  the  heavenlies  in  Christ,  and  that  it  is  in 
this  position  that  his  true  conflicts  take  place. 

Joshua,  then,  represents  Christ,  not  as  coming  down 
in  person  to  take  possession  of  the  earth,  but  as  leading 
His  people  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
acts  and  dwells  in  the  midst  of  this  people.  Yet  in 
Joshua,  as  in  all  other  typical  persons,  those  errors 
and  sins  are  found  which  betray  the  weakness  of  the 
instrument,  and  the  fragility  of  the  vessel  in  which,  for 
the  time,  God  has  condescended  to  put  His  glory. 

Let  us  apply  ourselves  now  to  the  study  of  this  book. 
The  first  chapter  shews  us  Joshua  placed  in  service  by 
Jehovah,  who  commands  him  to  go  over  Jordan  into 
the  land  which  He  had  given  to  the  children  of  Israel. 

Let  us  pause  a  moment  over  this  immediate  commis- 
sion from  Jehovah.  Moses  here  holds  the  place,  not  of 
the  living  mediator,  but  of  the  written  word.  All  that 
he  commanded,  being  from  God,  was  evidently  the  word 
of  God  for  Israel.  Joshua  is  the  energy  which  brings 
them  into  possession  of  the  promises. 

First  of  all,  we  have  the  principle  on  which  posses- 
sion is  taken;  not  in  the  simple  exercise  of  divine 
power,  as  that  which  will  take  place  at  the  end,  but  in 
the  energy  of  the  Spirit  and  in  connection  with  the 
responsibility  of  man.  The  boundaries  of  the  promised 
land  are  given ;  but  the  knowledge  of  the  boundaries 
assigned  by  God  was  not  enough:  God  had  defined 
them  very  accurately ;  but  a  condition  was  attached  to 
their  possession.  "  Every  place  that  the  sole  of  your 
foot  shall  tread  upon,  that  have  I  given  unto  you." 
They  must  go  there,  overcome  the  obstacles  with  the 
help  and  by  the  power  of  God,  and  take  actual  posses- 
sion.    Without  that  they  could  not  possess  it ;  and,  in 

I. 


330  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

fact,  this  is  what  happened.  They  never  took  possession 
of  all  the  land  which  God  had  given.  Nevertheless,  to 
faith  the  promise  was  sure :  "  There  shall  not  any  man 
be  able  to  stand  before  thee  all  the  days  of  thy  life.'* 
The  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  of  Christ  by  His  Spirit 
(the  true  energy  of  the  believer),  is  all-suflScient.  For 
it  is,  in  fact,  the  power  of  Christ  Himself,  who  has 
almighty  power.  At  the  same  time,  the  promise  of 
never  being  left  nor  forsaken  (Deut.  xxxi.  6,  8)  is 
maintained  in  all  its  force.  This  is  what  may  be 
reckoned  upon  in  the  Lord's  service — such  a  power  of 
His  presence  that  none  shall  be  able  to  stand  before 
His  servant,  a  power  which  will  never  forsake  him. 
With  this  full  encouragement,  he  who  walks  by  the 
Spirit  is  called  upon  to  be  strong  and  of  a  good 
courage. 

After  this  comes  Jehovah's  exhortation,  in  verse  7, 
"  Only  be  thou  strong  and  very  courageous,  that  thou 
mayest  observe  to  do  according  to  all  the  law  which 
Moses,  my  servant  (thq,  title  always  given  him  here), 
commanded  thee."  Spiritual  strength  and  energy,  the 
courage  of  faith,  are  necessary,  in  order  that  the  heart 
may  be  bold  enough  to  obey,  may  be  free  from  the  in- 
fluences, the  fears,  and  the  motives  which  act  upon  the 
natural  man,  and  tend  to  turn  believers  aside  from  the 
path  of  obedience,  and  that  he  may  take  heed  vmto  the 
word  of  God. 

There  is  nothing  so  unreasonable  in  the  world  as  the 
walk  set  before  us  in  the  word — nothing  which  so 
exposes  us  to  the  hatred  of  its  prince.  If,  then,  God 
be  not  with  us,  there  is  nothing  so  foolish,  so  mad  ;  if 
He  be  with  us,  nothing  so  wise.  If  we  have  not  the 
strength  of  His  presence,  we  dare  not  take  heed  to  His 
word ;  and,  in  that  case,  we  must  beware  of  going  out 
to  war.  But  having  the  courage,  which  the  almighty 
power  of  God  inspires  by  His  promise,  we  may  lay 
hold  of  the  good  and  precious  word  of  our  God :  its 


JOSHUA.  331 

severest  precepts  are  only  wisdom  to  detect  the  fleshy 
and  instruction  how  to  mortify  it,  so  that  it  may 
neither  blind  nor  shackle  us. 

The  most  difficult  path,  that  which  leads  to  the 
sharpest  conflict,  is  but  the  road  to  victory  and  repose, 
causing  us  to  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  God.  It  is 
the  road  in  which  we  are  ui  communion  with  God, 
with  Him  who  is  the  source  of  all  joy ;  it  is  the  earnest 
and  the  foretaste  of  eternal  and  infinite  happiness. 

If  only  this  word  from  God,  Jehovah,  is  heard — 
"  Turn  not  from  it,  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left, 
that  thou  mayest  prosper  whithersoever  thou  goest  " — 
what  joy  for  him  who,  through  grace,  comes  forward 
to  do  the  work  of  God ! 

The  Lord  then  exhorts  him  to  the  diligent  study  of 
this  book  of  the  law :  "  For  then  thou  shalt  make  thy 
way  prosperous,  and  then  thou  shalt  have  good 
success."  Here,  then,  are  the  two  great  principles  of 
spiritual  life  and  activity :  1st,  the  assured  presence 
of  the  almighty  power  of  God,  so  that  nothing  can 
stand  before  His  servant ;  2nd,  the  reception  of  His 
word,  submission  to  His  word,  diligent  study  of  His 
word,  taking  it  as  an  absolute  guide  ;  and  having 
courage  to  do  so,  because  of  the  promise  and  exhorta- 
tion of  God. 

In  short,  the  Spirit  and  the  word  are  all  in  all  for 
spiritual  life.  Furnished  with  this  power  faith  goes 
forward,  strengthened  by  the  encouraging  word  of  our 
God.  God  has  a  way  in  the  world  where  Satan  cannot 
touch  us.  This  is  the  path  where  Jesus  walked.  Satan 
is  the  prince  of  this  world ;  but  there  is  a  divine  path 
through  it,  but  no  other,  and  there  God's  power  is. 
The  word  is  the  revelation  of  it.  So  the  Lord  bound 
the  strong  man.  He  acted  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit, 
and  used  the  word.  The  Spirit  and  the  word  cannot  be 
separated  without  falling  into  fanaticism  on  the  one 
hand,  or  into  rationalism  on  the  other — without  putting 


832  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

oneself  outside  the  place  of  dependence  upon  God  and 
of  His  guidance.  Mere  reason  would  become  the  master 
of  some ;  imagination,  of  others. 

Moreover,  there  is  nothing  more  imaginative  than 
reason,  when  destitute  of  guidance !  In  result,  the 
enemy  of  souls  would  take  possession  of  both.  We 
should  have  man  under  Satan's  influence,  in  the  place 
of  God.  Miserable  exchange  !  for  which  the  unbeliever 
is  consoled  by  flattering  himself  that  there  is  nothing 
beyond  his  reach,  because  he  reduces  everything  to  the 
limits  of  his  own  mind.  Nothing  appears  to  me  more 
pitiful  than  this  unbelief,  which  pretends  that  there  is 
nothing  in  the  moral  and  intellectual  sphere  beyond 
the  thoughts  of  man,  and  which  denies  man's  capacity 
to  receive  light  from  a  more  exalted  mind — the  only 
thing  that  raises  man  above  himself,  while  at  the  same 
time  rendering  him  morally  excellent,  by  making  him 
humble  through  the  sense  of  superiority  in  another. 

Blessed  be  God,  that  some  are  to  be  found  who  have 
profited  by  the  grace  which  has  commiuiicated  to  man 
of  His  perfect  wisdom !  Even  though  the  imperfect 
vessel  which  received  it  may  have  a  little  impaired  its 
features  and  its  perfection,  they  have  nevertheless 
profited  by  it  so  as  to  take  their  true  place.  Happy 
place,  before  the  presence  of  Him  whom  to  know  is 
infinite  and  everlasting  joy ! 

There  is  yet  an  important  practical  rule  to  be  recog- 
nised in  these  words,  "  Houve  not  I  commanded  thee  T* 
(Chap.  i.  9.)  If  we  are  not  conscious  that  we  are 
doing  the  will  of  God — if,  before  we  begin  to  act,  we 
have  not  assured  ourselves  of  this  in  His  presence,  we 
shall  have  no  courage  in  performing  it.  Perhaps 
indeed  what  we  are  doing  is  the  will  of  God;  but, 
not  being  conscious  of  this,  we  act  with  hesitation, 
without  confidence,  without  joy ;  we  are  repulsed  by 
the  smallest  opposition,  whilst,  when  we  are  assured 
of  doing  His  will,  and  that  He  has  said,  "  Have  not 


JOSHUA.  333 

/  commanded  thee  ?"  nothing,  through  grace,  can 
alarm  us. 

Nevertheless  I  add  one  word,  or  rather  I  call  the 
reader's  attention  to  what  God  says ;  for  although  the 
command  of  God  inspires  us  with  a  courage  which  we 
could  not  have  had  without  it,  yet  no  revelation  is  by 
itself  strength  for  action.  But  God  adds,  "Be  not 
afraid,  neither  be  thou  dismayed,  for  Jehovah  thy  God 
is  with  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest." 

We  have  in  the  New  Testament  a  striking  exempli- 
fication of  this  principle :  Paul  was  caught  up  to  the 
third  heaven,  where  he  heard  things  which  it  is  not 
lawful  for  man  to  utter.  Was  this  his  strength  in  con- 
flict ?  Doubtless  it  inwardly  gave  his  views  a  scope 
which  reacted  upon  his  whole  work;  but  this  was 
not  his  strength  for  the  work.  On  the  contrary,  it 
tended  to  feed  the  false  confidence  of  the  flesh ;  at 
least  the  flesh  would  have  used  it  for  self -exaltation. 

Such  revelations  rendered  humiliation  needful,  and 
drew  from  God,  not  fresh  favours  (though  all  was 
favour),  but,  that  which  humbled  the  apostle,  and  ren- 
dered him  weak  and  contemptible  as  to  the  flesh.* 
Being  then  weak,  strength  is  given  him  in  another 
way :  not  in  the  use  or  in  the  consciousness  of  revela- 
tions, that  would  have  made  him  weak,  by  ministering 
to  the  exaltation  of  the  flesh,  but,  in  the  grace  and 
strength  of  Christ,  which  were  made  perfect  in  this 
m/irmity.   There  lay  his  only  strength ;  and  he  gloried 

*  Idle  curiosity  inquires  what  this  thorn  in  the  flesh  could  be. 
It  matters  little  to  us  what  it  was.  There  might  be  a  different 
titiorn  for  each  case  in  which  God  saw  fit  to  send  one.  It  would 
be  always  something  suited  to  humble  him  who  needed  it.  It  is 
enough  for  our  spiritual  instruction  to  know  by  the  word,  that  as 
to  Paul  it  was  an  infirmity  which  tended  to  make  him  personally 
contemptible  in  his  preaching.  (See  Gal.  iv.  14 ;  2  Cor.  x.  10.) 
The  object  of  God,  in  such  a  trial,  as  meeting  the  danger,  is 
so  evident  to  every  spiritual  mind,  that  it  were  useless  to  dwell 
upon  it. 

I. 


534  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

in  this  infirmity,  in  which  the  power  of  Christ  was 
perfected  in  him,  which  gave  occasion  for  the  manifes- 
tation of  this  power ;  and  which,  in  proving  that  Paul 
was  weak,  proved  that  Christ  Himself  was  in  the 
work  with  Paul.  We  always  need  immediate  strength 
from  Christ,  when  acting  on  the  part  of  Christ — 
strength  which  is  made  perfect  in  weakness,  to  do  His 
work — abiding  strength,  for  without  Him  we  can  do 
nothing.     Let  us  remember  this  truth. 

I  add  but  one  word  on  the  end  of  the  chapter. 
There  are  Christians  (I  cannot  say  approved  of  God) 
who  take  their  place  on  this  side  of  Jordan — that  is  to 
say,  on  this  side  of  the  power  of  death  and  resurrec- 
tion, applied  to  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The 
place  in  which  they  settle  is  not  Egypt ;  it  is  beyond 
the  Red  Sea,  it  is  within  the  limits  ot  Israel's  posses- 
sions— outside  Egypt  and  this  side  the  Euphrates, 
river  of  Babylon.  But  it  is  not  Canaan.  It  is  a  land 
they  have  chosen  for  their  cattle  and  their  possessions ; 
they  establish  their  children  and  their  wives  there.  It 
is  not  Joshua  who  conquered  that  land ;  it  is  not  the 
place  of  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
— that  Canaan  which  is  beyond  Jordan. 

However,  although  the  children  and  the  families 
might  be  placed  there,  yet  the  men  of  war  must, 
whether  they  will  or  no,  take  part  in  the  conflicts  of 
the  children  of  God,  who  seek  no  rest  except  where 
the  power  of  God  is  found — that  is  to  say,  in  Canaan, 
in  the  heavenly  places,  all  enemies  being  driven  out. 
And  indeed  when  the  sin  of  Israel,  and  their  conse- 
quent weakness,  exposed  the  people  to  the  successful 
attacks  of  their  enemies,  of  the  enemies  of  God,  this 
country  was  the  first  that  fell  into  their  hands.  "Ejiow 
ye  that  Ramoth  Gilead  is  ours  ?"  leads  to  no  blessing 
to  the  people  when  sorrowful  on  account  of  its  loss. 
For  the  time  all  was  well ;  that  is,  as  long  as  Reuben, 
Gad,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  remained  under 


JOSHUA.  335 

the  authority  of  Joshua,  and  through  him  the  power 
of  God  conducted  the  people.  They  too  say  to  Joshua 
that  which  God  had  said,  "  Be  strong  and  of  a  good 
courage." 

How  often  among  the  children  of  God  some  princi- 
ple or  line  of  conduct  is  brought  in,  that  is  inferior  in 
nature  to  the  excellence  of  that  work  which  is  going 
on  in  the  purpose  of  God ;  but  which,  as  long  as  the 
power  of  God  is  working  according  to  this  purpose, 
does  not  disengage  itself,  so  to  say,  from  the  work,  so 
as  to  assume  any  prominence,  and  produce  uneasiness 
and  sorrow !  But  when  this  divine  stream  becomes 
shallow  in  consequence  of  man's  unfaithfulness,  then 
bitter  fruits  appear;  spiritual  declensions,  weakness, 
heart-burnings,  divisions,  and  direct  subjection  to  the 
evil  power,  flowing  from  the  impossibility  of  reconcil- 
ing that  which  is  spiritual  with  that  which  is  carnal, 
and  of  maintaining  a  spiritual  testimony  while  con- 
forming to  the  ways  of  the  world. 

But  this  testimony  belongs  to  the  other  side  of 
Jordan.  The  two  tribes  and  a  half  may  follow  this 
course  if  they  will,  but  we  cannot  come  out  of  Canaan 
to  join  them,  Alas!  these  beautiful  meadows,  well 
suited  to  feed  their  flocks,  have  found  but  too  many 
Lots,  and  tribes  of  Israel,  to  settle  in  them  to  their 
loss.  The  shoals  that  are  met  with  in  our  christian 
voyage  may  perhaps  be  safely  crossed  at  high  tide; 
but  at  low  tide  skilful  pilotage  is  needed  to  avoid 
them,  and  to  float  always  in  the  full  current  of  the 
grace  of  God  in  the  channel  it  has  made  for  itself. 
But  there  is  a  sure  and  stedfast  pilot;  and  we  are 
safe  if  we  are  content  to  follow  Him.  God  has  given 
us  what  we  need  for  this.  Perhaps  we  must  be  satis- 
fied with  a  very  little  boat:  the  unerring  pilot  will 
be  in  it. 

At  the  first  Moses  was  not  pleased  with  the  pro- 
posal of  the  two  tribes  and  a  half.     The  thing  was 


336  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

permitted  certainly.  But  in  general  the  first  thoughts 
of  faith  are  the  best ;  they  only  contemplate  the  pro- 
mises, the  full  effect  of  the  promises  and  the  thoughts 
of  God.  After  thoughts  are  not  in  connection  with 
that. 

The  second  chapter  contains  the  interesting  history 
of  Rahab. 

How  beautiful  it  is  to  see  the  grace  of  God  setting 
up  its  way-marks  from  the  beginning,  that  the  eye  of 
taith  may  know  where  to  rest,  when  God  was  obliged 
to  narrow  His  dealings  with  respect  to  man,  and  to 
limit  Himself  in  His  relationship  to  man,  until  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ  gave  that  grace  its  full  scope 
and  liberty !  Seed  of  the  woman,  seed  of  Abraham, 
seed  of  David — it  narrows  more  and  more.  The 
promises  even,  as  to  the  government  of  God,  give 
place  to  the  law,  until  a  small  remnant  of  Israel, 
proud  in  proportion  to  its  poverty,  becomes  the  vessel 
which  contains  the  yet  smaller  remnant  of  faithful 
ones  who  were  waiting  for  the  redemption  of  Israel. 

And  what  shallow  thoughts,  though  true  ones,  were 
found  in  the  hearts  of  these  precious  saints,  in  com- 
parison with  the  hopes  of  an  Abraham  and  the  solemn 
declarations  of  an  Enoch!  The  Lord,  ever  perfect, 
ever  precious,  might  well  say  (one  understands  it, 
although  the  depths  of  His  heart  are  infinitely  beyond 
our  reach),  "  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptised  with,  and 
how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished!"  But 
there  have  always  been  these  signals  for  faith.  If 
God  acts.  He  goes  beyond  the  limits  of  the  existing 
dispensation,  and  oversteps  His  established  relation- 
ships with  man. 

It  is  thus  that  the  divine  nature  of  Jesus,  and  the 
divine  rights  of  His  Person,  manifested  themselves. 
He  was  only  sent  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of 
Israel.     This  was  the  limit  of  His  formal  relationship 


JOSHUA.  337 

with  men.  But  if  faith  lays  hold  of  the  goodness  of 
God,  can  this  goodness  deny  itself,  or  limit  itself  to 
those  who,  for  the  time  being,  were  the  alone  subjects 
of  His  dispensation  ?  No,  Christ  could  not  say,  God  is 
not  good,  I  am  not  good,  to  the  degree  you  have 
imagined.  How  could  God  deny  Himself  ?  The  Syro- 
phenician  woman  obtains  what  she  asks  for.  Precious 
prerogative  of  faith,  which  knows  and  owns  God 
through  everything ;  which  honours  Him  as  He  is,  and 
ever  finds  Him  what  He  is ! 

Wherein  was  manifested  that  faith  in  Rahab  which 
the  apostle  cites  as  a  pattern? — admirable  proof  that 
the  way  in  which  God  acts  in  grace  is  before  and 
above  law ;  that  grace  overleaps  the  boundary  which 
law  prescribes  to  man,  even  while  maintaining  its 
authority — an  authority  howe^r  which  can  only 
manifest  itself  in  condemnation  !  What  then  was 
Rahab's  faith  ?  It  was  the  faith  which  recognises 
that  God  is  with  His  people,  all  weak  and  few  as 
they  may  be  and  not  yet  possessed  of  their  inherit- 
ance, wandering  on  the  earth  without  a  country,  but 
beloved  of  God. 

If  Abraham  believed  God  when  there  was  not  a 
people,  Rahab  identified  herself  with  this  people  when 
they  had  nothing  but  God.  She  well  knew  that  the 
inheritance  was  theirs,  and  that,  however  strong  their 
enemies  might  be,  in  spite  of  their  walled  cities  and 
their  chariots  of  iron,  their  heart  was  melted.  This 
is  always  the  case  with  the  instruments  of  the  enemy, 
whatever  appearances  may  be,  when  the  people  of 
God  are  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
the  path  of  obedience  which  God  has  marked  out  for 
them. 

Thus,  in  the  midst  of   heathens,  this  poor  simple 

woman,  a  bad  and  despised  member  of  an  accursed 

race  doomed  to  destruction,  is  saved,  and  her  name  is 

a  testimony  to  the  glory  of  God.     Her  house,  recog- 

VOL.  I.  II.  Z 


338  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

nised  by  the  sure  mark,  the  line  of  scarlet  thread, 
becomes  the  refuge  and  the  security  of  all  who  take 
shelter  in  it,  trusting  to  the  promise  given. 

And  now  the  people  are  to  enter  the  promised  land; 
but  how  enter  it  ?  For  Jordan,  with  its  flood  at  the 
highest,  lay  as  a  barrier  before  the  people  of  God, 
guarding  the  territory  of  those  that  oppose  their 
hopes.  Now  Jordan  represents  death,  but  death 
looked  at  rather  as  the  end  of  human  life,  and  the 
token  of  the  enemj^'s  power,  than  as  the  fruit  and 
testimony  of  the  just  judgment  of  God.  The  passage 
of  the  Red  Sea  was  also  death;  but  the  people  were 
there  as  having  part  (in  type)  in  the  death  and  resur- 
rection of  Jesus  accomplishing  their  redemption,  and 
setting  them  free  for  ever  from  Egypt,  their  house  of 
bondage — that  is,  from  their  place  in  flesh  and  thus 
from  all  the  power  of  Satan* — as  the  blood  on  the 
door  posts  had  from  the  judgment  of  God.  It  was 
complete  redemption,  the  death  and  resurrection  of 

*  It  is  important  first  to  see  Jesus  alone  in  life  and  in  death  : 
there  we  have  the  thing  itself  in  its  perfection.  It  is  equally 
important  then  to  know  that  God  sees  us  as  having  been  there, 
that  it  expresses  our  place  ;  that  God  sees  us  in  Him,  and  that 
it  is  our  place  before  God.  But  then  there  is  also  our  taking 
that  place,  by  the  Spirit,  in  faith  and  in  fact.  The  former  was 
the  Ked  Sea ;  as  to  death,  it  was  Christ's  death ;  Jordan,  our 
entering  into  death  with  Him.  The  Eed  Sea  was  deliverance 
from  Egypt;  Jordan,  entrance  into  Canaan  subjectively;  that  is, 
a  state  suited  to  it  in  spirit,  not  possession  of  it,  as  Christ  when 
risen — for  us,  by  faith  only  of  course  as  yet,  as  risen  with 
Him.  Sitting  in  heavenly  places  is  an  entirely  distinct  thing,  and 
on  distinct  ground ;  an  absolute  work  of  God.  The  Eed  Sea  was 
the  condemning  of  sin  in  the  flesh,  in  Christ  in  death  for  sin ;  and 
no  deliverance,  when  known  by  faith.  But  this  is  Jordan.  Only 
Jordan  goes  further,  for  it  brings  us,  as  risen  with  Him,  into  the 
state  which  makes  us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of 
the  saints  in  light.  The  people  followed  the  ark  in  going  through 
Jordan,  the  ark  remaining  there  in  its  power  against  death  till 
all  were  passed. 


JOSHUA.  330 

lyrist  in  its  proper  and  intrinsic  value.  But  in  this 
iispect  it  is  a  complete  and  finished  work,  and  brings 
us  to  God — not  a  history  of  what  we  may  go  through 
in  actually  arriving  at  this  result.  (See  Ex.  xv.  13, 17  ; 
xix.  4.)  Hence,  judgment  even  was  executed.  In 
Sinai,  but  not  till  then,  law  took  the  place  of  worship, 
historically.  It  was  then  that  the  people  entered  upon 
their  pilgrimage  in  the  wilderness.* 

Redemption,  complete  salvation,  purchased  by  the 
precious  blood  of  Jesus,  introduces  the  Christian  into 
this  pilgrimage.  With  God  he  only  passes  through  the 
world  as  a  dry  and  thirsty  land,  where  no  water  is ; 
still,  this  pilgrimage  is  but  the  life  down  here,  although 
it  is  the  life  of  the  redeemed.f 

But,  as  we  have  seen,  there  is  the  heavenly  life,  the 
warfare  in  the  heavenly  places,  which  goes  on  at  the 
same  time  with  the  wilderness  journey.  When  I  say 
at  the  same  time,  I  do  not  mean  at  the  same  instant, 
but  during  the  same  period  of  our  natural  life  on  tlie 
earth.  It  is  one  thing  to  pass  through  this  world 
faithfully,  or  unfaithfully,  in  our  daily  circumstances, 
under  the  influence  of  a  better  hope;  it  is  another 
thing  to  be  waging  a  spiritual  warfare  for  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  promises  and  of  heavenly  privileges,  and  to 
conquer  the  power  of  Satan  on  God's  behalf,  as  men 
already  dead  and  risen,  as  being  absolutely  not  of  the 
world.  Both  these  things  are  true  of  the  christian  life. 
Now,  it  is  as  dead  and  risen  again  in  Christ  that  we  are 

*  This  supposes  being  really  born  again.  (See  Eom.  viii.  29, 
SO.)  The  wilderness  journey  after  Sinai  supposes  this  christian 
position  taken,  but  individual  reality  tested.  To  this  all  the 
"ifs"  of  the  New  Testament  apply;  that  is,  to  the  Christian  on 
the  road  to  the  promised  land,  but  with  a  certain  promise  of 
being  kept  to  the  end,  if  faith  is  there.  (1  Cor.  i.  8,  9 ;  John  x. 
28.)  It  is  dependence,  but  on  the  fidelity  of  God.  There  is  no 
*'if"  as  to  redemption,  nor  as  to  our  present  place  in  Christ, 
when  once  we  are  sealed. 

t  To  this  the  Epistle  to  the  Eomans  answers. 
III. 


340  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

in  spiritual  conflict :  to  make  war  in  Canaan  we  must 
have  crossed  the  Jordan.* 

The  Jordan,  then,  is  death  and  resurrection  with 
Christ,  looked  at  in  their  spiritual  power,  not  as  to 
their  efficacy  for  the  justification  of  a  sinner,  but  as  to 
the  change  of  position  and  state  in  those  who  have 
part  in  them,  in  order  to  the  realisation  of  life  in  con- 
nection with  the  heavenly  places,  into  which  Christ 
has  entered.-f  A  comparison  between  Philippians  iii. 
and  Colossians  ii.,  iii.  shews  how  death  and  resurrec- 
tion are  bound  up  with  the  true  character  of  the 
circumcision  of  Christ.  In  Philippians  iii.  the  return 
of  Christ  is  introduced  as  completing  the  work  by 
the  resurrection  of  the  body.  We  are  not  looked  at 
as  now  risen  with  Him ;  but  as  practically  running 
the  race,  with  Christ  and  resurrection  in  view — a  place 
which  indeed  characterises  the  epistle.  It  is  not  what 
faith  assumes  as  to  position,  but  the  actual  present 
race  towards  its  possession.  Hence  it  is  objective,  not 
being  in  Christ,  or  even  with  Him ;  but  that  I  might 
win  Christ  and  the  resurrection  from  among  the  dead. 
He  has  given  up  everything  for  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ;  and  is  looking  for  the  power  of 
His  resurrection,  and  even  justification  is  looked  at  as 
at  the  end  of  his  course. 


*  To  this  Ephesians  answers;  only  Ephesians  has  nothing 
to  do  with  our  death  to  sin.  It  is,  as  to  this  question,  simply  God's 
act,  taking  us  when  dead  in  sin  and  placing  us  in  Christ  on  high. 
Colossians  is  partially  both,  life  here  in  resurrection,  but  it  does 
not  set  us  in  heavenly  places,  only  our  affections  there.  By 
heavenly  life  I  mean  Hving  in  spirit  in  heavenly  places.  Actually 
Christ  was  divinely  there ;  we  as  united  to  Him  by  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

t  This  is  not  mere  conomunication  of  life,  as  by  the  Son  of 
God,  but  passing  as  a  moral  being  out  of  one  condition  into 
another,  out  of  Egypt  into  Canaan  ;  for  that  is  it,  the  wilderness 
being  dropped  as  another  thing.  The  Bed  Sea  and  Jordan  in 
this  aspeet  coalesce. 


JOSHUA.  341 

In  both  Philippians  and  Colossians  the  heavenly- 
life  is  spoken  of  as  a  present  thing ;  but  there  is 
entire  separation,  even  down  here,  between  the  pil- 
grimage and  this  heavenly  life  itself,  although  the 
latter  has  a  powerful  influence  on  the  character  of 
our  pilgrim  life. 

And  this  introduces  a  very  important  subject, 
which  I  cannot  treat  at  large  here,  the  connection 
between  life  as  manifested  here,  and  the  objects  it 
pursues.  They  that  are  after  the  Spirit  have  their 
minds  on  the  things  of  the  Spirit.  The  new  life  flows 
from  what  is  divine  and  heavenly,  from  Christ,  and 
this  is  specially  John's  part  in  teaching;  hence  it 
belongs  to  the  risen  state  in  glory,  has  its  full  develop- 
ment and  place  there.  Our  TroXir^vfia  is  there,  and  this 
makes  us  pilgrims  ;  the  heavenly  life  belongs  to 
heaven ;  the  second  Man  is  £?  ovgavox.  But  in  its  full 
development  there  is  no  pilgrimage;  we  are  at  home  in 
our  Father's  house,  like  Christ.  But  here  it  is  devel- 
oped in  pilgrimage ;  has  this  character  from  its  being 
heavenly.  It  has  a  growing  development  in  a  growing 
apprehension  of  what  is  heavenly.  (See  2  Cor.  iii.  3, 
17,  18;  iv.  17,  18;  Eph.  iv.  15;  1  John  iii.  2,  3,  and 
many  other  passages.)  This  necessarily,  our  object 
being  on  high,  makes  us  strangers  and  pilgrims  here, 
declaring,  in  the  measure  of  our  fidelity,  that  we  seek 
a  country,  the  country  to  which  our  life  belongs  ;  but 
it  forms  itself  thereby  for  the  display  of  Christ  here,  it 
is  adapted  to  the  scene  through  which  we  pass,  has 
duties,  obedience,  service  there.  The  starting-point  ib 
Bure,  that  we  have  died  and  are  risen  with  Christ,  in 
one  aspect ;  and  in  another,  we  are  sitting  in  Him  in 
heavenly  places.  But  this  last  is  not  our  subject  here, 
it  is  Ephesian  doctrine ;  this  is  more  Colossian.  Christ 
Himself,  though  Himself  that  life  and  its  manifesta- 
tion down  here  in  pilgrimage,  yet,  as  a  man  down  here, 
had   objects — for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him, 

III. 


342  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

endured  the  cross  and  despised  the  shame,  and  is  set 
down.  And  this  is  deeply  interesting ;  His  life — God 
Himself  (the  last  is  more  John's  doctrine) — was  what 
was  to  be  expressed,  expressed  suited  to  the  scene  He 
passed  through ;  but,  being  a  true  man,  He  walked  with 
objects  before  Him,  which  acted  on  the  tenor  of  His 
path.  The  fact  that  He  was  this  life,  and  that  for  His 
living  it  had  not  to  die  in  His  death  as  we  have  to  an 
evil  nature,  makes  it  more  difficult  to  realise  in  His 
case;  but  obedience,  and  He  learned  what  it  was, 
suffering,  patience,  all  referred  to  His  place  here;  com- 
passion, grace  as  to  His  disciples,  and  all  the  traits  of 
His  life,  though  divine  and  such  that  He  could  say,  "the 
Son  of  man  who  is  in  heaven,"  all  were  the  develop- 
ment of  the  heavenly  and  divine  life  here. 

Its  influence  was  perfect  and  entire  in  His  case; 
but  His  life  in  connection  with  men,  although  the 
ever-perfect  expression  of  the  effect  of  His  life  of 
heavenly  communion  and  of  His  divine  nature,  was 
evidently  distinct  from  it.  The  joy  of  the  heavenly 
life  entirely  set  aside  all  the  motives  of  the  lower 
life ;  and,  leading  to  the  sufferings  of  His  earthly  life 
in  connection  with  man,  produced  a  life  of  perfect 
patience  before  God.  In  Him  all  was  sinless  ;  but 
His  joys  were  elsewhere,  save  in  acting  m  grace  in 
the  midst  of  sorrow  and  sin — a  divine  joy.  Thus 
also  with  the  Christian  ;  there  is  nothing  in  common 
between  these  two  spheres  of  life.  And,  besides, 
nature  has  no  part  whatever  in  that  above;  in  that 
below,  there  are  things  which  belong  to  nature  and 
to  the  world  (not  in  the  bad  sense  of  the  word  "  world,'' 
but  considered  as  creation).  Nothing  of  this  enters 
into  the  life  of  Canaan. 

Christ  alone  could  pass  through  death,  and  exhaust 
its  strength,  when  in  it,  as  shedding  the  blood  of  the 
everlasting  covenant ;  and  He  alone  could  rise  again 
from  death,  in  the  reality  of  the  power  of  the  life  that 


JOSHUA.  343 

was  in  Him,  "  for  in  him  was  life."  But  it  was  proper 
divine  power  by  which  this  was  done.  God  raised 
Christ  from  the  dead,  testimony  of  His  full  accept- 
ance of  His  work.  Christ,  being  God,  could  say: 
"  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it 
up  :"  nor  was  it  possible  that  He  could  be  holden  of 
death.  But  it  is  not  by  any  force  of  spiritual  life,  as 
man,  that  He  raised  Himself ;  though  we  know,  as  He 
laid  it  down  of  Himself,  so  He  took  it  again,  and  this 
by  commandment  received  of  the  Father — so  that  in 
this  we  cannot  separate  the  deity  and  humanity — I 
speak  of  the  act,  not  of  His  Person.  He  had  power  to 
take  it  again,  but  it  was  still  obedience ;  we  feel  at 
every  step,  no  one  knows  the  Son  but  the  Father. 
He  has  opened  this  way ;  He  has  converted  death  into 
a  power  that  destroys  the  flesh  which  shackles  us,  and 
a  deliverance  from  that  in  us  which  gives  advantage 
to  the  enemy  with  whom  we  are  to  fight,  being  thence- 
forward brought  into  Canaan.  Therefore  the  apostle 
says,  "All  things  are  yours,  whether  life,  or  death." 
Now%  every  true  Christian  is  dead  and  risen  in  Christ; 
the  knowing  and  realising  it  is  another  thing.  But 
the  word  of  God  sets  christian  privilege  before  us 
according  to  its  real  power  in  Christ. 

The  ark  of  Jehovah  passed  over  before  the  people, 
who  were  to  leave  the  space  of  two  thousand  cubits 
between  it  and  them,  "  that  they  might  know  the  way 
by  which  they  must  go ;  for  they  had  not  passed  this 
way  before."  Who  indeed  had  passed  through  death, 
to  rise  beyond  its  power,  until  Christ,  the  true  ark  of 
the  Covenant,  had  opened  this  way  ?  Man,  whether 
innocent  or  sinful,  could  do  nothing  here.  This  way 
was  alike  unknown  to  both,  as  was  also  the  heavenly 
life  that  follows.  This  life,  in  its  own  sphere,  and  in 
the  exercises  here  spoken  of,  is  altogether  beyond 
Jordan :  the  scenes  of  spiritual  conflict  do  not  belong 
to  man  in  his  life  below  ;  though,  as  we  have  seen,  the 

in. 


344  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

realisation  of  the  heavenly  things  we  are  brought  into 
act  on  the  character  of  our  faith  down  here,  and  our 
sorrows  and  trials  down  here,  under  God's  grace,  tend 
to  clear  our  vision  as  regards  the  glory  hoped  for. 
See  2  Corinthians  v.  2-5,  and  how  the  hope  of  verse  2  is 
returned  to  in  verse  5.  No  wilderness  experience,  be  it 
ever  so  faithful,  has  anything  directly  to  do  with  this 
heavenly  life  although  the  grapes  of  Canaan  may  cheer 
the  pilgrims  by  the  way.  But  Christ  has  destroyed  all 
the  power  of  death  for  His  people,  so  far  as  it  is  the 
power  of  the  enemy,  and  the  token  of  His  dominion.  It 
is  now  but  the  witness  of  the  power  of  Jesus.  It  is 
indeed  death;  but,  as  we  have  said,  it  is  the  death 
of  that  which  fetters  us. 

I  will  add  some  brief  remarks.  "Lord  of  all  the 
earth  "  is  the  title  Joshua  repeats,  as  that  which  God 
had  here  taken :  for  it  is  in  testimony  to  this  great 
truth  that  God  had  planted  Israel  in  Canaan.  Here- 
after He  will  establish  in  power,  according  to  His 
counsels,  that  which  had  been  put  into  the  hands  of 
Israel,  that  they  might  keep  it  according  to  their  re- 
sponsibility. This  last  principle  is  the  key  to  the 
whole  history  of  the  Bible,  as  to  man,  Israel,  the  law, 
and  all  it  has  to  do  with.  All  is  first  trusted  to  man, 
who  ever  fails,  and  then  God  accomplishes  it  in  blessing 
and  power.* 

Thus  this  chapter  supplies  us  with  very  clear  indica- 
tions of  that  which  God  has  promised  to  accomplish  in 
the  last  days,  when  He  will  indeed  shew  Himself  to 
be  "  Lord  of  all  the  earth,"  in  Israel  brought  back  in 
grace  by  His  mighty  power.  And  we  must  attend  to 
this  testimony  of  the  purpose  of  God  in  establishing 
Israel  in  their  land.  Harvest  time  will  come,  and  the 
strength  of  the  enemy  will  overflow  its  banks;  but 

*  And  that  in  much  fuller  glory,  according  to  His  counsels 
before  the  world  was,  and  in  the  Second  Man. 


JOSHUA.  345 

we,  as  Christians,  are  already  on  the  other  side.  The 
strength  of  the  enemy  passed  all  bounds  in  the  death 
of  Jesus ;  and  we  do  not  say  now,  "  Lord  of  all  the 
earth ;"  but  "  All  power  is  given  unto  him  in  heaven 
and  in  earth." 

Let  us  remark,  also,  how  God  encourages  His  people. 
They  must  combat.  The  sole  of  the  foot  must  tread 
on  every  part  of  the  promised  land  to  possess  it ;  and 
it  must  be  in  conflict  that  the  power  of  the  enemy  and 
entire  dependence  upon  God  are  realised.  But,  while 
fighting  boldly  for  Him,  He  would  have  us  know  that 
victory  is  certain.  The  spies  said  to  Joshua,  "  Truly 
Jehovah  hath  delivered  into  our  hands  all  the  land;  for 
even  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  do  faint  because 
of  us."  That  is  what  we  know  and  prove  by  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  different  from  that  of  the 
flesh  as  brought  by  the  ten  who  came  back  with  Caleb 
and  Joshua. 

But  if  we  are  introduced  into  a  life  wdiich  is  on  the 
other  side  of  death,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
as  being  dead  and  risen  in  Christ,  there  must  be  the 
remembrance  of  that  death,  by  which  we  have  been 
delivered  from  that  which  is  on  this  side  of  it,  of  the 
ruin  of  man  as  he  now  is,  and  of  the  fallen  creation  to 
which  he  belongs.  Twelve  men,  one  out  of  each  tribe, 
were  to  bring  stones  from  the  midst  of  Jordan,  from 
the  place  where  the  priests'  feet  stood  firm  with  the 
ark,  while  all  Israel  passed  over  on  dry  ground.  The 
Holy  Ghost  brings  with  Him,  so  to  speak,  the  touch- 
ing memorial  of  the  death  of  Jesus,  by  t'le  mighty 
power  of  which  He  has  turned  all  the  eflect  of  the 
enemy's  strength  into  life,  and  deliverance  from  what 
could  not  enter  into  heavenly  things,  and  has  laid  the 
basis  for  our  having  part  in  them.  Death  comes  with 
us  from  the  grave  of  Jesus :  no  longer  now  as  death, 
it  is  become  life  unto  us,  and,  subjectively  for  faith,  the 
absence  of  that  which  cannot  have  part  in  what  is 
III.-IV. 


846  THE    BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

lieavenly.  This  memorial  was  to  be  set  up  at  Gilgai, 
The  meaning  of  this  circumstance  will  be  considered  in 
the  next  chapter.  We  will  only  dwell  here  on  the 
memorial  itself.  The  twelve  stones,  for  the  twelve 
tribes,  represented  the  tribes  of  God  as  a  whole.  This 
number  is  the  symbol  of  perfection  in  human  agency, 
in  connection  here,  as  elsewhere,  with  Christ,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  shewbread. 

Here  also  the  Spirit  sets  us — Christians — in  a  more 
advanced  position.  There  were  twelve  loaves  of  the 
shewbread,  and  we  form  but  one  in  our  life  of  union  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  with  Christ  our  Head,  which  is  the  life 
we  speak  of  here.  Now  it  is  His  death  that  is  recalled 
to  us  in  the  memorial  left  us  by  the  loving-kindness  of 
our  Lord,  who  condescends  to  value  our  remembrance 
of  His  love. 

I  only  speak  here  of  this  memorial  as  the  sign  of 
that  which  should  always  be  a  reality.  We  eat  His 
flesh,  we  drink  His  life  given  for  us.  Being  one  now 
in  the  power  of  our  union  with  Christ  risen  and  glori- 
fied, for  here  I  speak  of  our  whole  place,  dead  to  the 
world  and  to  sin,  it  is  from  the  bottom  of  the  river 
into  which  He  went  down  to  make  it  the  way  of  life 
— heavenly  life — for  us,  that  we  bring  back  the 
precious  memorial  of  His  love,  and  of  the  place  in 
which  He  fulfilled  His  work.  It  is  a  body  whose  life 
by  blood  is  closed*  which  we  eat,  a  poured  out  blood 
which  we  drink  ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  blood 
was  entirely  prohibited  to  Israel  after  the  flesh ;  for 
how  can  death  be  drunk  by  those  who  are  mortal  ? 
But  we  drink  it  because,  alive  with  Him,  through  the 
death  of  Christ  we  live,  and  it  is  in  realising  the  death 
of  that  which  is  mortal  that  we  live  with  Him.      The 

*  The  word  "broken"  is  wrongly  introduced  in  the  common 
text.  It  was  after  He  had  given  up  His  spirit  to  the  Father,  in 
fall  strength,  that  the  blood  was  shed  through  the  soldier's  spear. 
He  laid  down  His  life  of  Himself. 


JOSHUA.  347 

remembrance  of  Jordan,  of  death  when  Christ  was  in 
it,  is  the  remembrance  of  that  power  which  secured 
our  salvation  in  the  last  stronghold  of  him  who  had 
the  power  of  death.  It  is  the  remembrance  of  that 
love  which  went  down  into  death,  in  order  that,  as  to 
us,  it  should  lose  all  its  power,  except  that  of  doing  UvS 
good,  and  being  a  witness  unto  us  of  infinite  and 
unchangeable  love. 

The  power  of  resurrection-life  takes  all  strength 
from  Satan :  ''  He  who  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  him- 
self, and  that  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not."  In  our 
earthly  life,  the  tlesh  being  in  us,  we  are  exposed 
to  the  power  of  the  enemy,  though  Christ's  grace 
is  sufficient  for  us.  His  strength  made  perfect  in 
weakness;  but  the  creature  has  no  strength  against 
Satan,  even  though  it  should  not  be  drawn  away  into 
actual  sin.  But  if  death  is  become  our  shelter,  causing 
us  to  die  unto  all  that  would  give  Satan  an  advantage 
over  us,  what  can  he  do  ?  Can  he  tempt  one  who  is 
dead,  or  overcome  one  who,  having  died,  is  alive  again  T 
But,  if  this  be  true,  it  is  also  necessary  to  realise 
it  practically.  "  Ye  are  dead  .  .  .  therefore  mortify." 
(Col.  iii.)  This  is  what  Gilgal  means.  Nay,  we  are 
always  to  bear  about  in  the  body  the  dying  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  that  the  life  of  Jesus  may  be  manifested 
in  our  body.  (2  Cor.  iv.  10.)* 

The  matter  in  hand  was  not  yet  the  taking  of  cities, 
the  realisation  of  God's  magnificent  promises.  Self 
must  first  of  all  be  mortified.  Before  conquering 
Midian,  Gideon  must  cast  down  the  altar  that  was  in 
his  own  house. 

Remark  further,  the  wilderness  is  not  the  place 
where  circumcision  is  carried  out,  even  though  we 
may  have  been  faithful  there.     The  wilderness  is  th<* 

*  Colossians  iii.  is  God's  declaration  of  our  position  ;  Komana 
vi.  exhortation  to  take  it  up  in  faith  ;  2  Corinthians  iv.  carrying 
it  out  in  practice  in  the  inner  man.  (Col.  iii.  5-17.) 
IV.,  V. 


348  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

character  the  world  takes  when  we  have  been  re* 
deemed,  and  where  the  flesh  which  is  in  us  is  actually 
sifted.  But  death,  and  our  entrance  into  heavenly 
places,  judge  the  whole  nature  in  which  we  live  in 
this  world.  But  then,  consequent  upon  our  death  and 
resurrection  with  Christ,  it  is  practically  applied,  and 
circumcision  is  the  application  of  the  Spirit's  power 
to  the  mortification  of  the  flesh  in  him  who  has 
fellowship  with  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus. 
(Compare  2  Cor.  iv.  10-12.)  Therefore  Paul  says 
(Phil,  iii.),  "We  are  the  circumcision."  As  to  an 
outwardly  moral  life,  Paul  had  that  before.  Had  he 
now  added  true  piety  to  his  religion  of  forms,  the 
true  fear  of  God  to  his  good  works  ?  It  was 
far  more  than  that.  Christ  had  taken  the  place 
of  all  in  him — first  of  all  as  to  righteousness, 
which  is  the  groundwork.  But  further,  the  apostle 
says,  "  That  I  may  know  him,  and  the  power  of  his 
resurrection,  being  made  conformable  unto  his  death, 
if  by  any  means  I  might  attain  unto  the  resurrection 
from  among  the  dead."  Therefore  it  is  in  "  pressing 
towards  the  mark"  that  he  waits  for  the  coming  of 
Jesus  to  accomplish  this  resurrection  as  to  his 
body. 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  chapter  ii.,  he  speaks 
to  us  of  the  circumcision  of  Christ.  Is  it  only  that 
he  has  ceased  to  sin  (the  certain  efiect  indeed  of  this 
work  of  God)  ?  No ;  for  in  describing  this  work  he 
adds, "  Being  buried  with  him  in  baptism,  wherein  also 
we  are  risen  with  him,  through  faith  of  the  operation 
of  God  who  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead."  The 
consequences  of  this  heavenly  life  are  found  in  chapter 
iii.  1,  which  is  in  immediate  connection  with  the  verse 
just  quoted.  Here  also  the  work  is  crowned  by  the 
manifestation  of  the  saints  with  Jesus  when  He  shall 
appear.  Not  the  rapture ;  the  heavenly  part  is  omitted 
in  Colossians,  save  that  our  life  is  hid  there,  and  that 


JOSHUA.  349 

what  is  there  is  an  object  of  hope  ;  we  are  made  meet 
for  it,  which  indeed  is  just  what  is  done  here. 

Our  Gilgal  is  in  verse  5  :  "  Mortify  therefore."  It  is 
not  "  die  to  sin."  Mortify  is  active  power.  It  rests  on 
the  power  of  that  which  is  ah-eady  true  to  faith :  "Ye 
are  dead :  mortify  therefore."  This  being  the  standing, 
it  is  realised.  "  Reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead," 
said  the  apostle  (Rom.  vi.),  when  speaking  on  the  same 
subject.*  This  is  the  practical  power  of  the  type  of 
the  stones  brought  from  Jordan.  They  are  a  symbol 
of  our  place,  being  the  result  of  death  with  Christ  who 
was  dead.t  But  we  are  also  raised  up  together  with 
Him, I  as  having  died  with  Him.  But  there  is  another 
aspect  of  truth,  we  were  dead  in  sins.  He  came  down 
in  grace  where  we  were,  on  the  way  down,  so  to  speak, 
atoning  for  our  sins.  God  has  quickened  us  together 
with  Him,  having  forgiven  us  all  trespasses.§  All 
that  He  did  was  for  us ;  and  now,  associated  with  Him 
in  life,  united  to  Him  by  the  Spirit,  I  am  also  sitting 
in,  not  yet  with.  Him  in  heavenly  places.  ||  I  appro- 
priate to  myself,  or  rather  God  ascribes  to  me,  all  that 
He  has  done,  as  though  it  had  happened  to  myself: 

*  We  have  three  steps  in  this  process  :  God's  judgment,  "  Ye 
are  dead;"  the  recognition  of  it  by  faith,  "  Keckon  yourselves 
dead ;"  and  the  carrying  it  out  in  practice,  "  always  bearing 
about  in  the  body  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 

t  The  Epistle  to  the  Romans  gives,  in  the  desert,  faith's 
estimate  of  the  position  which  Christ's  death  has  given  to  us,  of 
death  to  sin  and  life  to  God  in  this  world,  as  involved  in  our 
being  saved  by  His  death  into  which  we  were  baptised,  but  our 
resurrection  which  takes  us  out  of  the  desert,  and  is  Colossians 
and  Jordan. 

X  Thus  far  the  Colossians. 

§  Thus  far,  also,  the  Colossians  ;  but  we  are  not  viewed  there 
as  dead  in  sins,  but  as  having  lived  in  them,  now  dead  and 
risen. 

II  This  is  Ephesian  teaching.  And  this  is  God's  sovereign  act 
of  power  which  has  taken  us  when  dead  in  sins  and  put  us  into 
Christ. 


350  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE 

He  is  dead  to  sin,  in  Him  I  am  dead  to  sin.  Therefore 
I  can  "  mortify :"  which  I  could  not  do  as  being  still 
alive  in  the  flesh.  Where  was  the  nature,  the  life,  to 
do  it  in  ?  I  am  risen  with  Him ;  I  am  also  in  Him 
sitting  in  heavenly  places.  But  here  it  is  not  the 
Ephesian  doctrine — which  teaches  the  purpose  and 
counsels  of  God,  and,  Christ  being  exalted  to  the  right 
hand  of  God,  shews  the  simple  act  of  divine  power 
which  takes  us  when  dead  in  sins  and  sets  us  in  Him — 
it  is  the  process,  so  to  speak,  through  which  we  pass 
as  having  been  alive  (not  dead)  in  sins,  and  passes  us 
through  death,  in  Christ,  into  a  better  life.  The  other 
is  equally  true,  so  I  have  spoken  of  it ;  but,  it  is  the 
change,  the  essential  but  subjective  change  spoken  of 
in  Colossians  as  far  as  death  and  resurrection  with 
Him  go,  which  is  our  present  subject  in  Joshua. 

Now,  circumcision  being  the  practical  application  of 
that  of  which  we  have  been  speaking — the  death  of 
Christ  to  sin,  to  all  that  is  contrary  to  our  risen  position, 
"the  body  of  the  flesh" — we  remember  the  death  of 
Christ,  and  the  mortification  of  our  members  on  the 
earth  is  accomplished  through  grace,  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  grace.  Otherwise  it  would  only  be  the  eflfort 
of  a  soul  under  the  law,  and  in  this  case  there  would 
be  a  bad  conscience  and  no  strength.  This  is  what 
sincere  monks  attempted  ;  but  their  efibrts  were  not 
made  in  the  power  of  grace,  of  Christ  and  His  strength. 
If  there  was  sincerity,  there  was  also  the  deepest 
spiritual  misery.  In  order  to  mortify  there  must  be 
life ;  and  if  we  have  life,  we  have  already  died  in  Him 
■w  .10  died  for  us. 

The  stones  set  up  in  Gilgal  were  taken  out  of  the 
midst  of  Jordan,  and  Jordan  was  already  crossed  before 
Israel  was  circumcised.  The  memorial  of  grace  and  ot 
death,  as  the  witness  to  us  of  a  love  which  wrought  out 
our  salvation,  by  taking  up  our  sins  in  grace,  and  dying 
to  sin  once,  stood  in  the  place  where  death  to  sin  was 


JOSHUA.  351 

to  be  effected.  In  that  He  died,  He  died  unto  sin 
once ;  and  we  reckon  ourselves  dead  to  sin.  Christ 
dying  for  sins,  in  perfect  love,  in  unfailing  efficacy,  and 
His  death  to  sin,  give  us  peace  through  His  blood  as  to 
both,  but  also  enable  us  through  grace  to  reckon  our- 
selves dead  to  sin,  and  to  mortify  our  members  which 
are  on  earth. 

In  every  circumstance,  then,  we  must  remember  that 
we  are  dead,  and  say  to  ourselves.  If  through  grace  I 
am  dead,  what  have  I  to  do  with  sin,  which  supposes 
me  to  be  alive  ?  Christ  is  in  this  death  in  the  beauty 
and  in  the  power  of  His  grace;  it  is  deliverance  itself, 
and  introduction  morally  into  the  condition  in  which 
we  are  made  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance 
of  the  saints  in  light.  As  to  the  glory,  as  running  the 
race  down  here,  the  apostle  says,  "  I  follow  after,  if  that 
I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  also  I  am  apprehended 
of  Christ  Jesus."     But  that  is  another  subject. 

Thus,  in  being  dead,  and  only  thus,  will  the  reproach 
of  Egypt  be  taken  away.  Every  mark  of  the  world  is 
a  reproach  to  him  who  is  heavenly.  It  is  only  the 
heavenly  man  who  has  died  with  Christ  that  disen- 
tangles himself  from  all  that  is  of  Egypt.  The  life  of 
the  flesh  always  cleaves  to  Egypt ;  but  the  principle  of 
worldliness  is  uprooted  in  him  who  is  dead  and  risen 
with  Christ  and  living  a  heavenly  life.  There  is  in  the 
life  of  man,  alive  as  such  in  this  world  (Col.  ii.  20),  a 
necessary  link  with  the  world  as  God  sees  it,  that  is, 
corrupt  and  sinful ;  with  a  dead  man  there  is  no  such 
link.  The  life  of  a  risen  man  is  not  of  this  world  ;  it 
has  no  connection  with  it.  He  who  possesses  this  life 
may  pass  through  the  world,  and  do  many  things  that 
others  do.  He  eats,  works,  suffers ;  but,  as  to  his  life 
md  his  objects,  he  is  not  of  the  world,  even  as  Christ 
was  not  of  the  world.  Christ,  risen  and  ascended  up 
on  high,  is  his  life.  He  subdues  his  flesh,  he  mortifies 
it,  for  in  point  of  fact  he  is  down  here,  but  he  does  not 

V. 


352  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

live  in  it.  The  camp  was  always  at  Gilgal.  The 
people — ^the  army  of  Jehovah — returned  thither,  after 
their  victories  and  their  conquests.  If  we  do  not  do 
the  same,  we  shall  be  feeble :  the  flesh  will  betray  us. 
We  shall  fall  before  the  enemy  in  the  hour  of  conflict, 
even  though  it  may  be  honestly  entered  into  in  the 
service  of  God.  It  is  at  Gilgal  the  monument  of  the 
stones  from  Jordan  is  set  up ;  for  if  the  consciousness 
of  being  dead  with  Jesus  is  necessary  to  enable  us  to 
mortify  the  flesh,  it  is  through  this  mortification  that 
we  attain  to  the  practical  knowledge  of  what  it  is  to 
be  thus  dead. 

We  do  not  realise  the  inward  communion  (I  am  not 
speaking  now  of  justification),  the  sweet  and  divine  en- 
joyment of  the  death  of  Jesus  for  us,  if  the  flesh  is  un- 
mortified.  It  is  impossible.  But  if  we  return  to  Gilgal, 
to  the  blessed  mortification  of  our  own  flesh,  we  find 
there  all  the  sweetness  (and  it  is  infinite),  all  the 
powerful  efficacy  of  this  communion  with  the  death  of 
Jesus,  with  the  love  manifested  in  it.  "  Always  bear- 
ing about  in  the  body,"  says  the  apostle,  "  the  dying 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus  might  be 
manifested  in  our  mortal  body."  Thus  we  do  not  re- 
main in  Jordan ;  but  there  remains  in  the  heart  all  the 
preciousness  of  this  glorious  work,  a  work  which  the 
angels  desire  to  look  into,  which  is  for  us,  and  which 
Christ,  in  His  love,  appropriates  to  us.  We  find  Him 
with  us  at  Gilgal — a  place  of  no  outward  show  or 
victory  to  attract  the  eyes  of  men  ;  but  where  He,  who 
is  the  source  of  all  victory,  is  found  in  the  power  and 
the  communion  which  enable  us  to  overcome. 

But  there  were  also  twelve  stones  set  up  in  the  midst 
of  Jordan  ;  and  indeed,  if  we  apply  the  power  of  the 
death  of  Christ  to  mortify  the  flesh,  the  heart — exer- 
cised in,  and  fully  enjoying  heavenly  things — loves  to 
turn  again  to  Jordan,  to  the  place  where  Jesus  went 
down  in  the  power  of  life  and  obedience,  and  to  gaze 


JOSHUA.  353 

upon  that  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  which  stood  there,  and 
staye\i  those  impetuous  waters  till  all  the  people  had 
passed  over.  One  loves,  now  that  He  is  risen,  while 
viewing  the  power  of  death  in  all  its  extent,  to  behold 
Jesus  there,  who  went  down  into  it,  but  who  destroyed 
its  power  for  us.  In  the  overflowing  of  the  nations, 
Christ  will  be  the  security  and  the  salvation  of  Israel ; 
but  He  has  been  our  security  and  our  salvation  with 
respect  to  much  more  terrible  enemies.  The  heart 
loves  to  stand  on  the  banks  of  that  river — already 
crossed — and  to  realise,  while  studying  what  Jesus  was, 
the  work  and  the  wondrous  love  of  Him  who  went 
down  into  it  alone,  until  all  was  accomplished.  But  in 
one  sense  we  were  there.  The  twelve  stones  shew 
that  the  people  had  to  do  with  this  work,  although 
the  ark  was  there  alone  when  the  waters  were  to  be 
restrained. 

In  the  Psalms  we  can  especially  there  contemplate 
the  Lord,  now  that  we  are  in  peace  on  the  other  side 
the  stream.  Oh,  that  the  Christian — each  one  in  the 
assembly — knew  how  to  seat  himself  there,  and  there 
meditate  on  Jesus  gone  down  into  death  alone,  and  death 
when  it  overflowed  all  its  banks,  bearing  its  sting  and 
the  power  of  divine  judgment  with  it !  In  doctrine  the 
Psalms  set  forth  also  the  connection  between  the  death 
of  Jesus  and  the  residue  of  Israel  passing  through  the 
waters  of  tribulation  in  the  last  days. 

Behold,  then,  the  people  out  of  Egypt  and  in  Canaan, 
according  to  the  faithfulness  of  God's  promise ;  but  as 
yet  nothing  of  Canaan  possessed,  nor  any  victory 
gained.  It  is  a  type  for  us  of  what  is  taught  in  the 
Colossians:  made  meet  to  be  partakers,  but  the  in- 
heritance of  the  saints  in  light  still  in  hope  ;*  not  only 

*  Christ's  state  (only  that  He  was  actually  raised)  between 
His  resurrection  and  ascension  helps  to  understand  it.  He 
belonged  evidently  to  heaven,  not  to  this  world,  though  He  was 
not  in  heaven. 

VOL.  L  y.  A  A 


354  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

redeemed  out  of  Egypt,  but  brought  into  Canaan,  the 
reproach  of  Egypt  being  rolled  away,  and  the  people 
of  God  having  taken  their  place  at  Gilgal — the  true 
circumcision  of  heart  of  which  we  have  spoken. 

Israel  encamped  at  Gilgal. 

The  character  of  their  communion  with  God  is  then 
pointed  out,  before  their  victories.  They  keep  the  pass- 
over  in  the  plains  of  Jericho.  Jehovah  prepared  a  table 
before  them  in  the  presence  of  their  enemies. 

The  blood  was  no  longer  sprinkled,  as  in  Egypt, 
upon  the  lintel  and  the  two  side-posts,  that  they  might 
be  sheltered  from  the  destroyer,  and  preserved  from 
the  last  judgment  which  spread  terror  throughout 
every  house  where  the  blood  was  not  seen. 

We  need  this  aspect  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  while 
judgment  threatens  in  the  territory  of  sin  and  Satan, 
although  called  of  God  to  come  out  of  it.  God  s  justice 
and  our  consciences  require  it.  But  here  the  passover 
is  no  longer  this  ;  it  is  the  memorial  of  accomplished 
salvation.  Neither  is  it  participation  by  grace  in  the 
power  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ.  It  is  the 
soul's  communion  ;  it  is  the  sweet  spiritual  recollection 
of  a  work  all  His  own,  of  His  death  as  a  lamb  without 
blemish.  We  feed  upon  it,  as  His  redeemed  people,  in 
the  enjoyment  of  this  position  in  the  land  of  promise 
and  of  God — a  land  which  belongs  to  us  in  consequence 
of  this  redemption,  and  of  our  being  raised  up  with 
Christ.  The  death  of  Jesus  can  only  be  thus  enjoyed 
on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  as  risen  with  Him.  Then, 
in  peace,  in  fellowship  with  Him,  and  with  ineffable 
feelings  of  thankfulness,  we  return  to  the  death  of  the 
Lamb ;  we  contemplate  it ;  we  feed  upon  it.  Our  heavenly 
happiness  and  intelligence  only  increase  our  sense  of 
its  preciousness. 

On  the  morrow  after  the  passover  the  people  ate  of 
the  old  corn  of  the  land.  Thus,  raised  up,  and  in  title 
and  nature  suited  to  it,  and  taking  our  place  thus  in 


JOSHUA.  355 

fitness  and  hope  in  the  heavenly  places,  it  is  Christ 
known  as  heavenly  who  feeds  the  soul,  and  maintains 
it  in  vigour  and  in  joy.*  From  thenceforward,  also, 
the  manna  ceased.  This  is  the  more  remarkable, 
because  Christ,  we  know,  is  the  true  manna,  but  Christ 
down  here,  Christ  after  the  flesh,  and  suited  to  man, 
and  to  his  wants  in  the  wilderness ;  nor  will  He  ever 
be  forgotten  as  such.  I  contemplate  Jesus  (God  mani- 
fest in  the  flesh)  with  adoration.  My  soul  feeds  upon 
the  mighty  attractions  of  His  grace  in  His  humiliation ; 
delights  in  the  blessed  testimony  of  His  love  who  bore 
our  sorrows  and  carried  our  sicknesses,  and  learns  to  be 
nothing  and  serve,  in  Him  who  took  the  lowest  place. 
It  is  in  this  He  ministers  to  the  secret  affections  of  the 
heart  as  we  pass  through  this  world ;  still  in  that 
condition  He  remained  alone.  The  corn  of  wheat 
must  fall  into  the  ground  and  die ;  otherwise  it  abides 
alone. 

But — while  knowing  what  He  has  been — it  is  a 
Christ  seated  above,  who  came  from  above,  who  died 
and  is  raised  again,  and  ascended  up  where  He  was 
before,  whom  I  now  know.  His  death,  of  the  memorial 
of  which  we  have  spoken,  is  undoubtedly  the  basis  of 
all.  There  is  nothing  more  precious  :  but  it  is  a 
heavenly  Christ  with  whom  we  have  now  to  do  as  the 
living  One.  For  the  rest,  we  remember  Him  in  His 
humiliation  and  death  ;  but  this  He  gives  us  as  its 
character.  Even  in  the  Lord's  supper,  analogous  to  the 
passover  here  celebrated,  it  was  "Do  this  in  remem- 
brance of  me."  And  so  in  all  His  life ;  it  was  in  the 
wilderness,  and  suited  to  us  for  the  wilderness  also; 

*  Let  us  remark,  also,  that  christian  simplicity  and  sincerity, 
the  practical  hoUness  of  the  christian  Hfe,  the  unleavened  bread 
which  was  eaten  on  the  morrow  after  the  passover,  is  a  heavenly 
tiling.  Nothing  on  this  side  Jordan  can  be  this.  It  is  of  the 
growth  of  that  land ;  therefore  it  is  connected  with  Jesus,  and 
peace  through  His  death  as  a  thing  previous. 

V. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

it  is,  in  our  little  measure,  in  heart  or  in  fact,  the 
fellowship  of  His  sufferings. 

We  contemplate,  while  seeking  to  imitate,  the  pre- 
cious model  which  He  has  set  before  us,  as  a  heavenly 
man  upon  the  earth.  But,  beholding  with  unveiled 
face  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  we  are  changed  into  the 
same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord.  He  has  for  our  sakes  sanctified  Himself,  that 
we  might  be  sanctified  through  the  truth.  We  delight 
ourselves  with  the  contemplation  of  all  His  grace  here 
below;  our  affections  are  drawn  out  by  a  suffering 
Saviour.  Nothing  more  precious  than  the  Son  of  God 
winning  the  confidence  of  man's  heart  to  God  by  His 
love  in  their  midst  when  far  from  Him;  but  our 
present  fellowship  is  with  a  Christ  in  heaven.  And  the 
Christ,  whom  we  know  on  earth,  is  a  heavenly  Christ, 
and  not  an  earthly  Christ,  as  He  will  be  to  the  Jews 
by-and-by.  It  was  bread  on  earth  no  doubt,  but  bread 
come  down  from  heaven  ;  and  this  is  a  very  important 
consideration.  In  passing  through  this  wilderness  (and 
we  are  passing  through  it),  Christ,  as  the  manna,  is  in- 
finitely precious  to  us.  His  humiliation — His  grace — 
comfort,  also  relieve,  and  sustain  us.  We  feel  that  He 
has  passed  through  the  same  trials,  and  our  heart  is 
sustained  by  the  thought  that  the  same  Christ  is  with 
us.  This  is  the  Christ  we  need  for  the  wilderness — 
the  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven :  but,  as 
a  heavenly  people,  it  is  Christ,  as  belonging  to 
heaven  and  heavenly  things,  as  associated  with  Him, 
the  old  com  of  the  land ;  for  it  is  to  Christ  ascended  up 
on  high  that  we  are  united ;  it  is  there  that  He  is  our 
life.  In  a  word,  we  feed  on  heavenly  things,  on  Christ 
above,  on  Christ  humbled  and  dying  indeed  as  a  sweet 
remembrance,  but  on  Christ  living  as  the  present 
power  of  life  and  grace.  We  feed  on  the  remembrance 
of  Christ  on  the  cross ;  this  is  the  passover.  But  we 
keep  the  feast  with  a  Christ  who  is  the  centre  of 


JOSHUA.  357 

heavenly  things,  and  feed  upon  them  all.  (Col.  iii.  1,  2.) 
It  is  the  old  corn  of  the  land  into  which  we  have 
entered.     For  He  belongs  to  heaven. 

Thus,  before  giving  battle,  in  front  of  the  very  walls 
of  Jericho  (representative  of  the  enemy's  power),  God 
gives  us  to  enjoy  the  fruit  of  this  heavenly  land  as 
being  all  our  own.  We  remember  the  death  of  Jesus, 
as  redemption  long  since  wrought  out ;  and  we  feed  on 
the  old  corn  of  the  land,  on  heavenly  things,  as  our  own 
present  portion.  For,  being  risen  with  Christ  by  His 
grace,  all  is  ours. 

After  this  beautiful  picture  of  the  position  and  the 
privileges  of  God's  people,  who — according  to  God's 
own  rights — may  enjoy  everything  before  engaging  in 
a  single  battle,  we  find  that  war  must  follow.  But 
there  is  one  thing  necessary  for  making  war  and 
obtaining  blessings  by  conquest.  Jehovah  presented 
Himself  as  Captain  of  the  host;  it  is  He  Himself 
who  leads  us.  He  is  there  with  a  drawn  sword  in 
His  hand.  Faith  owns  no  neutrality  in  heavenly 
things.*  "And  Joshua  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  for 
us,  or  for  our  adversaries  ?  And  he  said.  Nay,  but  as 
captain  of  the  host  of  Jehovah  am  I  come." 

Remark  here  that  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  as  Captain 
of  the  host,  as  much  demanded  holiness  and  reverence, 
as  when  He  came  down  to  redeem  His  people  (Exodus 
iii.)  in  that  divine  holiness  and  majesty  which  were 
manifested  according  to  their  just  requirements  in  the 
death  of  Jesus,  who  gave  Himself  that  He  might 
magnify  and  establish  them  for  ever.  Such  as  He  was, 
who  called  Himself  "  I  am,"  when  He  thus  came  down 

*  I  say,  in  heavenly  things,  because  the  heart  is  sensible  of 
good  quahties  in  the  creature.  The  Lord  loved  the  rich  young 
man  when  He  had  heard  his  replies.  But  when  a  rejected  and 
ascended  Lord  is  to  be  followed,  the  will  always  sets  itself  either 
for  or  against.  Faith  knows  this ;  it  knows  too  the  rights  of 
God,  and  it  maintains  them. 

V, 


358  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

in  righteousness  and  majesty;  such  also  is  He  when 
standing  in  the  midst  of  His  people  to  bless  and  lead 
them  in  conflict. 

The  almighty  power  of  God  is  with  the  church  in  its 
warfare.  But  His  infinite  holiness  is  there  also,  and 
He  will  not  make  good  His  power  in  their  conflicts  if 
His  holiness  is  compromised  by  the  defilement,  the 
negligence,  the  heedless  levity,  of  His  people ;  or  by 
their  failure  in  those  feelings  and  affections  which 
become  the  presence  of  God,  for  it  is  God  Hvmself  who 
is  there. 

In  chapter  vi.  we  find  the  principles  on  which  the 
conquests  of  Israel  are  founded.  The  work  is  altogether 
God's.  He  may  indeed  exercise  His  people  in  conflict, 
but  it  is  He  who  does  all.  "  They  went  up  every  man 
straight  before  him."  There  is  submission  here  in  the 
use  of  means,  readiness  to  follow  a  course  which,  in  the 
eyes  of  the  world,  is  absurd  and  without  object ;  but 
which  loudly  proclaims  the  presence  of  the  Lord  in  the 
midst  of  His  people.  There  is  entire  dependence  upon 
God,  a  perfect  confidence  in  Him,  which  openly  declares 
it  has  nothing  else  to  do  but  to  obey  Him. 

The  promise  is  sure ;  they  act  in  obedience.  That  is 
the  principle.  Joshua — type  of  the  energy  and  the 
mind  of  the  Spirit  in  one  who  enjoys  communion  with 
the  Lord — is  certain  of  success ;  and  in  this  assurance 
of  faith  he  acts  without  hesitation.  In  effect,  all  the 
strength  of  the  enemy  falls  to  the  ground  without  the 
use  of  any  means  that  could  account  for  it. 

Another  principle  is,  that  there  must  be  no  fellowship 
whatever  with  that  which  constitutes  the  power  of  the 
enemy  of  God,  with  the  world,  and  that  which  is  its 
strength.  All  is  accursed.  It  is  so  with  us  in  this 
world.  If  the  world  of  Sodom  had  enriched  Abraham, 
he  would  have  been  dependent  on  that  world ;  he  would 
have  owed  it  something ;  he  would  not  have  been  at 


JOSHUA.  359 

liberty  from  it  to  belong  entirely  to  God.  "  And  ye  in 
any  wise  keep  yourselves  from  the  accursed  thing,  lest 
ye  make  yourselves  accursed."  God  may  use  these 
things  by  consecrating  them  to  Himself,  if  He  will. 
Uut  if  man,  if  the  Christian,  meddle  with  them,  the 
Lord  must  judge  him.  Cities  walled  up  to  heaven,  the 
greatest  obstacles  are  as  nothing ;  how  can  they  be 
with  God?  But  holiness, complete  separation  from  the 
world  because  power  is  of  God — that  is  the  condition 
of  strength.  Jericho,  representing  the  enemy's  power 
and  means  of  defence  (inasmuch  as  it  was  the  first  city 
standing  as  a  barrier  to  arrest  the  progress  of  God's 
people),  is  put  under  a  curse  for  ever  ;  and  sentence  is 
passed  against  any  one  who  should  rebuild  it.  (See 
1  Kings  xvi.  34.)  The  abstract  principles  of  the  power 
of  God  and  the  enemy's  strength  are  presented  by  this 
city  and  its  fall,  in  what  evidences  them,  and  in  con- 
trast. But,  if  God  is  there,  and  the  world  is  utterly 
condemned.  His  grace  calls  out  from  this  world  a  people 
saved  by  faith  from  its  abominations,  and  Rahab,  a 
poor  unworthy  sinner,  is  saved  from  its  judgment,  and 
has  her  place  and  part  with  the  people  of  God.* 

Chapter  vii.  lays  open  the  principles  of  God's  govern- 
ment, or  His  ways  in  the  midst  of  His  people  who  are 
in  conflict.  Victory  leads  to  negligence.  The  work  is 
thought  easy.  After  a  manifestation  of  God's  power 
there  is  a  kind  of  confidence  which  in  reality  is  only 
self-confidence,  for  it  neglects  God.  What  proves  this 
is  that  God  is  not  consulted.  Ai  was  but  a  small  city. 
Two  or  three  thousand  men  could  easily  take  it.  They 
went  up  and  viewed  the  country,  but  God  was  for- 
gotten. The  consequence  of  this  will  be  seen.  If  they 
had  taken  counsel  of  Jehovah,  either  He  would  have 
given  no  answer  on  account  of  the  accursed  thing,  or 

*  It  is  noticeable  that  she,  like  Ruth  the  stranger,  is  in  the 
line  of  the  Lord's  royal  genealogy.  (Matt.  i.  5.) 
VI.,  VII. 


360  THE   BOOKS  OT    THE  BIBLE. 

He  would  have  made  its  presence  known.  But  they 
did  not  seek  His  counsel ;  they  went  forward,  and  they 
were  defeated.  The  people  of  God,  surrounded  by  the 
enemy,  have  lost  their  strength,  and  flee  before  the 
least  city  in  the  land.  What  will  they  do  now  ?  This 
is  more  than  they  know.  Engaged  in  battle,  and  un- 
able to  conquer,  what  can  they  do  there,  where  victory 
alone  is  their  safety?  "The  hearts  of  the  people 
melted  and  became  as  water."  Joshua  cries  unto 
Jehovah,  for  in  such  a  case  even  he  who  has  the  Spirit 
is  taken  by  surprise,  not  having  acted  according  to  the 
Spirit.  He  must  fall  on  his  face  before  Jehovah,  for 
their  condition  is  not  normal,  not  according  to  the  Spirit 
who  is  the  only  guide  and  wisdom  of  His  people. 
Joshua  however  recalls  the  power  by  which  God  had 
brought  the  people  over  Jordan,  and  contrasts  it  with 
their  present  condition,  so  evidently  inconsistent  with 
it.  "Wherefore  hast  thou  at  all  brought  this  people 
over  Jordan,  to  deliver  us  into  the  hand  of  the  Amorites, 
to  destroy  us  ?  Would  to  God  we  had  been  content, 
and  dwelt  on  the  other  side  Jordan,  O  Lord !  what 
shall  I  say  ?" 

This  was  a  perturbed  state  of  mind,  the  effect  of  a 
mixture  of  unbelief  with  the  remembrance  of  the 
wonders  which  the  power  of  God  had  wrought.  Joshua 
loves  the  people,  and  he  sets  before  God  the  glory  of 
His  name ;  yet  with  a  timorous  wish  that  they  had  re- 
mained on  the  other  side  of  Jordan  (and  what  to  do 
there  ?  for  unbelief  ever  reasons  badly),  away  from 
the  conflict  which  led  to  such  disasters — a  wish  that 
betrayed  the  unbelief  which  disturbed  his  heart. 

Such  is  the  state  of  a  believer's  soul  in  the  conflict 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  brings  him  into,  when  the  state 
of  his  soul  does  not  inwardly  correspond  with  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Holy  Ghost  who  is  our  only  strength  for 
conflict.  There  is  no  escape.  The  position  in  which  the 
saints  find  themselves  is  one  which  absolutely  requires 


JOSHUA.  861 

strength ;  yet  the  very  nature  of  God  prevents  His 
bestowing  it.  We  lament,  we  recognise  His  power,  we 
dread  the  enemy.  We  talk  of  God's  glory  :  but  we  are 
thinking  of  our  own  fears  and  our  own  condition.  Yet 
the  thing  was  very  simple.  "  Israel  hath  sinned."  Man, 
even  when  spiritual,  looks  at  results  (because  he  is  in 
close  contact  with  them),  even  while  owning  the  power 
of  God,  and  the  connection  between  Him  and  His 
people.  But  God  looks  at  the  cause,  and  also  at  what 
He  is  Himself.  It  is  true  that  He  is  love,  but  He  can- 
not sacrifice  the  very  principles  of  His  being,  nor  deny 
Himself  in  those  relationships  which  are  founded  upon 
what  He  is.  His  glory  is  indeed  connected  through 
grace  with  the  well-being  of  His  people.  But  He  will 
vindicate  His  glory,  and  even  bless  His  people  in  the 
end,  without  compromising  these  principles.  Faith 
must  count  on  the  sure  result  of  His  faithfulness,  but 
bring  the  heart  (submitting  to  God's  ways)  into  accord- 
ance with  those  principles. 

It  would  not  be  maintaining  His  glory  in  the  midst 
of  His  people  if  He  tolerated  amongst  them  anything 
contrary  to  His  essential  character,  and  made  use  of 
His  power  to  maintain  them  in  a  condition  which  would 
deny  His  nature.  The  relationship  would  be  broken, 
and  God  Himself  compromised — a  thing  absolutely  im- 
possible. They  had  sin  amongst  them,  and  the  strength 
of  God  is  no  longer  with  them ;  for  God  cannot  identify 
Himself  with  sin. 

And  let  us  remember  that  there  was  sin  also  in  the 
neglect  which  went  forward  without  seeking  counsel 
from  God.  Joshua's  cry  did  not  at  once  bring  deliver- 
ance, but,  first  of  all,  discovery  of  the  sin,  with  respect 
to  which  God  is  very  precise  and  exact.  When  the 
government  of  His  people  is  in  question,  He  searches 
into  everything,  and  takes  cognisance  of  the  smallest 
details.  (See  ver.  11.) 

Further,  God  not  only  said,  "  therefore  Israel  could 

VII. 


362  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

not  stand,"  but  "  Thou  canst  not  stand."  Their  weak- 
ness would  continue.  Sorrowful  change  !  Before  it 
was  "  No  man  shall  be  able  to  stand  before  thee."  Now 
they  could  not  stand  themselves.  Where  there  is  not 
holiness,  God  allows  the  weakness  of  His  people  to  be 
practically  seen ;  for  there  is  no  strength  but  in  Him, 
and  He  will  not  go  out  with  them  where  holiness  ia 
wanting,  nor  thus  sanction  and  encourage  sin.  Only, 
let  us  remark  here,  that  God  does  not  always  withdraw 
His  blessing  at  once  from  those  who  are  unfaithful. 
He  frequently  chastens  them  on  one  hand,  and  blesses 
them  on  the  other.  He  deals  patiently,  He  instructs 
them,  in  His  grace;  He  does  not  bless  them  on  the 
side  where  the  evil  is,  but  He  acts  with  admirable 
tenderness  and  perfect  knowledge,  taking  the  trouble, 
so  to  say,  of  following  the  soul  in  detail  according  to 
its  condition  and  for  its  good  ;  for  He  is  full  of  grace. 
How  often  He  thus  waits  for  the  repentance  of  His 
people !  Alas  !  how  often  He  waits  for  it  in  vain. 
But  we  have  here  the  great  principle  on  which  He  acts 
(as  in  the  case  of  Jericho,  that  of  His  power  exercised 
on  behalf  of  His  people),  proving  that  all  is  of  God. 

Another  important  principle  is  here  set  before  us. 
The  people  of  God  are  viewed  corporately,  as  to  the 
effects  of  sin  amongst  them.  God  is  in  their  midst. 
Sin  is  committed  there.  He  is  there.  But  since  there 
is  only  one  God  there,  and  the  people  are  one,  if  God 
is  displeased  and  cannot  act,  the  whole  people  suffer 
in  consequence,  for  they  have  no  other  strength  but 
God.  The  only  remedy  is  to  put  away  the  accursed 
thing. 

We  find  the  same  thing  at  Corinth,  modified  accord- 
ing to  the  principles  of  grace.  The  wicked  person  must 
be  put  away.  If  not,  they  are  all  identified  with  the 
sin  until  they  have  put  it  away,  and  have  thus  "  ap- 
proved themselves  to  be  clear."  In  doing  so,  they  take 
God's  part  against  the  sin,  and  the  relationship  between 


JOSHUA.  363 

God  and  the  body  reassumes  its  normal  state.  Never- 
theless all  this  cannot  fail  to  produce  certain  painful 
effects.  If  the  accursed  thing  is  there,  although  God 
may  have  been  glorified  in  the  manifestation  of  the 
perfection  of  His  ways — of  His  jealousy  of  sin,  and 
perfect  knowledge  of  all  that  happens  (for  Achan's 
confession  justifies  God,  and  the  people  have  not  a 
word  to  say),  still,  though  the  sin  is  no  longer  con- 
cealed, discipline  must  be  carried  out.  The  confession 
of  Achan  (whose  sin  had  been  brought  to  light, 
through  the  obedience  of  the  people,  or  of  Joshua,  to 
the  Lord's  directions)  does  but  ratify,  in  the  eyes  of 
all,  the  just  judgment  of  God. 

But  it  is  well  to  remember  here  that  christian  disci- 
pline has  always  the  recovery  of  the  soul  for  its  object. 
Even  if  the  offender  should  be  delivered  unto  Satan,  it 
is  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit  may 
be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord — a  most  forcible 
reason  for  exercising  this  discipline,  according  to  the 
measure  of  our  spiritual  power;  for  we  cannot  go 
beyond  that.  At  the  least  we  might  always  humble 
ourselves  before  God,  in  order  that  the  evil  may  be  re- 
moved. To  be  indifferent  to  the  presence  of  evil  in 
the  church  is  to  be  guilty  of  high  treason  against 
God ;  it  is  taking  advantage  of  His  love  to  deny  His 
holiness,  despising  and  dishonouring  Him  before  all. 
God  acts  in  love  in  uie  church ;  but  He  acts  with  holi- 
ness and  for  the  maintenance  of  holiness :  otherwise  it 
would  not  be  the  love  of  God  which  acted ;  it  would 
not  be  seeking  the  prosperity  of  souls. 

It  is  interesting  to  see  that  this  valley  of  Achor,  the 
witness  and  the  memorial  of  the  first  sin  committed  by 
Israel  after  they  had  entered  the  land,  is  given  them 
"  for  a  door  of  hope  "  (Hosea  ii.  15),  when  the  sovereign 
grace  of  God  is  in  action.  It  is  always  thus.  Fear 
sin,  but  do  not  fear  the  bitterness  of  its  discovery,  nor 
that  of  its  chastisement :  for  at  this  point  God  resumes 

VII. 


364  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  course  of  blessing.  Blessed  be  His  gracious  name 
for  it !  Alas  !  Shinar  (Babylon)  and  money  soon  begin 
to  affect  the  ways  of  the  people  of  God.  They  find 
these  things  amongst  their  enemies,  and  the  carnal 
heart  covets  them.  Observe  also  that,  if  there  is  faith- 
fulness and  obedience,  God  never  fails  to  manifest  and 
take  away  that  which  hinders  the  blessing  of  His 
people.  Let  us  follow  the  history  of  the  people's 
restoration  to  God's  favour. 

Chapter  viii.  exhibits  the  return  of  Israel  to  their 
strength  in  God. 

If  all  the  people  were  compromised  by  Achan's  sin, 
it  was  needful  that  they  should  be  sensibly  restored 
to  confidence,  that  they  should  be  established,  and 
consequently  that  they  should  go  through  whatever 
was  necessary  to  their  restoration.  They  must  ex- 
perience many  things.  Much  experience  of  this  kind 
would  be  avoided  by  walking  in  the  simplicity  and 
integrity  of  faith.  Jacob  had  more  of  it  than  Abra- 
ham, and  it  was  when  unfaithful  that  Abraham  went 
through  the  most  (that  is,  of  such  experience  as  is 
really  felt  to  exercise  the  heart).  But  God  makes 
use  of  this  to  teach  us  what  we  are,  and  what  He  is : 
two  things  which — if  we  know  them  not — render  ex- 
perience necessary. 

Success  is  now  certain :  but  all  the  people  must  go 
up  against  this  small  city  which,  judging  by  human 
strength,  might  have  been  taken  by  two  or  three 
thousand  men.  Pride  and  false  confidence  are  sharply 
rebuked  by  this.  How  much  trouble  must  Joshua 
now  take !  Lay  an  ambush,  feign  to  flee :  all  this  to 
take  a  small  city,  and  not  much  glory  after  all.  It 
costs  more  pains  to  return  into  the  path  of  blessing 
than  it  would  have  done  to  avoid  the  evil.  But  the 
simplicity  of  faith  and  its  natural  vigour  can  be 
regained  no  other  way. 

Meanwhile,  the  power  of   God  is  with  them,  and 


JOSHUA.  365 

everything  succeeds;  although  the  manifestation  of 
this  power  is  not  such  as  it  was  at  Jericho.  At 
length  by  God's  command  Joshua  stretches  out  the 
spear  that  was  in  his  hand  toward  the  city.  It  does 
not  appear  that  the  ambush  saw  it,  or  that  it  was  a 
concerted  signal.*  But  as  soon  as  it  was  stretched 
out,  the  ambush  arose,  entered  the  city,  and  set  fire  to 
it.  It  is  thus  that  the  Lord,  working  by  His  Spirit  at 
the  opportune  moment,  produces  activity  in  those  even 
who  may  not  know  why.  At  a  given  time  they  are 
impelled  onwards,  and  think  they  act  from  motives  of 
their  own,  while  it  is  the  Lord  who  directs  all  their 
steps  in  harmony  with  what  He  is  doing  elsewhere: 
and  thus  He  brings  about  the  success  of  the  whole 
afiair. 

It  is  highly  interesting  to  see  the  Lord  thus  the 
hidden  spring  of  all  action,  giving  impulse  to  the 
activity  of  His  children,  who  in  detail  are  ignorant  of 
what  it  is  that  puts  them  in  motion ;  although,  on  the 
whole,  the  mind  of  God  is  revealed  to  them,  even  as 
Israel  had  the  general  orders  of  Joshua.  When  Christ 
stretches  out  the  spear,  all  is  activity  to  bring  about 
the  counsels  of  His  wisdom,  and  lead  to  the  predeter- 
mined results  of  His  mighty  grace.  May  we  only  have 
faith  to  believe  it ! 

We  have  still  two  other  important  facts  to  consider 
in  this  chapter.  Jehovah  had  already  shewn  in  the 
taking  of  Jericho,  that  it  was  His  might  alone  that 
gave  victory,  or  rather  that  made  everything  fall 
before  Israel,  the  prince  of  this  world  having  no 
power  against  Him;  and  that,  the  gold  and  silver 
being   Jehovah's,  the   people   were   not   to  seek   the 

*  It  the  more  appears  that  this  was  not  a  concerted  signal, 
but  that  the  action  had  the  meaning  which  I  have  here  assigned 
to  it,  because  Joshua  drew  not  his  hand  back  till  they  had 
utterly  destroyed  all  the  inhabitants  of  Ai ;  and  this  does  not 
agree  with  the  idea  of  a  mere  signal. 

VIIL 


366  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

treasures  of  the  conquered  world,  nor  to  enrich  them- 
selves with  its  spoils.  In  general,  however,  when 
Israel  had  exterminated  their  enemies,  they  took  pos- 
session of  everything,  as  of  the  promised  land. 

Now  that  these  two  great  principles  are  established, 
(namely,  that  the  power  of  God  is  with  His  people, 
and  that  He  will  have  holiness  and  consecration  to 
Himself  maintained  in  the  camp,)  Joshua  takes 
formal  possession  of  the  whole  country,  as  belonging 
to  Jehovah. 

This  is  not  celebrating  the  memorial  of  their  salva- 
tion by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb ;  nor  is  it  feeding  on 
the  old  corn  of  the  heavenly  land  in  the  place  of  rest ; 
where  the  grace  and  perfection  of  Christ  and  the 
redemption  He  has  wrought  out  are  peacefully  re- 
membered. The  people  treat  the  land  itself  as  belong- 
ing of  right  to  Jehovah,  according  to  the  strength  of 
the  spiritual  might  which  is  in  activity  to  assert  His 
rights,  and  which  recognises  them,  although  the  con- 
quest of  the  land  is  only  just  begun.  Before  Jericho 
(in  type)  they  had  fellowship  with  the  cross,  and  with 
things  above,  without  striking  a  blow. 

Here,  the  conditions  of  the  warfare  being  laid 
down,  they  publicly  declare  beforehand  that  it  is 
Jehovah's  land.  Though  Satan  is  still  in  possession  of 
the  contested  land,  by  right  it  is  Jehovah's.  There 
were  two  actions  by  which  Joshua  verified  this.  He 
commanded  the  dead  body  of  the  king  of  Ai  to  be 
taken  down  from  the  tree  as  soon  as  the  sun  was 
down.  This  was  the  ordinance  in  Deuteronomy  xxi. 
22,  23,  "  His  body  shall  not  remain  all  night  upon  the 
tree,  but  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  bury  him  that  day 
(for  he  that  is  hanged  is  accursed  of  God)  ;  that  thy 
land  be  not  defiled,  which  Jehovah  thy  God  giveth 
thee  for  an  inheritance."  Israel's  victory  was  com- 
plete. The  curse  hung  over  their  enemies,  who  were 
also  God's  enemies.     They  were  made  a  curse,  and 


JOSHUA.  367 

declared  to  be  so.  Now,  according  to  Joshua's  faith, 
the  land  was  so  entirely  Israel's,  as  the  gift  of  God, 
that  it  ought  not  to  be  defiled;  he  had,  therefore, 
the  dead  body  taken  down  that  it  should  not  be  so  in 
fact. 

The  other  action  was  Joshua's  building  an  altar  on 
Mount  Ebal.  Having  taken  possession  of  Canaan  as  a 
consecrated  land,  they  recognise  Jehovah  as  the  God  of 
Israel  by  worshipping  Him  in  the  land.  The  altar 
was  there  as  a  witness,  and  as  a  bond  between  the 
people  and  Jehovah  who  had  given  them  the  land. 
The  erection  of  this  altar  has  been  already  spoken  of, 
when  considering  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy;  I  will 
not  recur  to  it.  I  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  judge 
whether  Joshua  would  have  done  better  to  set  up  this 
altar  as  soon  as  they  had  crossed  the  Jordan.  Be  that 
as  it  may,  we  do  not  always  turn  at  once  to  God,  when 
we  enjoy  that  which  His  power  has  wrought.  Our 
not  doing  so  only  proves  our  folly,  whether  it  be 
in  things  connected  with  our  joy  or  our  safety.  It 
was  the  Lord's  mind  here  to  give  us  the  testimony  of 
divine  strength  and  human  weakness  before  this 
public  assumption  of  the  land  in  His  name;  the 
practical  realisation  of  being  beyond  Jordan  in  power 
and  of  Gilgal,  brought  home  to  them  by  its  contrast. 
It  is  taken  possession  of  in  connection  with  Israel's 
responsibility  under  the  law. 

Joshua  now  reads,  before  all  the  people,  not  only  the 
curses  attached  to  the  violation  of  the  law,  but  all  that 
made  known  the  ways  of  God  in  His  government  of 
the  people. 

But,  if  such  a  position  as  this  proclaims  the  rights 
of  God  and  manifests  the  confidence  of  the  people,  it 
.soon  leads  to  conflict.  The  enemy  will  not  consent  to 
the  invasion  and  the  taking  possession  of  all  the  terri- 
tory he  has  usurped.  But  the  wiles  of  the  enemy  are 
more  to  be  feared  than  his  strength ;  indeed  it  is  only 
VIII. 


368  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

these  that  are  to  be  feared:  for  in  his  strength  he  meets 
the  Lord ;  in  his  wiles  he  deceives,  or  seeks  to  deceive, 
the  sons  of  men.  If  we  resist  the  devil,  he  flees;  but  to 
stand  against  his  wiles,  we  need  the  whole  armour  of 
God.  Christ  met  his  wiles  with  scripture,  in  the  path 
0»f  simple  obedience,  and,  when  he  manifested  himself, 
tne  Lord  said,  "  Get  thee  hence,  Satan." 

The  inhabitants  of  Gibeon  pretended  to  have  come 
from  far.  The  princes  of  Israel  use  their  own  wisdom 
instead  of  asking  counsel  of  Jehovah.  This  time  it  is 
confidence,  not  in  the  strength,  but  in  the  wisdom  of 
man.  The  princes  of  the  congregation,  accustomed  to 
reflect  and  to  guide,  are  more  likely  to  fall  into  this 
snare.  Bad  as  they  are  in  their  unbelief,  the  people, 
eager  for  the  result,  are  often  nearer  the  mind  of  God 
to  whom  the  result  is  sure.  The  princes  had  some 
misgivings,  so  that  they  are  inexcusable.  Apparently 
there  was  much  advantage  in  gaining  allies  in  a  place 
where  they  had  so  many  enemies.  The  Gibeonites 
flattered  them  too,  as  the  servants  of  Jehovah.  Every- 
thing was  calculated  to  set  their  minds  at  rest. 

Satan  can  talk  religiously  as  well  as  another;  but 
he  deceives  only  when  we  take  the  management  into 
our  own  hands,  instead  of  consulting  the  Lord.  Com- 
munion with  Him  was  needed  to  discern  that  these 
were  people  of  the  country,  enemies  who  dared  not  to 
be  enemies :  but  to  make  peace  with  such  is  to  deprive 
oneself  of  a  victory,  and  of  one's  right  to  make  good 
the  judgment  and  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  unmingled 
possession  of  the  land  of  blessing.  Allies  can  only 
set  aside  that  single-eyed  dependence  upon  God,  and 
that  purity  of  moral  relationship  which  exist  between 
God  and  His  people,  when  it  is  His  power  alone  that 
sustains  them.  For  allies  were  not  Israel.  Israel 
spares  the  enemy ;  and  the  name  of  Jehovah,  which 
had  been  brought  in,  obliges  His  people  to  retain  a 
perpetual  snare  in  their  midst. 


JOSHUA.  369 

Four  centuries  later,  in  the  days  of  Saul,  this  pro- 
duced its  sorrowful  fruits.  To  a  spiritual  mind  the 
presence  of  the  Gibeonites  would  always  be  an  evil. 
Besides,  what  had  Israel  to  do  with  allies  ?  Was  not 
Jehovah  sufficient  ?  May  He  give  us  always  to  trust 
in  Him,  to  seek  counsel  of  Him,  to  own  none  but  Him, 
and  to  be  always  subject  to  Him !  This  will  ensure 
victory  over  every  enemy,  and  the  land  will  be  all  our 
own. 

Moreover,  this  peace  with  the  Gibeonites  only 
brought  fresh  attacks  upon  Israel.  But  now  all  is 
plain.  Jehovah  says  to  Joshua,  "  Fear  them  not,  for 
I  have  delivered  them  into  thy  hand."  This  is  all 
that  conflict  means  for  one  who  walks  in  the  Spirit 
before  God.  There  must  be  conflict,  but  conflict  is 
only  victory.  It  is  the  Lord  who  has  delivered  the 
enemy  into  our  hands ;  none  can  stand  before  us. 

All  things  are  ours.  The  sun  stands  still,  and  the 
moon  stays  its  course,  witnessing  to  the  power  of  God 
and  to  the  interest  He  takes  in  blessing  His  people. 
We  may  be  sure  that,  whithersoever  the  Spirit  will  go, 
there  the  wheels  will  go.  (Ezek.  i.  20.)  Joshua  de- 
feated all  his  enemies,  because  Jehovah,  the  God  of 
Israel,  fought  for  Israel.  This  time  they  were  faith- 
ful, they  made  no  peace.  What  had  Canaanites  to  do 
in  Jehovah's  land  ?  Has  Satan  any  right  to  the  land 
of  promise  ?  This  is  the  light  in  which  Joshua  always 
beholds  the  land  of  Canaan.  (Chap.  x.  27.)  But,  after 
the  victory,  Israel  returned  to  the  camp  of  Gil  gal.  We 
liave  already  explained  what  Gilgal  means.  But  the 
return  thither  of  the  conquerors  of  the  Canaanitish 
kings  contains  the  instructive  lesson  that,  whatever 
our  victories  and  our  conquests  may  be,  we  must 
always  return  to  the  place  that  becomes  us  before 
God  in  the  annihilation  of  self ;  to  the  application  of 
the  knowledge  we  have  of  God  (the  resurrection  of 
Christ  having  set  us  in  the  heavenly  places),  to  the 

TOL.   I.  IX.,   X.  B  B 


370  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

judging  and  the  mortifying  ot  the  flesh — to  spiritual 
circumcision,  which  is  the  death  of  the  flesh  by  the 
power  of  resurrection.  There  is  a  time  to  act  and  a 
time  to  be  still,  waiting  upon  God  that  we  may  be  fit 
for  action.  Activity,  the  power  that  attends  us,  suc- 
cess, everything,  tends  to  draw  us  away  from  God,  or 
at  least  to  divide  the  attention  of  our  fickle  hearts. 

But  the  camp  is  the  starting-point  for  victory,  and 
the  return  from  triumph  for  true  strength  is  always  to 
Gilgal.  It  is  not  there  that  the  enemy  attacks  us  if 
we  are  faithful.  The  attack  will  be  on  our  side,  what- 
ever the  manoeuvres  of  our  adversaries  may  be. 

Let  us  observe  al«o  that,  in  spite  of  the  people's  and 
Joshua's  failures,  everything  turned  out  well  in  the 
end.  There  were  faults,  and  these  faults  received  their 
chastisement,  as  in  the  case  of  Gibeon  and  of  Ai.  But, 
the  walk  of  the  people  being  faithful  in  the  main,  God 
made  everything  work  together  for  good.  Thus  the 
peace  with  Gibeon  led  to  victory  over  the  kings  who 
attacked  that  people.  There  was  cause  for  humiliation 
and  for  chastisement  in  the  details  of  their  history; 
1  )ut,  as  a  whole,  the  hand  of  God  appears  in  it  most 
iDanifestly. 

It  is  seldom  that  every  step  of  our  way  is  taken  in 
faith  and  dependence  upon  God  Vfe  do  well  to 
humble  ourselves  on  account  of  this.  But  when  th(i 
object  is  the  Lord's  object,  He  goes  before  us,  and 
orders  all  things  for  the  triumph  of  His  people  in  this 
holy  war,  which  is  His  own  war.  Only  failures  may 
bring  their  fruits  for  a  long  while. 

Israel's  victories  bring  fresh  war  upon  them:  but 
the  confederation  of  their  enemies  only  serves  to 
deliver  them  aU  together  into  their  hands.  If  God 
will  not  have  peace,  it  is  because  He  will  have  victory. 
A  new  principle  is  now  set  before  us.  God  will  m 
mowise  allow  the  world's  seat  of  power  to  become  that 
of  His  people ;  for  His  people  depend  exclusively  on 


JOSHUA.  871 

Him.  The  natural  consequence  of  taking  Hazor 
would  have  been  to  make  it  the  seat  of  government, 
and  a  centre  of  influence  in  the  government  of  God, 
so  that  this  city  should  be  that  for  God  which  it  had 
before  been  for  the  world  ;  "  for  Hazor  bef oretime  was 
the  head  of  all  those  kingdoms."  But  it  was  just  the 
contrary.  Hazor  is  totally  destroyed.  God  will  not 
leave  a  vestige  of  former  power ;  He  will  make  all 
things  new.  The  centre  and  the  source  of  power  must 
be  His,  entirely  and  exclusively  His  :  a  very  important 
lesson  for  His  children,  if  they  would  preserve  their 
spiritual  integrity. 

In  a  certain  sense  the  conquest  of  the  land  seemed 
complete ;  that  is  to  say,  there  was  no  outward  strength 
left,  either  to  stand  before  them  or  to  form  a  king- 
dom. But  Israel  had  still  many  enemies  in  this  land, 
enemies  who  did  not,  indeed,  molest  them  while  they 
continued  faithful,  but  who  taught  the  people  many 
things  that  afterwards  helped  on  their  ruin.  They  had 
divided  the  conquered  land;  they  had  rest  from  war. 
When  all  is  finished,  we  may  reckon  up  our  victories, 
but  not  before  ;  till  then  we  ought  rather  to  be  occupied 
in  o-ainingj  more. 

We  may  remark  here  that,  in  the  result  of  God's 
dealings,  the  fault  committed  previously  to  the  attack 
upon  Ai  seems  blotted  out,  and  had  even  contributed 
to  the  development  of  His  purposes.  At  the  time  it 
had  kept  them  back,  and  was  punished.  But  God  ap- 
]^lied  Himself  to  Israel's  moral  restoration  to  the  con- 
fidence of  faith,  and  the  grand  object  of  His  dealings 
was  in  nowise  hindered.  This  is  no  excuse ;  but  it  "is 
a  sweet  and  strong  consolation  which  leads  so  much 
the  more  into  worship.  The  fault  committed  in  the 
matter  of  the  Gibeonites  appears  to  me  more  serious. 
It  did  not  delay  their  progress ;  but,  being  the  act  of 
Joshua  and  the  princes,  it  set  them  for  ever  in  a  false 
position  with  respect  to  those  whom  they  spared. 

X. 


o72  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Chapter  xi.  closes  the  first  division  .of  the  book,  thafc 
is  to  say,  the  history  of  Joshua's  victories  (typically 
that  of  the  Lord's  power  by  the  Spirit,  giving  His 
people  possession  of  the  promises). 

Chapter  xii.  is  only  a  summary  of  their  conquests. 
The  Holy  Ghost  not  only  gives  us  the  victory  over 
our  enemies,  but  makes  us  understand  and  know  the 
whole  extent  of  the  country,  and  defines  the  particular 
portion  of  each  ;  giving  us  details  of  everything  it  con- 
tains; of  God's  perfect  arrangements  for  the  appro- 
priation of  the  whole,  and  the  distribution  of  each 
part  of  His  people,  so  as  to  produce  a  well-ordered 
whole,  and  perfect  in  all  its  parts,  according  to  the 
wisdom  of  God.  But  here  we  have  to  realise  the  dis- 
tinction maintained  in  the  New  Testament  between 
the  gifts  of  God,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  gifts  given. 
'  ie  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye 
know  all  things."  "  He  hath  made  us  sit  together  in 
heavenly  places"  by  the  same  power  which  placed 
Christ  there,  when  He  raised  Him  from  the  dead  and 
set  Him  above  every  name  that  is  named.  Alas !  how 
many  earthly  things  still  remain  unsubdued  among 
(Christians.  But  the  Holy  Ghost  takes  cognizance  of 
this  condition,  in  view  of,  and  in  connection  with,  that 
which  rightfully  belongs  to  them  :  it  is  this  which 
enables  us  to  understand  the  second  division  of  this 
book. 

Although  there  was  still  a  considerable  part  of  the 
land  to  be  possessed,  Joshua  parcels  out  the  whole 
amongst  the  tribes  of  Israel,  according  to  the  com- 
mand of  Jehovah,  who  declares  that  He  will  Himself 
drive  out  its  inhabitants  before  them.  But  the  people 
poorly  responded  to  this  promise.  The  cities  of  the 
Philistines  were  indeed  taken,  but  their  inhabitants 
were  not  exterminated ;  they  were  spared,  and  soon 
regained  power.  Here  we  may  remark  that,  where- 
ever  there  is  faithfulness,  there  is  rest.     The  effect  of 


JOSHUA.  373 

Joshua's  work  was,  that  "  the  land  had  rest  from  war ;" 
so  also  with  that  of  Caleb.  (Chap.  xiv.  15.)  When 
the  cities  of  the  Levites  were  allotted  them,  we  find 
the  same  thing  again.  (Chap.  xxi.  43,  44.)  It  is  not  so 
in  detail.  The  whole  extent  of  country  is  given  to 
Israel,  and  each  tribe  has  his  share ;  the  portion,  there  - 
fore,  which  fell  to  each  tribe  was  given  them  in  full 
right  by  Jehovah  Himself.  Their  borders  were  marked 
out ;  for  the  Spirit  of  God  takes  notice  of  everything 
in  distributing  the  spiritual  inheritance,  and  gives  to 
each  according  to  the  mind  of  God.  There  is  nothing 
imcertain  in  God's  arrangements.  But  we  find  that 
not  one  tribe  drove  out  all  the  enemies  of  God  from 
His  inheritance,  not  one  realised  the  possession  of  all 
that  God  had  given  him. 

Judah  and  Joseph  take  possession  of  their  lots.  We 
know  that  they  always  remained  chief  amongst  Israel, 
fulfilling  thus  the  counsels  of  God  as  to  royalty  for 
Judah,  and  the  birthright  which  fell  by  grace  to 
Joseph.  (Chaps,  xv.-xvii. ;  see  1  Chron.  v.  2.)  The 
tabernacle  of  God  was  also  set  up  in  peace  (chap, 
xviii.) ;  but,  once  at  rest,  the  tribes  are  very  slow  in 
taking  possession  of  their  portion — too  frequently 
the  history  of  God's  people.  Having  found  peace, 
they  neglect  His  promises.  Nevertheless,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  Spirit  of  God  did  not  fail  to  point  out  to  the 
people  in  detail  all  that  belonged  to  them. 

The  cities  of  refuge  are  appointed  (chap,  xx.)  ;  that 
is,  the  land  being  Jehovah's,  provision  is  made  that  it 
may  not  be  defiled,  and  for  the  return  of  every  man  to 
his  inheritance,  after  he  had  fled  from  it  for  a  time, 
because  of  killing  some  person  unawares.  We  have 
already  seen  the  force  of  this.  Only  we  may  remark 
here,  that  not  only  have  we  seen  spiritual  title  to  all 
at  once  before  Jericho — the  rights  of  Jehovah  main- 
tained in  the  case  of  the  king  of  Ai  and  mount  Ebal, 
as  the  ground  of  present  possession — but  provision  for 
xi.-xx. 


374  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

restoration  to  enjoyment  of  the  inheritance  in  detail 
when  temporarily  lost,  which,  in  figure,  applies  to  the 
people  in  the  last  days. 

The  establishment  of  the  two  tribes  and  a  half  on 
the  other  side  Jordan  gave  rise  to  difficulties  and 
suspicions.  Nevertheless  these  tribes  were  faithful 
at  heart.  Their  position  had  done  them  harm,  their 
self-seeking  having  somewhat  marred  the  energy  of 
their  faith :  still,  faithfulness  to  Jehovah  was  found  in 
them. 

Finally,  Joshua  sets  the  people,  in  the  way  of  warn- 
ing, under  a  curse,  or  under  a  blessing,  according  to 
their  obedience  or  disobedience  ;  and  then  recapitulates 
their  history,  telling  them  that  their  fathers  had  been 
idolaters,  and  that  the  people  around  them  were  so 
still. 

But  the  people,  not  having  yet  lost  the  sense  of  the 
power  of  God  who  had  blessed  them,  declare  that  they 
will  serve  Jehovah  alone.  They  are  thus  placed  under 
responsibility,  and  undertake  to  obey,  as  the  condition 
of  their  possessing  the  land  and  enjoying  the  fruit  of 
God's  promise.  They  are  left  there,  it  is  true,  in 
peaceable  possession  of  it  all,  but  under  the  condition 
of  obedience  after  having  already  allowed  those,  who 
should  have  been  utterly  destroyed,  to  remain  in  the 
land;  and  when,  from  the  outset,  they  had  not  at 
all  realised  that  which  God  had  given  them.  What  a 
picture  of  the  assembly  ever  since  the  days  of  the 
apostles ! 

There  is  yet  one  remark  to  be  made.  When  Christ 
shall  return  in  glory,  we  shall  inherit  all  things,  Satan 
being  bound.  The  assembly  ought  to  realise  now,  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  power  of  this  glory.  But  there 
are  things,  properly  called  heavenly,  which  are  ours, 
as  being  our  dwelling-place,  our  standing,  our  calling ; 
there  are  others  which  are  subjected  to  us,  and  which 
are  a  sphere  for  the  exercise  of  the  power  that  we 


JOSHUA.  375 

possess.  Thus  the  limits  of  Israel's  abode  were  less 
extensive  than  those  of  the  territory  to  which  they 
had  a  right.  Jordan  was  the  boundary  of  their  abode, 
the  Euphrates  that  of  their  possession.  The  heavenly 
things  are  ours ;  but  the  manifestation  of  the  power 
of  Christ  over  creation,  and  the  deliverance  of  this 
creation,  is  granted  to  us.  It  will  be  delivered  when 
C]n-ist  Himself  shall  exercise  the  power. 

Thus  the  "  powers  of  the  world  to  come  "*  were  deli- 
verances from  the  yoke  of  the  enemy.  These  were  not 
things  proper  to  us :  nevertheless  they  were  ours. 

"^^  So  called,  I  doubt  not,  because  they  were  samples  of  that 
power  wliich  will  entirely  subdue  the  enemy  when  Christ  shall 
appear. 


••■e.» 


XXI. -XX 17, 


JUDGES. 

The  Book  of  Judges  is  the  history  of  the  failure  of 
Israel.  Joshua  sets  before  us  the  energy  of  God  acting 
in  the  midst  of  the  people,  though  there  may  be 
failure.  In  Judges  we  see  the  miserable  state  of 
the  nation,  now  become  unfaithful ;  and,  at  the  same 
time,  the  intervention  of  the  God  of  mercy  in  the 
circumstances  into  which  their  unfaithfulness  had 
brought  them.  These  interventions  correspond  with 
what  are  called  revivals  in  the  history  of  the  church 
of  God. 

In  this  book  we  no  longer  see  blessing  and  power 
marking  the  establishment  of  the  people  of  God. 
Neither  does  it  contain  the  fulfilment  of  God's  pur- 
poses, after  the  people  had  manifested  their  inability 
to  retain  the  blessing  they  had  received,  that  indeed  is 
yet  to  come  for  them,  and  for  the  assembly ;  nor  the 
forms  and  government  which,  in  spite  of  the  evil  and 
internal  unfaithfulness  or  uie  people,  could  maintain 
their  external  unity,  until  God  judged  them  in  their 
leaders.  God  was  still  the  only  leader  acknowledged 
in  Israel ;  so  that  the  people  themselves  always  bore 
the  penalty  of  their  sin. 

The  misery  into  which  their  unfaithfulness  brought 
them  moving  the  compassion  of  God,  His  mighty 
grace  raised  up  deliverers  by  His  Spirit  in  the  midst 
of  the  fallen  and  wretched  people.  "  For  his  soul  was 
grieved  for  the  misery  of  Israel."  "And  Jehovah 
raised  up  judges,  which  delivered  them  out  of  the 
hand  of  those  that  spoiled  them."  "  And  when  Jeho- 
vah raised  them  up  judges,  then  Jehovah  was  with 


JUDGES.  377 

the  judge,  and  delivered  them  out  of  the  hands  of 
their  enemies,  all  the  days  of  the  judge ;  for  it  re- 
pented Jehovah  because  of  their  groanings  by  reason 
of  them  that  oppressed  them  and  vexed  them."  But 
Israel  was  unchanged.  "  And  yet  they  would  not 
hearken  unto  their  judges."  "And  it  came  to  pass, 
when  the  judge  was  dead,  that  they  returned  and  cor- 
rupted themselves  more  than  their  fathers,  in  follow- 
ing other  gods  to  serve  them,  and  to  bow  down  unto 
them ;  they  ceased  not  from  their  own  doings,  nor 
from  their  stubborn  way."  This  is  the  sorrowful 
history  of  the  people  of  God ;  but  it  is  also  the  history 
of  the  grace  of  God,  and  of  His  compassions  towards 
His  people. 

Thus,  in  the  beginning  of  the  book,  we  see  evil  and 
failure,  and  also  simple  and  blessed  deliverances.  But 
alas  !  the  picture  darkens  more  and  more.  There  are 
grievous  features  even  in  the  conduct  of  the  judges, 
and  the  state  of  Israel  becomes  worse  and  worse ; 
until  weary  of  the  results  of  their  own  unfaithfulness, 
in  spite  of  the  presence  of  the  prophet,  and  the 
express  word  of  God,  they  reject  the  kingship  of  the 
Almighty  to  adopt  human  forms  of  governnient,  and 
establish  themselves  on  the  same  footing  as  the  world, 
when  they  had  God  for  their  king ! 

This  unfaithfuhiess,  indeed,  foreseen  of  God,  was 
the  reason  why  God  left  some  of  the  nations  in  the 
midst  of  His  people  to  prove  them.  The  presence  of 
these  nations  was  in  itself  a  proof  of  Israel's  lack  of 
energy  and  confidence  in  the  power  of  God,  who 
nevertheless  would  have  preserved  them  from  their 
subsequent  disasters.  But  in  the  wisdom  of  His 
counsels,  God,  who  knew  His  people,  left  these  nations 
in  their  midst,  as  a  means  of  proving  them.  Israel 
will  be  fully  blest  only  under  Messiah,  who  by  His 
might  will  bring  in  their  blessing,  and  by  His  might 
will  preserve  it  to  them. 

L 


373  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

Alas !  this  history  of  Israel  in  Canaan  is  also  that 
of  the  assembly.  Set  up  in  heavenly  blessing  on  the 
earth,  it  has  failed  from  the  beginning  in  realising  that 
which  was  given  to  it ;  and  evil  developed  itself  in  it 
as  soon  as  the  first  and  mighty  instruments  of  blessing 
which  had  been  granted  it  were  removed.  Things 
have  gone  from  bad  to  worse.  There  have  been 
revivals,  but  still  the  same  principle  of  unbelief ;  and 
the  decay  of  each  revival  has  marked  increasing  pro- 
gress in  evil  and  unbelief  in  proportion  to  the  good 
which  has  been  thus  forsaken.  The  revival  never 
reaches  to  the  extent  of  laying  hold  of  what  God  is, 
what  He  revealed  Himself  as  at  first  for  His  people, 
what  the  first  power  of  revelation  and  action  of  the 
Spirit.  When  departed  from,  God  is  more  and  more 
lost.  The  part  of  His  blessing  afresh  brought  forward 
is  neglected  and  abandoned,  so  that  there  is  a  more 
entire  forgetfulness  of  Him,  and  nature  and  the  world 
resume  their  place,  but  now  not  merely  without,  but 
to  the  exclusion  of,  God,  and  setting  up  of  man  and 
nature,  by  departing  from  the  primitive  source  of 
blessing^  and  strenerth.* 

Nevertheless  God  has  always  had  His  own  people  ; 
and  His  faithfulness  has  never  failed  them,  whether  in 
secret,  or  manifesting  openly,  in  His  kindness.  His 
grace  towards  His  assembly  in  public  power — a  power 
that  it  ought  always  to  have  enjoyed.  This  sad  suc- 
cession of  falls  will  have  an  end  at  the  coming  of 
Jesus,  who  will  accomplish  His  purposes  respecting  the 
assembly  in  its  heavenly  glory ;  purposes,  of  which  it 

*  It  is  a  striking  fact  in  man's  history  that  the  first  thing  that 
he  has  always  done  when  God  has  set  up  something  of  His  own 
on  the  earth  has  been  to  spoil  it.  Man  hunself  eats  the  for- 
bidden fruit ;  Noah  gets  drunk ;  Aaron's  sons  offer  strange  fire 
Israel  makes  the  golden  calf;  Solomon  falls  into  idolatiy;  Nebu- 
chadnezzar sets  up  his  idol  and  persecutes.  God's  patience  has 
gone  on  dealing  with  souls,  all  through,  in  spite  of  it. 


JlfDGES.  371> 

should  have  always  been  the  faithful  witness  here 
below. 

The  power  and  the  presence  of  God  did  not  forsake 
Israel  at  the  time  of  Joshua's  departure.  It  was 
always  to  be  found  wherever  there  was  faith  to  make 
use  of  it.  This  is  the  first  truth  which  this  book  pre- 
sents. It  is  what  Paul  said  to  the  Philippians,  "  Work 
out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  not  &s 
in  my  presence  only,  but  now  much  more  in  my 
absence ;  for  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you  both  to 
will  and  to  do." 

This  presence  of  God  with  them  in  blessing  to  faith 
makes  itself  known  at  one  time  by  victory  over  most 
powerful  enemies  (chap.  i.  1-7) ;  at  another  by  the 
obtaining  of  special  blessing,  "  springs  of  water " 
(vers.  13-15),  and  in  all  the  detail  of  their  realisation 
of  the  promises.  The  Philistines  even  were  driven  out. 
(Yer.  18.)  But  at  the  same  time,  the  faith  of  Judah 
and  Simeon,  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  and  of  all  the 
tribes  failed ;  and  consequently  their  energy,  and  their 
sense  of  the  value  of  God's  presence,  and  of  their  own 
consecration  to  Him,  failed  also,  together  with  their 
perception  of  the  evil  existing  among  their  adversaries 
— a  perception  which  would  have  rendered  their 
presence  in  the  midst  of  them  insupportable. 

What  dishonour  to  God,  what  sin,  to  spare,  to 
tolerate,  such  people !  What  unfaithfulness  towards 
God  was  this  indifference;  and  what  an  infallible 
source  of  evil  and  corruption  in  Israel !  But  they 
were  insensible  to  all  this.  They  were  wanting  in 
spiritual  discernment  as  well  as  in  faith ;  and  the 
sources  of  evil  and  misery  dwelt  beside  the  peopIe,^ 
even  in  the  land,  the  land  of  God  and  of  Israel. 

Alas  !  if  such  was  the  condition  of  the  people,  and 
they  were  satisfied  with  it,  chastening,  as  at  Ai,  was 
no  longer  in  question.  But  the  angel  of  Jehovah  (the 
operative  power  of  God  in  the  midst  of  the  people) 

I. 


380  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

quits  Gilgal  (that  spiritual  circumcision  of  heart, 
which  precedes  victory,  and  tempers  the  soul  anew 
that  we  may  overcome  in  conflict)  and  comes  up  to 
Bochim,  to  the  place  of  weeping,  in  the  midst  of  the 
people,  declaring  that  He  will  no  longer  drive  out  the 
enemy  whom  Israel  had  spared. 

God  had  been  then  at  Gilgal !  What  a  blessing  amid 
those  exercises  and  inward  conflicts  of  heart,  in  which 
true  practical  circumcision  is  accomplished,  in  which 
the  source  and  influence  of  sin  are  felt  in  order  to 
judge  it  before  God ;  so  that,  the  flesh  being  judged, 
we  may  in  conflict  (and  also  in  communion)  enjoy  the 
strength  of  God,  who  cannot  grant  it  to  the  flesh  and 
to  sin. 

This  inward  mortification  is  a  work  of  no  outward 
glory ;  it  is  unseen,  or  little  and  pitiful  in  the  eyes  of 
man ;  it  makes  us  little  in  our  own,  but  God  and  His 
grace  great,  and  associates  the  heart  with  Him,  giving 
the  moral  consciousness  of  His  presence.  Not  as  if  we 
were  strong ;  on  the  contrary  there  is  the  sense  of  entire 
dependence  (compare  2  Cor.  xii.),  but  dependence  on 
divine  strength,  which  really  does  all  that  is  done, 
though  God  may  do  it  through  instruments  if  He  sees 
good,  and  then  the  responsibility  of  man  comes  in.  At 
Jericho  God  did  all,  to  shew,  being  without  man,  who 
was  the  doer — then  at  Ai,  responsibility.  The  strength 
was  not  shewn  at  Gilgal.  It  was  shewn  against  the 
Amorites  of  the  mountains,  at  Gibeon ;  but  it  was 
gathered  at  Gilgal.  Historically  it  did  not  appear  that 
the  strength  of  God  was  at  Gilgal.  To  have  mani- 
fested it  would  have  destroyed  the  proper  work  of 
Gilgal — the  judgment  in  humbleness  because  of  God, 
of  everything  in  which  flesh  works.  But,  ivhen  for- 
sahen,  it  was  discovered  that  the  angel  of  Jehovah 
had  been  there.  It  is  exchanged  for  tears.  But  the 
tears  are  for  lost  blessings.  God  may  be  worshipped 
in  Bochim:  His  relationship  to  the  people  was  un- 


JUDGES.  381 

altered.  He  accepts  these  tears.  But  what  a  difier- 
ence !  The  strength  and  the  light  of  Jehovah's 
countenance  are  not  there.  But  He  is  always  the 
same  for  faith  to  count  on,  as  when  the  sea  fled  from 
before  His  face,  and  Jordan  was  driven  back.  The 
sorrow  of  the  position  is  felt,  but  alleviated  by  the  sense 
that  His  grace  cannot  and  will  not  fail.  (See  Judges 
vi.  13,  14.)  This  change  from  Gilgal  to  Bochim  is  the 
key  to  the  book ;  it  is  so,  alas !  but  too  often,  the 
cbndition  of  God's  children. 

The  Holy  Ghost,  having  laid  these  general  founda- 
tions, goes  on  to  the  historical  development  of  Israel's 
position. 

All  the  days  of  Joshua  and  of  the  elders  that  out- 
lived him,  Israel  walked  before  Jehovah.  It  is  the 
history  of  the  assembly.  While  the  apostles  were 
there,  it  was  preserved ;  but  Paul  (Acts  xx.  29)  and 
Peter  (2  Pet.  ii.)  alike  warned  the  saints  that  unfaith- 
fulness and  rebellion  would  unhappily  follow  their 
departure.  These  evil  principles  were  already  there. 
The  intermixture  of  unbelievers  (the  enemy's  work) 
would  become  the  means  through  which  the  evil 
would  unfold  itself  and  o-ain  o-round  amongst  them. 

The  Lord  had  spoken  of  this  (Matt,  xiii.),  not  indeed 
as  to  the  assembly,  but  as  to  the  good  seed  which  He 
had  sown ;  and  Jude  develops  its  progress  and  results 
with  solemn  perspicuity  and  precision. 

But  when  another  generation  arises  in  Israel,  which 
has  not  known  Jehovah,  and  has  not  seen  all  the  great 
works  of  His  hand  ;  and  when  they  serve  the  gods  of 
the  people  whom  Israel  had  spared,  God  no  longer 
protects  them.  Unfaithful  within,  the  Israelites  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  without.  Then,  as  we 
have  seen,  in  their  affliction  Jehovah,  moved  with 
compassion,  raised  up  judges,  who,  acknowledging  His 
name,  brought  back  the  manifestation  of  His  power  in 
their  midst. 

n. 


SS2  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

God,  knowing  what  the  people  were,  and  what  was 
their  condition,  had  left  within  the  borders  of  their 
land  that  which  put  obedience  to  the  proof — the 
Philistines,  the  Sidonians,  &c.,  that  they  might  learn 
Avar,  and  experience  the  ways  and  the  government  of 
Jehovah. 

Thus  the  wisdom  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  who 
knows  what  is  in  man,  turned  the  unfaithfulness  of 
the  people  into  blessing.  Outward  prosperity,  without 
trial,  would  not  have  remedied  unbelief,  whilst  'it 
would  have  deprived  them  of  those  exercises  and  con- 
flicts in  which  they  might  learn  what  God  was,  His 
ways  and  His  relations  to  them,  as  well  as  what  their 
own  hearts  were. 

We  go  through  the  same  experience,  and  for  the 
same  reasons. 

I  will  now  go  over  the  principal  subjects  presented 
in  the  history  of  this  book.  Othniel,  Ehud,  and  Sham- 
gar  were,  in  succession,  the  first  instruments  raised  up 
by  God  to  deliver  His  people. 

First  we  have  to  remark  the  failure  of  the  people, 
who  begin  to  serve  false  gods ;  thereupon  their  servi- 
tude. In  their  distress  they  cry  unto  Jehovah.  This  is 
always  the  way  in  which  deliverance  comes.  (Chap, 
iii.  9,  15  ;  iv.  3.)  In  this  last  instance  Jehovah  departs 
from  His  usual  ways.  The  nation  had  lost  its  strength 
and  energy,  even  as  to  its  internal  affairs.  This  is  the 
effect  of  repeated  falls ;  the  sense  of  God's  power  is 
lost. 

At  the  period  of  which  we  speak,  a  woman  judged 
Israel.  It  was  a  sign  of  God's  omnipotency,  for  she 
was  a  prophetess.  But  it  was  contrary  to  God's  ordi- 
nary dealings,  and  a  disgrace  to  men.  Deborah  calls 
Barak  (for  where  the  Spirit  of  God  acts.  He  discerns 
and  directs) ;  she  communicates  to  him  the  command 
of  God.  He  obeys ;  but  he  lacks  faith  to  proceed  as 
one  who  has  had  direct  instruction  from  God  and  con- 


JUDGES.  388 

sequently  needs  no  other.  These  direct  communica- 
tions give  the  consciousness  o£  God's  presence,  and  that 
He  interposes  on  behalf  of  His  people.  Barak  will 
not  go  without  Deborah.  But  this  want  of  faith  is 
not  to  his  credit.  Men  will  keep  the  place  whicli 
answers  to  the  measure  of  their  faith ;  and  God  wil  1 
again  be  glorified  through  the  instrumentality  of  a 
woman.  Barak  has  faith  enough  to  obey  if  he  has 
.some  one  near  who  can  lean  immediatel}^  on  God,  but 
not  enough  to  do  so  himself.  This  is  too  often  the 
case.  God  does  not  reject  him,  but  He  does  not 
honour  him.  In  fact,  it  is  by  no  means  the  same 
faith  in  God.    And  it  is  by  faith  that  God  is  honoured. 

We  have,  moreover,  in  this  case,  not  the  immediate 
destruction  of  the  enemy,  but  the  discipline  of  the 
people  in  war  to  recover  them  from  the  state  of  moral 
weakness  into  which  they  had  fallen.  They  began 
with  small  things.  A  woman  was  the  instrument; 
for  fear  does  not  honour  God,  and  God  cannot  allow 
His  glory  to  rest  on  such  a  condition  as  this.  But 
little  by  little  "the  hand  of  the  children  of  Israel 
prevailed  against  Jabin  until  they  had  destroyed 
him." 

The  usual  effect  of  such  a  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
as  this  is  to  present  the  people  as  willingly  offering 
themselves.  (Chap.  v.  2.)  Nevertheless  the  Spirit  of 
God  has  shewn  us  that  unbelief  amongst  the  people 
had  caused  many  of  them  to  stay  behind ;  and  thus 
they  lost  the  manifestation  and  the  experience  of  the 
power  of  God.  The  judgment  of  God  amounts  to  a 
curse  where  there  was  an  entire  holding  back,  a  re- 
fusing to  be  associated  witli  the  people  in  their 
weakness. 

But  again  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the 
sight  of  Jehovah,  and  He  delivered  them  into  the 
hand  of  Midian.  And  the  children  of  Israel  cried 
again  unto  Jehovah.     God  reveals  the  cause  of  their 

IIL-V. 


384  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

distress  to  the  consciences  of  the  people.  This  was 
indeed  an  answer ;  but,  for  the  moment,  He  left  them 
as  they  were.  He  did  not  act  in  their  midst  by 
delivering  them  at  once;  but  He  acted  for  them  in 
the  instrument  whom  He  had  chosen  to  effect  their 
deliverance.  God  glorified  Himself  in  Gideon :  but 
the  concentration  of  this  work  in  one  man  proves  the 
people  to  be  in  a  lower  condition  than  before.  Never- 
theless, in  these  humiliating  circumstances,  God 
chooses  means  which  display  His  glory  in  every  way. 
Where  He  works,  there  is  strength;  and  faith  also, 
which  acts  according  to  that  strength  in  its  own  sphere. 

We  will  examine  a  little  into  the  history  of  Gideon, 
and  the  features  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  this  deliver- 
ance, as  well  as  in  the  faith  of  him  whom  He  raised 
up.  It  is  evident  that  many  thoughts  had  occurred 
to  Gideon,  many  serious  reflections,  before  the  angel 
spoke  to  him.  But  it  was  the  angel's  visit  that  caused 
him  to  give  form  and  expression  to  the  thoughts  with 
which  his  heart  was  occupied.  Gideon  suffered  with 
the  rest  from  the  oppression  of  God's  enemies ;  but  it 
led  him  to  think  of  God,  instead  of  making  up  his 
mind  to  endure  the  bondage  as  a  necessary  evil.  The 
angel  says  to  him,  "  Jehovah  is  with  thee,  thou  mighty 
man  of  valour." 

That  which  preoccupied  the  mind  of  Gideon  is 
now  manifested.  It  was  not  his  own  position,  but 
the  relation  between  Jehovah  and  Israel.*  "If  Jeho- 

*  Not  the  elevation  of  Abrahamic  promises,  but  the  manifes- 
t;itiou  of  redeeming  power  in  Jehovah  in  favour  of  Israel.  Some- 
tiiinfif  hke  Moses,  to  whom  Jehovah  had  said,  *'  thy  people,"  but 
who  ever  said,  "thy  people."  So  Gideon  cannot  separate  himself 
from  aU  Israel — God's  people.  "Jehovah  is  with  thee,"  said 
the  angel.  "  If  Jehovah  be  with  us"  says  Gideon,  "  why  then 
is  all  this  befallen  us?"  But  this  is  an  immensely  important 
principle  of  faith  and  its  activities.  Note,  too,  what  was  passing 
in  the  heart  of  faith  was  the  ground  Jehovah  took  in  testimony 
:  ver.  8),  only  adding  the  charge  of  disobedience. 


JUDGES.  385 

vah,**  said  he,  "be  with  us,  why  then  is  all  this 
befaJlen  us?  And  where  be  all  his  miracles  which 
our  fathers  told  us  of,  saying,  Did  not  Jehovah  bring 
us  up  from  Egypt  ?  But  now  Jehovah  hath  forsaken 
us,  and  delivered  us  into  the  hands  of  the  Midianites." 

Faith,  indeed,  was  the  source  of  all  these  reasonings 
and  exercises  of  mind.  Jehovah  had  wrought  all  these 
wonders.  He  had  brought  the  people  up  from  Egypt. 
If  Jehovah  was  with  Israel,  if  such  was  His  relation 
to  His  people,  why  were  they  in  this  sorrowful  condi- 
tion ?  (Oh,  how  applicable  would  this  reasoning  be  to 
tiie  ajssembly !) 

Gideon  acknowledges,  too,  that  it  is  Jehovah  who 
delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  the  Midianites.  How 
the  thought  of  God  raises  the  soul  above  the  sufferings 
one  ia  enduring !  While  thinking  of  Him  one  recog- 
nises, in  these  very  sufferings,  the  hand  and  the  whole 
character  of  Him  who  sent  them.  It  was  that  which 
lifted  up  this  poor  Israelite,  labouring  imder  the 
weight  of  oppression.  "And  Jehovah  looked  upon 
him  and  said,  Go  in  this  thy  might,  and  thou  shalt 
save  Israel."  The  visit  and  the  command  of  Jehovah 
imparted  their  form  and  their  strength  to  that  which 
before  was  only  heart-exercise. 

Nevertheless  it  was  this  heart-exercise  which  gave 
him  strength;  for  it  was  the  inward  link  of  faith 
>vith  all  that  Jehovah  was  for  His  oppressed  people, 
in  the  consciousness  of  the  relationship  existing 
between  them. 

We  will  look  now  at  the  development  of  this  faith, 
and  see  it  employed  for  the  deliverance  of  God's 
people.  Gideon  experiences  at  first  the  sense  of  his 
own  littleness,  whatever  may  be  the  relationship 
between  Jehovah  and  the  people.  (Chap.  vi.  15.)  Je- 
hovah's answer  shews  him  the  one  simple  means 
"  Surely  I  will  be  with  thee."  Precious  condescension ! 
Sweet    and    powerful    encouragement    to   the   soul  ! 

▼OL.  I.  VI.  C  C 


THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

Gideon*s  faith  was  weak.  The  present  state  of  the 
people  tended,  by  its  duration,  to  blot  out  the  remem- 
brance of  the  wonders  which  Jehovah  had  wrought 
when  they  came  out  of  Egypt,  and  to  weaken  their 
consciousness  of  His  presence.  The  angel  of  Jehovah 
condescends  to  tarry  with  him  in  order  to  strengthen 
his  faith. 

Gideon,  who  had  addressed  him  with  a  secret  con- 
sciousness that  it  was  Jehovah,  now  knows  indeed  that 
he  has  seen  the  angel  of  Jehovah,  of  Elohim,  face  to 
face.  It  was  a  positive  revelation,  sufficient  to  annihi- 
late him  in  himself,  as  was  indeed  the  case ;  but  also 
mightily  to  strengthen  him  in  his  walk  amongst 
others,  who  had  not  known  Jehovah  in  the  same  way. 
Although  not  with  similar  visions,  yet  it  is  always 
thus  when  God  raises  up  a  special  instrument  for  the 
deliverance  of  His  people. 

Jehovah  had  made  Himself  known,  and  now  he  re- 
assures Gideon :  "  Peace  be  unto  thee ;  fear  not :  thou 
shalt  not  die." 

A  man  who  is  humbled  by  the  presence  of  God  re- 
ceives strength  from  God,  if  that  presence  is  in  bless- 
ing. Gideon  recognises  and  lays  hold  of  this  for 
himself :  Jehovah  is  with  him  in  peace  and  in  bless- 
ing. The  word  Shalom,  translated  "  Peace  be  with 
thee,"  is  the  same  as  that  used  in  the  name  of  the 
altar. 

When  God  acts  powerfully  on  the  heart,  the  first 
effect  shews  itself  always  in  connection  with  Himself. 
Cxideon's  thoughts  are  occupied  with  Jehovah,  they 
were  so  before  this  manifestation.  But  being  taken 
up  with  Jehovah,  it  is  by  worship  that  he  expresses 
his  feelings,*  when  he  receives  an  answer  from  Jeho- 

*  We  observe  a  similar  feeling  in  Eliezer.  (Gen.  xxiv.  27.)  It 
is  very  interesting  to  notice  the  different  circumstances  in  which 
altars  have  been  built  to  Jehovah.  I  will  name  a  few  passages : 
Genesis  viii.  20 ;    xii.  7;    compare  xiii.  4 ;    see  xxi.  33 ;    xxii.  9  ; 


JUDGES.  387 

vah  to  all  his  thoughts.*  He  builds  an  altar  to  the 
God  of  peace.  The  relationship  of  peace  is  thus  esta- 
blished between  God  and  His  servant ;  but  all  this  is 
between  Gideon  and  Jehovah. 

Now  comes  his  public  service,  which  is  also  fulfilled 
by  re-establishing,  first  of  all,  in  the  bosom  of  his 
own  family,  and  in  his  own  city,  the  relationship  be- 
tween God  and  His  people.     Israel  must  put  away 

xxvi.  25 ;  xxxiii.  20 ;  xxxv.  7.  We  may  also  remark  Exodus 
xxiv.  4 ;  Joshua  viii.  30 ;  and  here  Judges  vi.  It  appears  even 
that  Gideon  built  two  altars;  the  one  for  himself  in  worship, 
and  the  other  by  command  as  a  testimony.  (1  Samuel  vii.  17  ; 
xiv.  35 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  32.  We  may  add  2  Samuel  xxiv.  25 ; 
Ezra  iii.  2.) 

*  It  is  instructive  to  observe  here  the  difference  between  the 
exercises  of  heart  which  are  the  result  of  faith,  and  the  answer 
of  God  to  the  wants  and  difficulties  which  are  caused  by  those 
exercises.  In  verse  13  we  have  the  expression  of  these  exercises 
in  a  soul  under  the  weight  of  the  same  oppression  as  his  breth- 
ren, but  who  feels  it  thus  because  his  faith  in  the  Lord  was  real. 
Then  we  have  the  answer  which  produces  peace,  and,  with 
peace,  worship.  It  is  the  same,  when,  after  having  suffered 
death,  the  risen  Jesus  reveals  Himself  to  His  disciples  with  the 
same  words  that  God  uses  here,  and  lays  down  the  foundation  of 
the  church  gathered  together  in  worship.  In  Luke  vii.  we  find 
the  same  experiences  in  the  woman  who  was  a  sinner.  She  be- 
heved  in  the  person  of  Jesus.  His  grace  had  made  Him  her  all ; 
but  she  did  not  know  yet  that  one  like  her  was  pardoned  and 
saved,  and  might  go  in  peace.  This  assurance  was  the  answer 
^iven  to  her  faith.  Now  this  answer  is  what  the  gospel  pro- 
claims to  every  believer.  The  Holy  Ghost  proclaims  Jesus. 
This  produces  conviction  of  sin.  The  knowledge  of  God  in 
Christ,  and  of  ourselves,  casts  down  (for  sin  is  there,  and  we  are 
in  bondage,  sold  under  sin) ;  but  it  produces  conflict,  perhaps 
anguish.  Often  the  soul  struggles  against  sin,  and  cannot  gain 
the  mastery ;  it  cannot  get  beyond  a  certain  point  (the  greater 
number  of  the  sermons  from  which  it  expects  hght  go  no 
farther)  ;  but  the  gospel  proclaims  God's  own  resources  for 
bringing  it  out  of  this  state.  "  Peace  be  unto  thee,"  "  thy  sins 
are  forgiven."  "  Thy  faith  "  (for  she  has  faith),  says  Christ  to 
the  poor  sinful  woman,  "  hath  saved  thee."  This  was  what  she 
knew  not  yet.  (Compare  Acts  ii.  37,  38.) 

VL 


388  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE  BIBLE. 

Baal  before  God  can  drive  out  the  Midianites.  How 
could  He  do  so,  while  the  blessing  might  be  ascribed  to 
Baal? 

Gideon  is  therefore  commanded  to  give  a  striking 
testimony,  which  calls  the  attention  of  the  whole 
people  to  the  necessity  of  casting  out  Baal,  in  order 
that  God  may  intervene. 

Faithfulness  within  precedes  outward  strength :  evil 
must  be  put  away  from  Israel  before  the  enemy  can 
l)e  driven  out.  Obedience  first,  and  then  strength ; 
this  is  God's  order. 

When  Satan's  power  in  superstition  (in  whatever 
way  it  may  be  outwardly  manifested)  is  despised,  ii  is 
destroyed;  supposing  always  that  God  is  with  him 
who  pours  contempt  on  it,  and  that  he  is  in  the  paih 
of  obedience. 

Gideon  overthrows  Baal ;  and,  on  the  anger  of  the 
people,  fearful  through  superstition — What  can  this 
god  do  ?  he  cannot  defend  himself,  said  even  he  to 
whom  the  altar  belonged.  The  power  of  God  acted 
on  their  minds,  for  faith  was  there.  But  the  opposi- 
tion of  the  enemy  did  not  cease  on  that  account. 
There  is  nothing  so  despicable  as  a  despised  god.  But 
if  Satan  cannot  be  a  god  amongst  men,  he  is  not  at  the 
end  of  his  resources,  he  will  incite  them  to  open 
hostility  against  those  who  overthrow  his  altars ;  bat 
if  we  are  standing  on  God's  side,  the  only  effect  of 
this  will  be  to  bring  him  thereby  into  the  presence  of 
God's  power,  and  to  give  us  victory,  deliverance,  and 
peace. 

The  Midianites  come  up  against  Israel.  All  is  ready 
for  the  Lord's  intervention.  The  Spirit  of  Jehovali 
comes  upon  Gideon.  This  is  a  new  phase  in  the 
history;  not  only  faithfulness,  but  power.  Gideon 
blows  the  trumpet,  and  those  who  shortly  before 
would  have  slain  him  now  follow  in  his  train.  He 
sends  messengers  to  all  his  tribe.      Zebulun,  Asher, 


JUDGES.  389 

and  Naphtali  come  up  also.  The  power  of  the  Spirit, 
which  sways  the  minds  of  men,  is  with  the  faith  that 
acknowledges  God,  that  acknowledges  Him  in  His 
relationship  to  His  people,  and  faithfully  puts  away 
the  evil  which  is  incompatible  with  that  relationship. 

God  gives  another  proof  of  His  great  condescension, 
by  granting  a  sign  to  strengthen  the  weak  but  real  and 
sincere  faith  of  Gideon ;  who  feels,  whilst  repeating  his 
request  (ver.  39),  that  God  might  well  chasten  him  for 
his  lack  of  faith.  Nevertheless  the  Lord  grants  his 
petition. 

Thirty-two  thousand  men  followed  Gideon.  But 
Jehovah  will  not  have  so  many.  He  alone  must  be 
glorified  in  their  deliverance.  Their  faith  was  indeed 
so  weak,  even  while  the  Spirit  of  God  was  at  work, 
that,  when  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  twenty-two 
thousand  men  were  content  to  return  at  Gideon's 
invitation.  The  movement  produced  by  the  faith 
of  another  is  quite  a  different  thing  from  personal 
faith. 

But  ten  thousand  men  are  still  too  many.  Jehovah's 
hand  alone  must  be  seen.  Those  only  may  remain 
who  do  not  stop  to  quench  their  thirst  at  their  ease, 
but  who  refresh  themselves  hastily,  as  opportunity 
offers,  more  occupied  with  the  combat  than  with  their 
own  comforts  by  the  way.  This  was  what  was  needed 
for  Israel — that  Jehovah  should  have  His  place  in 
their  hearts  and  faith  ;  and  it  suited  the  just  judgment 
of  God  in  Israel  that  they  should,  as  to  their  place  in 
the  work,  be  left  out  of  the  glory  of  it. 

Gideon  now  displays  entire  confidence  in  God.  Pre- 
viously, the  weakness  of  his  faith  had  made  him  look 
too  much  at  himself,  instead  of  simply  looking  to  God. 
His  deep  sense  of  Israel's  condition  prevented  his  hesi- 
tating for  a  moment  because  the  people  were  not  with 
him ;  what  could  be  done  with  this  people  ?  In  the 
mistrust  which  arose  from  a  disposition  to  look  too 

VI.,  VII. 


390  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

much  to  himself,  what  he  needed  was  the  certainty 
that  Jehovah  was  with  him.  But,  having  now  the  as- 
surance that  Jehovah  will  deliver  Israel  by  his  means, 
he  trusts  entirely  to  Him. 

Jehovah  throws  terror  and  alarm  into  the  midst  of 
the  enemy;  and  acquaints  Gideon  with  this.  It  is 
affecting  to  see  the  care  which  God  takes  to  impart 
confidence  to  His  servant,  suitably  to  the  need  which 
the  state  of  things  had  created.  Already  the  name  of 
Gideon  resounded  with  dread  in  the  numerous  army  of 
the  Midianites.  Then,  terror-stricken,  they  destroy 
each  other.  The  confidence  of  the  Midianites,  founded 
only  on  Israel's  want  of  power,  melted  away  before 
the  energy  of  faith  ;  for  the  enemy's  instruments  have 
always  a  bad  conscience.  It  is  Jehovah  who  does 
everything.  The  trumpets  and  the  lamps  alone  an- 
nounce His  presence,  and  that  of  His  servant  Gideon. 
The  multitude  of  Israel  pursue  the  enemy,  profiting 
by  the  work  of  faith,  although  without  faith  them- 
selves :  the  usual  result  of  such  a  movement. 

Nevertheless,  they  did  not  all  unite  with  Gideon  in 
pursuit  of  the  Midianites.  But,  for  the  moment, 
Gideon  despises  the  cowardice  which  disowns  him 
through  a  remaining  fear  of  the  oppressor's  power. 
On  his  return  he  chastises,  in  the  righteous  indigna- 
tion of  faith,  those  who  at  such  a  moment  had 
shewn  themselves  favourable  to  the  enemy,  when 
the  servants  of  God  were  "faint  yet  pursuing." 
(Chap,  viii.) 

While  the  work  was  yet  to  do,  they  were  taken  up 
with  the  work  and  passed  on:  there  is  time  enough 
for  vengeance  when  the  work  is  done.  Gideon  has 
also  the  prudence  to  set  himself  aside,  in  order  to 
allay  the  jealousy  of  those  who  felt  their  pride 
wounded,  because  Gideon  had  had  more  faith  than 
themselves.  They  did  not  boast  of  their  own  im- 
portance, or  request  to  be  called,  when  Midian  had 


JUDGES.  31)1 

power  over  the  land  of  Israel.  It  would  be  wrong- 
to  contend  with  such  persons.  If  you  are  satisfied 
with  having  done  the  work  of  God,  they  will  be 
satisfied  with  the  spoil  they  find  in  pursuing  the 
enemy ;  they  will  make  a  victory  of  it  to  themselves. 
It  must  be  allowed  them ;  for  in  fact  they  have  done 
something  for  the  cause  of  God,  although  tardy  in 
espousing  it.  They  came  when  they  were  called,  and 
willingly,  as  it  appears ;  they  followed  Gideon's  direc- 
tions, and  brought  him  back  the  heads  of  the  princes. 
The  secret  of  faith  and  of  Jehovah  was  with  Gideon. 
It  was  useless  to  speak  of  it  to  them.  The  people  did 
not  know  their  own  weakness.  Gideon  must  be  strong 
on  Jehovah's  side  for  Israel,  since  Israel  could  not  be 
so  with  him.  But  for  that  very  reason  they  could  not 
understand  why  they  were  not  called  before.  It  had 
to  be  left  unexplained;  a  proof  of  the  sad  state  of 
Israel.  But  the  danger  was  removed,  and  the  diffi- 
culty set  aside,  in  that  Gideon  wisely  contented  him- 
self with  calming  their  minds,  by  not  insisting  upon 
his  own  importance,  which  arose  from  a  faith  of  which 
they  did  not  feel  themselves  incapable,  and  the  diffi- 
culties of  which  they  could  not  appreciate,  since  they 
])Ossessed  it  not.  We  must  be  near  God  in  order  to 
I'eel  what  is  wanting  in  His  people's  condition  as  to 
Him :  for  it  is  in  Him  we  find  that  which  enables  us 
to  understand  both  His  strength,  and  the  exigencies  of 
our  relationship  with  Him. 

During  the  lifetime  of  Gideon  Israel  dwelt  in  peace. 

Although  the  details  of  this  deliverance  have  an 
especial  interest,  it  appears  to  me  to  mark  a  lower 
condition  of  the  people  than  at  the  period  of  the 
preceding  ones.  It  then  seemed  quite  a  natural  thing 
that  some  servant  of  Jehovah,  trusting  to  His  arm, 
should  deliver  the  people  from  the  yoke  that  oppressed 
them.  Or  else  the  people — awakened  by  the  words  of 
a  prophetess — released  themselves,  and,  by  the  help  of 
VII.,  VIII. 


892  THE  BOOKS  OF   THE  BIBLE. 

God,  obtained  the  victory  over  their  enemies.  But  in 
this  case  even  the  sense  of  Jehovah's  relationship  to 
His  people  had  to  be  restored.  That  is  what  God  does 
with  Gideon,  as  we  have  seen,  and  that  with  touching 
condescension  and  tenderness.  But  it  was  requisite  to 
do  it.  Therefore  God  alone  accomplished  the  deliver- 
ance of  His  people.  The  people  must  not  be  employed 
in  it,  lest  they  should  attribute  it  to  themselves ; 
for  the  farther  off  we  are  from  God,  the  more  ready 
we  are  to  ascribe  to  ourselves  that  which  is  due  only 
to  Him. 

After  Gideon's  death  we  see  the  results  of  this  dis- 
tance from  God  in  the  internal  struggles  which  took 
place  between  the  children  of  Israel.  They  are  un- 
grateful to  the  house  of  Gideon,  and  war  breaks  out 
amongst  them  through  the  leader  whom  they  set  up, 
and  who,  instead  of  fighting  with  the  enemies  of  God, 
only  seeks  dominion  over  the  people  who  are  now  at 
peace.     (Chap,  ix.) 

The  overthrow  of  the  men  of  Shechem  and  of 
Abimelech  is  followed  by  temporary  peace,  after 
which  the  people  fall  again  into  their  idolatrous 
iniquity,  and  Jehovah  sells  them  into  the  hands  of 
the  nations  whose  gods  they  serve.  Sorely  distressed 
by  their  enemies,  the  children  of  Israel  cry  unto  Jeho- 
vah, who  reproaches  them  for  their  past  conduct,  and 
sends  them  back  to  the  gods  they  had  been  worship- 
ping. Then  the  people  put  away  the  strange  gods 
from  among  them.  Jehovah  is  moved  with  compas- 
•ion.     (Chap,  x.) 

Israel,  without  a  leader,  have  recourse  to  the  captain 
of  a  troop  of  "  vain  men,"  and  promise  to  obey  him 
if  he  will  put  himself  at  their  head.  Jephthah  con- 
sents. But  although  this  was  a  deliverance,  yet  we 
see  in  it  all  how  deeply  Israel  had  fallen.  Jephthah 
himself  suffers  cruelly  from  his  rash  vow ;  and,  more- 
over, when  the  pride  of  the  Ephraimites  led  them  to 


JUDGES.  393 

complain  that  they  had  not  been  treated  with  due 
respect,  the  calmness  and  wisdom  of  one  who  knew 
Jehovah  as  Gideon  did,  were  not  found  in  Jephthah. 
What  a  difference  between  these  days  and  those  of 
Joshua !  God  multiplies  His  deliverances ;  but  this 
has  no  effect  on  the  unbelief  of  the  people,  and  their 
condition  continues  to  grow  worse  and  worse.  (Chaps, 
xi.,  xii.) 

After  Jephthah,  Israel  again  enjoys  an  interval  of 
peace  under  the  guidance  of  several  judges  whom  God 
raises  up.  But  they  soon  return  to  their  former  course 
of  sin,  and  Jehovah  delivers  them  into  the  hand  of 
the  Philistines.  Samson's  history  gives  us  the  com- 
mencement of  Israel's  relationship  with  these  bitter 
enemies,  which  only  ceased  when  David  had  subdued 
them.  The  Philistines  at  this  period  were  at  the  height 
of  their  power.  But  the  important  thing  here  is  the 
history  of  Samson.  (Chaps.  xiii.-xvi.) 

Samson,  as  a  type,  sets  before  us  the  principle  of 
Nazariteship,  entire  separation  to  God,  the  source  of 
strength  in  conflict  with  our  enemies,  looked  at  as 
enemies  who  seek  to  gain  the  upper  hand  amongst  the 
people  of  God,  within  their  own  limits  and  in  their 
own  heart. 

The  Philistines  were  not  a  scourge,  a  chastisement 
sent  from  without;  they  dwelt  in  Israel's  own  terri- 
tory, in  the  land  of  promise.  Undoubtedly,  before 
this,  other  nations  whom  the  faithlessness  of  the 
people  had  left  in  the  midst  of  Canaan  had  been  a 
snare  to  them,  leading  them  to  intermarriage  with 
idolaters,  and  to  the  worship  of  false  gods;  and 
Jehovah  had  given  them  up  into  the  hands  of  their 
enemies.  But  now,  those  who  had  been  suffered  to 
remain  in  the  conquered  land  assume  dominion  over 
Israel. 

Here,  then,  that  which  can  give  victory  and  peace  to 
ix.-xin. 


394  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  heirs  of  promise  is  the  strength  imparted  by  sepa- 
ration from  all  that  belongs  to  the  natural  man,  and 
entire  consecration  to  God,  so  far  as  it  is  realised. 
This  Nazariteship  is  spiritual  power,  or  rather  that 
which  characterises  it,  when  the  enemy  is  within  the 
land.  For  Samson  judged  Israel  during  the  dominion 
of  the  Philistines.  (Chap.  xv.  20.)  Afterwards  Samuel, 
Saul,  and  above  all  David,  entirely  changed  the  state 
of  things. 

When  the  Canaanite,  when  the  power  of  the  enemy, 
reigns  in  the  land,  Nazariteship  alone  can  give  power 
to  one  who  is  faithful.  It  is  a  secret  unknown  to  the 
men  of  the  world.  Christ  exemplified  it  in  its  perfec- 
tion. Evil  reigned  amongst  the  people.  The  walk  of 
Christ  was  a  walk  apart,  separate  from  evil.  He  was 
one  of  the  people,  but,  like  Levi  (Deut.  xxxiii.  9),  He 
was  not  of  them.  He  was  a  Nazarite.  But  we  must 
distinguish  with  respect  to  this. 

Morally  Christ  was  as  separate  from  sinners  while 
on  earth,  as  He  is  now.  But,  outwardly  He  was  in 
their  midst ;  and,  as  the  witness  and  expression  of 
grace,  He  was  spiritually  in  their  midst  also.  Since 
His  resurrection  He  is  completely  separate  from 
sinners.  The  world  sees  Him  not,  and  will  see  Him 
no  more  save  in  judgment. 

It  is  in  this  last  position,  and  as  having  put  on  this 
character  of  entire  separation  from  the  world,  that  the 
assembly,  that  Christians,  are  in  connection  with  Him. 
Such  a  High  Priest  became  us.  The  assembly  retains 
its  strength,  Christians  retain  their  strength,  so  far 
only  as  they  abide  in  this  state  of  complete  separation, 
which  the  world  does  not  understand  and  in  which  it 
cannot  participate.  Human  joy  and  sociability  have 
no  part  in  it ;  divine  joy  and  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  are  there.  The  life  of  our  adorable  Saviour 
was  a  life  of  gravity,  always  grave  and  generally 
straitened  (not  in  Himself,  for  His  heart  was  a  spring- 


JUDGES.  395 

ing  well  of  love,  but  because  of  the  evil  that  pressed 
Him  on  every  side) :  I  speak  of  His  life  and  of  His 
own  heart.  With  regard  to  others,  His  death  opened 
the  flood-gates,  in  order  that  the  full  tide  of  love 
might  flow  over  poor  sinners. 

Nevertheless,  whatever  may  have  been  the  Lord's 
habitual  separateness,  He  could  say,  with  reference  to 
His  disciples,  "  These  things  I  speak  in  the  world  that 
they  might  have  mny  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves."  It 
was  the  best  of  wishes,  divine  joy  instead  of  human 
joy.  The  day  will  come  when  these  two  joys  shall  be 
united,  when  He  will  again  drink  wine,  though  in 
a  new  way,  with  His  people  in  the  kingdom  of  His 
Father;  and  all  will  be  His  people.  But  at  present 
this  cannot  be ;  evil  reigns  in  the  world.  It  reigned 
in  Israel,  where  there  ought  to  have  been  righteous- 
ness. It  reigns  in  Christendom,  where  holiness  and 
grace  should  be  manifested  in  all  their  beauty. 

The  separation  unto  God,  of  which  we  have  been 
speaking,  is  under  these  circumstances  the  only  means 
of  enjoying  the  strength  of  God.  It  is  the  essential 
position  of  the  assembly.  If  it  has  failed  in  it,  it  has 
ceased  to  manifest  the  essential  character  of  its  Head, 
in  connection  with  itself,  "  separate  from  sinners,  and 
made  higher  than  the  heavens ;"  it  is  but  a  false 
witness,  a  proof  among  the  Philistines  that  Dagon  is 
stronger  than  God ;  it  is  a  blind  prisoner. 

Nevertheless  it  is  remarkable  that,  whenever  the 
world  draws  away,  by  its  allurements,  that  which  God 
has  separated  from  it  unto  Himself,  this  brings  down 
the  judgment  of  God  upon  the  world,  and  leads  to  its 
ruin.  Look  at  Sarah  in  the  house  of  Pharaoh ;  and  in 
this  instance,  Samson,  blind  and  prisoner  in  the  hands 
of  the  Philistines ;  and  again  also  Sarah  in  the  house 
of  Abimelech,  although  God,  on  account  of  the  integ- 
rity of  his  heart,  did  but  chasten  the  latter. 

The  Nazarite  then  represents  Christ,  such  as  He  was 

XIV. 


39f5  THE  BOOKS   OP  THE   BIBLE. 

here  below  in  fact  and  by  necessity ;  and  also  such  as 
He  now  is  completely  and  in  full  right,  seated  on  the 
right  hand  of  God  in  heaven,  hidden  in  God,  where 
our  life  is  hid  with  Him.  The  Nazarite  represents  the 
assembly  or  an  individual  Christian,  so  far  as  the  one 
and  the  other  are  separated  from  the  world  and  de- 
voted to  God,  and  keep  the  secret  of  this  separation. 

This  is  the  assembly's  position,  the  only  one  which 
God  recognises.  The  assembly,  being  united  to  Christ 
who  is  separate  from  sinners  and  made  higher  than  the 
heavens,  cannot  be  His  in  any  other  manner.  It  may 
be  unfaithful  to  it,  but  this  is  the  standing  given  it 
with  Christ.     It  can  be  recognised  in  no  other. 

Samson  represents  to  us  also  the  tendency  of  the 
assembly,  and  of  the  Christian  to  fall  away  from  this 
position,  a  tendency  which  does  not  always  produce 
the  same  amount  of  evil  fruit,  but  which  causes  the 
inward  and  practical  neglect  of  Nazariteship,  and  soon 
leads  to  entire  loss  of  strength,  so  that  the  assembly 
gives  itself  up  to  the  world.  God  may  still  use  it, 
may  glorify  Himself  through  the  havoc  it  makes  in 
the  enemy's  land  (which  ought  to  be  its  own) ;  He 
may  even  preserve  it  from  the  sin  to  which  the 
slippery  path  it  treads  would  lead  it.  But  the  state 
of  mind  which  brought  it  there  tends  to  yet  lower 
downfalls. 

God  makes  use  of  Samson's  marriage  with  a  Phili- 
stine woman  to  punish  that  people.  Still,  in  the  fresh- 
ness of  his  strength,  his  heart  with  Jehovah,  and 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  Samson  acts  in  the  might 
of  this  strength  in  the  midst  of  the  enemies  he  has 
raised  up  against  him ;  and,  in  point  of  fact,  he  never 
marries  this  Philistine  woman. 

I  have  said  that  God  used  this  circumstance.  II  is 
thus  He  may  use  this  spiritual  strength  of  the  as- 
sembly, so  long  as  in  heart  it  cleaves  to  Him,  although 
its  walk  may  not  be  faithful  or  such  as  He  can  ap- 


JUDGES.  397 

prove.  For  it  is  evident  that  Samson's  marriage  with 
a  daughter  of  Timnath  was  a  positive  sin,  a  flagrant 
infringement  of  Jehovah's  ordinances,  which  is  in  no 
wise  justified  by  the  blessing  which  the  Lord  bestowed 
upon  him  when  wronged  by  the  Philistines.  It  was 
not  in  his  marriage  he  found  bleising,  but  quite  the 
contrary. 

Accordingly  Samson  has  not  Israel  with  him  in  the 
conflicts  occasioned  by  his  marriage  ;  the  Spirit  of  God 
does  not  act  upon  the  people  as  He  did  in  the  case 
of  Gideon,  of  Jephthah,  or  Barak. 

Moreover,  when  Nazariteship  is  in  question,  opposi- 
tion must  be  expected  from  the  people  of  God.  A 
Nazarite  is  raised  up  in  their  midst,  because  they  are 
no  longer  themselves  thus  separated  unto  God.  And 
this  being  the  case,  they  are  without  strength,  and 
will  allow  the  world  to  rule  over  them,  provided  that 
outward  peace  is  left  them ;  and  they  would  not  have 
any  one  act  in  faith,  because  this  disquiets  the  world 
and  incites  it  against  them.  "  Knowest  thou  not,"  said 
Israel,  "  that  the  Philistines  are  rulers  over  us  ?"  Even 
while  acknowledging  Samson  as  one  of  themselves, 
ihe  Israelites  desire  to  give  him  up  to  the  Philistines 
in  order  to  maintain  peace. 

But  in  the  part  of  Samson's  life  now  before  us  there 
ttre  some  details  which  require  more  attention. 

His  marriage  was  a  sin.  But  the  separation  of  God'e 
people  had  no  longer  that  measure  of  practical  applica- 
tion which  the  mind  of  God  had  assigned  it.  The  fact 
itself  was  inexcusable,  because  it  had  its  origin  in  the 
will  of  Samson,  and  he  had  not  sought  counsel  from 
God.  But,  owing  to  the  influence  of  circumstances,  he 
was  not  conscious  at  the  time  of  the  evil  he  was  com- 
mitting, and  God  allowed  him  to  seek  peace  and 
friendship  with  the  Canaanite  world  (that  is  to  say, 
the  world  within  the  inclosure  of  God's  people),  instead 
of  making  war  against  them ;  so  that,  as  to  the  Phili- 

XV. 


398  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE   BIBLE. 

stines,  Samson  had  right  on  his  side  in  the  contentions 
which  followed. 

Before  his  marriage  Samson  had  slain  the  lion,  and 
had  found  honey  in  its  carcase.  He  had  strength  from 
God  while  walking  in  his  integrity  This  is  the 
"  riddle,"  the  secret  of  God's  people.  The  lion  has  no 
strength  against  one  who  belongs  to  Christ.  Christ 
has  destroyed  the  strength  of  him  that  had  the  power 
of  death.  By  the  might  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  our 
warfare  is  victory,  and  honey  flows  therefrom.  But 
this  is  carried  on  in  the  secret  of  communion  with 
the  Lord.  David  maintained  this  place  better  in  the 
simplicity  of  duty. 

Samson  did  not  keep  himself  from  those  connections 
with  the  world  to  which  the  condition  of  the  people 
easily  led.  This  is  always  a  Christian's  danger.  But 
whatever  may  be  their  ignorance,  if  the  children  of 
God  make  any  alliance  with  the  world,  and  thus 
pursue  a  line  of  conduct  opposed  to  their  true  cha- 
racter, they  will  assuredly  find  disappointment.  They 
do  not  keep  themselves  apart  for  God ;  they  do  not 
keep  their  secret  with  God,  a  secret  which  is  only 
known  in  communion  with  Himself.  Their  wisdom  is 
lost,  the  world  beguiles  them,  their  relationship  with 
the  world  becomes  worse  than  before,  and  the  world 
despises  them,  and  goes  on  its  own  way,  regardless  of 
their  indignation  at  its  behaviour  towards  them. 

What  had  Samson  to  do  there  ?  His  own  will  (chap. 
:xv.)  is  in  exercise,  and  takes  its  share  in  the  use  of 
that  strength  which  God  had  given  him  (like  Moses 
when  he  slew  the  Egyptian).  We  always  carry  a  little 
of  the  world  with  us  when,  being  children  of  God,  we 
have  mingled  with  it.  But  God  makes  use  of  this  to 
separate  us  forcibly  and  thoroughly  from  it,  making 
union  impossible  by  setting  us  in  direct  conflict  with 
the  world  even  in  those  very  things  which  had  formed 
•our  connection  with  it.    We  had  better  have  remained 


JUDGES.  399 

apart.  But  it  is  necessary  that  God  should  thus  deal 
with  us,  when  this  union  with  the  world  becomes 
an  habitual  and  a  tolerated  thing  in  the  church.*  The 
most  outrageous  circumstances  pass  unnoticed.  Think 
of  a  Nazarite  married  to  a  Philistine !  God  must 
break  off  such  a  union  as  this  by  causing  enmities 
and  hostilities  to  arise,  since  there  is  no  intelligence  of 
that  moral  nearness  to  God  which  separates  from  the 
world,  and  gives  that  quietness  of  spirit  which,  finding 
its  strength  in  God,  can  overcome  and  drive  away  the 
enemy,  w^hen  God  leads  into  conflict  by  the  plain 
revelation  of  His  will. 

But  if  we  are  linked  with  the  world,  it  will  always 
have  dominion  over  us ;  we  have  no  right  to  resist  the 
claims  of  any  relationship  which  we  ourselves  have 
formed.  We  may  draw  nigh  to  the  world,  because  the 
flesh  is  in  us.  The  world  cannot  really  draw  nigh  to 
the  children  of  God,  because  it  has  only  its  own  fallen 
and  sinful  nature.  The  approximation  is  all  on  one 
side  and  always  in  evil,  whatever  the  appearance  may 
be.  To  bear  testimony  in  the  midst  of  the  world  is 
another  thing. 

We  cannot  therefore  plead  the  secret  of  the  Lord, 
the  intimate  relationship  of  God's  people  to  Himself, 
and  the  feelings  they  produce ;  for  the  secret  and  the 
strength  of  the  Lord  are  exclusively  the  right  and 
the  strength  of  His  redeemed  people.  How  could  this 
be  told  to  his  Philistine  wife  ?  What  influence  would 
the  exclusive  privileges  of  God's  people  have  over  one 
who  is  not  of  their  number  ?  How  can  we  speak  of 
these  privileges  when  we  disown  them  by  the  very 

*  In  this  union,  when  it  takes  place  between  the  world  and 
true  Christians,  or  those  at  least  who  profess  the  truth  the  world 
always  rules ;  when,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  with  the  hierarchy 
that  the  world  is  connected,  it  is  then  a  superstitious  hierarchy 
that  rules,  for  this  is  necessary  in  order  to  restrain  the  will  of 
man  by  religious  bonds  adapted  to  the  flesh. 

XV. 


400  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE   BIBLE. 

relationship  in  which  we  stand  ?  We  disown  them  by 
imparting  this  secret;  for  we  then  cease  to  be  sepa- 
rated and  consecrated  to  God,  and  to  confide  in  Him 
as  we  can  do  in  no  other.  This  experience  should 
have  preserved  Samson,  for  the  future,  from  a  similar 
step.  But  in  many  respects  experience  is  useless  in 
the  things  of  God,  because  we  need  faith  at  the 
moment ;  for  it  is  God  Himself  whom  we  need. 

Nevertheless  Samson  here  still  retains  his  strength. 
The  sovereign  will  of  God  is  fulfilled  in  this  matter,  in 
spite  of  very  serious  faults  which  resulted  from  the 
general  state  of  things  in  which  Samson  participated. 
Once  in  the  battle-field,  he  exhibits  the  strength  of 
Jehovah  who  was  with  him ;  and  in  answer  to  bis 
cTj  Jehovah  supplies  him  with  water  for  his  tbirai 
(dhap.  XV.) 

It  is  here  that  this  general  history  of  Samson  ends. 
We  have  seen  that  the  people  of  God,  his  brethren, 
wete  against  him — the  general  rule  in  such  a  case.  It 
]•  the  history  of  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  ex- 
ercised in  Nazariteship,  in  separation  from  the  world 
mito  God ;  but  in  the  midst  of  a  condition  entirely 
opposed  to  this  separation ;  and  in  which  he  who  is 
upheld  by  the  power  of  this  Spirit,  finding  himself 
again  in  his  habitual  sphere,  is  always  in  danger  of 
being  unfaithful ;  and  so  much  the  more  so  (unless  be 
lives  very  near  to  God  in  the  repose  of  obedience)  from 
his  consciousness  of  strength. 

Christ  exhibited  the  perfection  of  a  heavenly  walk 
under  similar  circumstances.  We  see  that  no  one 
understood  the  source  of  His  power,  or  His  authority. 
He  must  have  given  up  all  hope  of  satisfying  men 
with  respect  to  the  principles  by  which  He  was  guided. 
They  must  have  been  like  Him  to  comprehend  Him, 
and  then  they  would  not  have  needed  to  be  convinced. 
To  walk  before  God  and  leave  His  justification  with 
God  was  all  that  could  be  done.     He  silenced  His 


JUDGES.  401 

enemies  by  the  well-known  principles  of  God  and  of 
all  good  conscience ;  but  He  could  not  reveal  the  secret 
between  Him  and  the  Father,  the  element  of  His  life, 
and  the  spring  of  all  His  actions.  If  the  truth  came 
out,  when  Satan  pushed  things  so  far  that  nothing 
else  could  be  said,  His  enemies  treated  Him  as  a 
blasphemer,  and  He  openly  denounced  them  as  the 
children  of  Satan.  We  find  this  particularly  in  John's 
Gospel.  (See  chap,  viii.)  But  at  that  time  Jesus 
held  no  longer  the  same  relationship  to  the  people. 
Indeed,  from  the  beginning  of  this  Gospel,  they  are 
treated  as  rejected,  and  the  Person  of  the  Son  of  God 
is  brought  forward. 

From  the  commencement  of  His  ministry,  He  main- 
tained the  place  of  an  obedient  servant,  not  entering 
on  public  service  imtil  called  of  God,  after  having 
taken  the  lowest  place  in  John's  baptism.  This  was 
the  point  at  issue  when  He  was  tempted  in  the  wilder- 
ness. The  tempter  endeavoured  to  make  Him  come 
out  of  His  place  as  the  obedient  man,  because  He  was 
the  Son  of  God.  But  the  strong  man  was  bound  there: 
to  remain  in  obedience  is  the  only  way  to  bind  the  ad- 
versary. Christ  ever  walked  in  this  perfect  separation 
of  the  inner  man,  in  communion  with  His  Father,  and 
entire  dependence  upon  Him  in  obedience  without  a 
single  moment  of  self-will.  Therefore  was  He  the 
most  gracious  and  accessible  of  men:  we  observe  in 
His  ways  a  tenderness  and  a  kindness  never  seen  in 
man,  yet  we  always  feel  that  He  was  a  stranger.  Not 
that  He  came  to  be  a  stranger  in  His  relationship  with 
men ;  but  that  which  lay  deepest  in  His  own  heart — 
that  which  constituted  His  very  nature,  and  conse- 
quently guided  His  walk  by  virtue  of  His  communion 
with  the  Father — was  entirely  foreign  to  all  that 
influences  man. 

He  abode  emphatically  alone.  It  is  striking  that 
not  once  His  disciples  understood  what  He  said.  The 
VOL.  I.  XV.  D  D 


402  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

one  only  trace  of  a  heart  going  with  Him  was  Mary  at 
Bethany ;  and  that  had  to  be  told  to  the  whole  world. 
In  Him,  sympathy  for  every  sorrow ;  for  His,  none. 

This  spirit  of  self-denial,  entire  renunciation  of  His 
own  will,  obedience,  and  dependence  upon  His  Father, 
is  seen  throughout  the  life  of  Jesus.  After  John's 
baptism  He  was  praying  when  He  received  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Before  calling  the  apostles  He  spent  the  whole 
night  in  prayer.  After  the  miracle  of  feeding  the  five 
thousand  with  five  loaves  He  went  up  into  a  mountain 
apart  to  pray.  If  the  request  is  made  to  sit  on  His 
right  hand  and  on  His  left  in  His  kingdom,  it  is  not 
His  to  give,  but  to  them  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of 
His  Father.  In  His  agony  of  Gethsemane,  His  expec- 
tation and  dread  of  death  is  all  laid  before  His  Father; 
and  the  cup  which  His  Father  has  given  Him,  shall 
He  not  drink  it  ?  The  effect  is  that  all  is  calm  before 
men.  He  is  the  Nazarite,  separated  from  men  by  His 
entire  communion  with  His  Father,  and  by  the  obedi- 
ence of  a  Son  who  had  no  other  will  than  to  fulfil  the 
good  pleasure  of  His  Father.  It  was  His  meat  to 
do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Him,  and  to  finish  His 
work. 

But  it  was  when  man  would  not  receive  Him,  and 
there  was  no  longer  any  relationship  whatever  between 
man  and  God,  that  Jesus  fully  assumed  His  Nazarite 
character,  separate  from  sinners,  made  higher  than  the 
heavens.  It  is  Christ  in  heaven  who  is  the  true 
Nazarite,  and  who,  having  received  of  the  Father  the 
promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  has  sent  Him  forfch  upon 
His  disciples,  in  order  that,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  they  might  maintain  the  same  position  on  the 
earth,  through  communion  with  Him  and  with  His 
Father ;  walking  in  the  separateness  of  this  com- 
munion, and  capable  therefore  of  using  this  power 
with  a  divine  intelligence  that  enlightens  and  sus- 
tains the  obedience  for  which  they  are  set  apart  unto 


JUDGES.  403 

the  glory  of  Christ,  and  for  His  service.  "  If  ye  abide 
in  me,"  said  He  to  His  disciples,  "  and  my  words  abide 
in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done 
unto  you."  They  were  not  of  the  world,  even  as  He 
was  not  of  the  world.  The  assembly,  which  was 
formed  of  His  disciples,  should  walk  as  separated  from 
the  world  and  set  apart  unto  Himself  in  a  heavenly 
life. 

Christ  is  then  the  antitype  of  Samson's  history,  as 
to  the  principle  it  contains.  But  its  detail  proves  that 
this  principle  of  strength  has  been  entrusted  to  those 
who  were  alas  !  but  too  capable  of  failing  in  com- 
munion and  obedience,  and  thus  of  losing  its  enjoy- 
ment. 

Samson  sins  again  through  his  intercourse  with 
"  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god ;"  he  connects  himself 
again  with  women  of  the  Philistines,  amongst  whom 
his  father's  house  and  the  tribe  of  Dan  were  placed. 
But  he  retains  his  strength  until  the  influence  of  these 
connections  becomes  so  great  that  he  reveals  the 
secret  of  his  strength  in  God.  His  heart,  far  from 
God,  places  that  confidence  in  a  Philistine  which 
p^^ould  have  existed  only  between  his  soul  and  God. 
(Chap,  xvi.) 

To  possess  and  keep  a  secret  proves  intimacy  with  a 
friend.  But  the  secret  of  God,  the  possession  of  His 
confidence,  is  the  highest  of  all  privileges.  To  betray 
it  to  a  stranger,  be  he  who  he  may,  is  to  despise  the 
precious  position  in  which  His  grace  has  placed  us ;  it 
is  to  lose  it.  What  have  the  enemies  of  God  to  do 
with  the  secret  of  God  ?  It  was  thus  that  Samson 
gave. himself  up  to  his  enemies.  All  attempts  were 
powerless  against  him  so  long  as  he  maintained  his 
Nazariteship.  This  separation  once  lost,  although 
Samson  was  apparently  as  strong,  and  his  exterior  as 
goodly  as  before,  yet  Jehovah  was  no  longer  with  him. 
''  I  will  o-o  ou^-  ^s  at  other  times  before,  and  shake  my- 

XVI. 


404  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

self.  And  he  wist  not  that  Jehovah  was  departed 
from  him." 

We  can  scarcely  imagine  a  greater  folly  than  that  of 
confiding  his  secret  to  Delilah,  after  having  so  many 
times  been  seized  by  the  Philistines  at  the  moment 
she  awoke  him.  And  thus  it  is  with  the  assembly: 
when  it  yields  itself  to  the  world,  it  loses  all  its 
wisdom,  even  that  which  is  common  to  man.  Poor 
Samson !  his  strength  may  be  restored,  but  he  has  lost 
his  sight  for  ever. 

But  who  has  ever  hardened  himself  against  the 
Lord,  and  prospered  ? 

The  Philistines  ascribe  their  success  to  their  false 
god.  God  remembers  His  own  glory,  and  His  poor 
servant  humbled  under  the  chastisement  of  his  sin. 
The  Philistines  assemble  to  enjoy  their  victory  and 
glorify  their  false  gods.  But  Jehovah  had  His  eye  on 
all  this.  In  his  humiliation,  the  thought  of  the  Lord 
had  more  power  over  the  heart  of  Samson;  his 
Nazariteship  was  regaining  strength.  He  makes  his 
touching  appeal  to  God.  Who  would  fear  a  blind  and 
afflicted  prisoner  ?  but  who  amongst  this  world  knows 
the  secret  of  Jehovah  ?  A  slave  and  for  ever  deprived 
of  sight,  his  condition  affords  an  opportunity,  which 
his  strength  had  not  been  able  to  obtain,  before  his  un- 
faithfulness deprived  him  of  it.  But  he  is  blind  and 
enslaved,  and  he  must  perish  himself  in  the  judgment 
which  he  brings  upon  the  impiety  of  his  enemies.  He 
had  identified  himself  with  the  world  by  hearkening 
to  it,  and  he  must  share  the  judgment  which  falls  upon 
the  world.* 

If  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  assembly  has  given  the 
world  power  over  it,  the  world  has  on  the  other  hand 

*  There  was  something  of  this,  though  in  a  very  different 
form  and  manner,  in  Jonathan.  His  faith  was  not  perfect.  He 
held  the  world  with  one  hand  and  David  with  the  other,  though 
the  excuse  of  natural  relationship  might  be  there. 


JUDGES.  405 

assailed  the  rights  of  God  by  corrupting  the  assembly, 
and  therefore  brings  down  judgment  upon  itself  at  the 
moment  of  its  greatest  triumph  :  a  judgment  which,  if 
it  puts  an  end  to  the  existence,  as  well  as  to  the  misery 
of  the  Nazarite,  destroys  at  the  same  time  in  one  com- 
mon ruin  the  whole  glory  of  the  world. 

In  the  details  of  prophecy  this  applies  to  the  closing 
history  of  the  Jewish  people.*  Only  there  the  rem- 
nant is  preserved,  to  be  established  on  a  new  base  for 
the  accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of  God. 

The  chapters  that  follow  (xvii.-xxi.)  are  not  com- 
prised in  the  historical  order  of  this  book.  They  lift 
the  veil  to  disclose  some  incidents  of  the  inner  life  of 
this  people  whom  the  patience  of  God  bore  with  so 
long,  touched  with  the  afflictions  of  His  people  in  the 
sufferings  occasioned  by  their  sins.  Had  they  been 
obedient  when  Jehovah  was  their  King,  their  pros- 
perity had  been  secure.  Self-willed  as  they  were,  the 
absence  of  restraint — when  they  had  no  king — gave 
room  to  all  kinds  of  license.  The  last  event,  related 
in  this  book,  shews  to  what  a  height  disorder  had  risen 
in  Israel  and  how  they  fell  aw^ay  immediately  from 
God.  But  it  affords  a  very  important  lesson.  If  the 
state  of  God's  people  collectively  gives  rise  to  iniqui- 
ties which  require  discipline,  the  whole  people  are  in- 
volved in  the  chastisement  that  follows ;  the  effect  of 
which  is  to  make  them  take  their  condition  to  heart. 
That  condition  had  prevented  the  repression  of 
iniquity,  or  its  immediate  punishment  when  com- 
mitted. But  the  people  are  set  in  the  presence  of  God, 
who  judges  the  whole  matter,  and  all  the  people  must 
have  to  do  with  it. 

Israel    at   first   did  not  even    take   counsel    with 

*  As  to  the  professing  church  it  is  somewhat  different,  because 
the  saints  are  taken  away  to  glory,  and  the  rest,  being  apostate, 
are  judged ;  but  the  fact  of  judgment  on  the  world  is  identical. 
XVII.-XXI. 


406  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Jehovah  to  learn  how  the  sin  should  be  dealt  with. 
They  acted  from  natural  indignation  (which  was 
nevertheless  quite  righteous).  Jehovah  allowed  all 
this  in  order  that  the  people  might  learn  where  they 
were.  The  evil  which  required  chastening  had  so 
blunted  their  spiritual  state  that  they  had  not  the 
thought  of  waiting  in  the  first  place  on  Jehovah  to 
know  what  was  to  be  done.  Their  course  of  action  is 
determined  before  they  consult  him,  for  they  were  far 
from  Him.  They  merely  ask  who  is  to  go  up  first. 
Jehovah  points  out  Judah,  but  Judah  is  defeated. 
Twice  beaten  when  they  expected  an  easy  victory,  the 
people  humbled  and  in  tears  have  recourse  again 
to  Jehovah,  and  inquire  if  they  shall  go  up.  Jehovah 
then  gives  them  the  victory.  Gibeah  well  deserved 
this  discipline ;  but,  to  execute  it,  Israel  itself  needed 
discipline,  and  God  allowed  all  to  take  part  in  it  in 
order  to  make  it  take  eflfect  upon  all. 

But  what  a  state  were  they  all  in,  when  the  whole 
tribe  of  Benjamin  joined  the  men  of  Gibeah,  when 
guilty  of  such  enormities  !  And  observe,  that  Phine- 
has  was  still  high  priest,  although  he  had  already 
grown  to  manhood  in  the  wilderness.  How  patiently 
God  dealt  with  this  people,  delivering  them  when  they 
had  so  quickly  fallen  into  sin  and  into  such  depths  of 
sin  !  What  does  God  not  see  in  this  world,  and  even  in 
His  people  ?  It  is  important  to  note  this  bringing  to 
light  of  that  inward  state  which,  in  the  general 
history,  is  not  done.  It  sheds  a  much  fuller  light  on 
the  ways  of  God.  But  it  must  be  remarked  that  this 
is  disaster  and  shame  within,  and  from  within,  and 
under  God's  hand,  but  not  judgment  by  enemies 
without  through  departure  from  God  Himself. 


RUTH. 

The  Book  of  Ruth  tells  us  also  of  the  days  of  the 
judges,  when  there  was  no  king  in  Israel ;  but  it 
shews  us  the  fair  side  of  those  days,  in  the  opera- 
tions of  the  grace  of  God,  who  (blessed  be  His 
name !)  never  failed  to  work  in  the  midst  of  the 
evil,  as  also  in  the  steady  progress  of  events  towards 
the  fulfilment  of  His  promises  in  the  Messiah,  what- 
ever may  have  been  the  simultaneous  progress  of  the 
general  evil. 

Ruth,  a  stranger  seeking  shelter  by  faith  under  the 
wings  of  the  God  of  Israel,  is  received  in  grace,  and 
the  genealogy  of  David,  king  over  Israel  according  to 
grace,  is  linked  with  her.  It  is  the  genealogy  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Himself  after  the  flesh. 

This  book  appears  to  me  to  set  before  us  in  type, 
the  reception  in  grace  of  the  remnant  of  Israel  in 
the  last  days,  their  Redeemer  (the  kinsman,  who  has 
the  right  of  redemption)  having  taken  their  cause  in 
hand. 

Eli-Melech  (which  signifies  God  the  King)  being 
dead,  Naomi  (my  delight,  my  pleasure)  becomes  a 
widow,  and  eventually  loses  her  children  also.  She 
typifies  the  Jewish  nation,  who,  having  lost  her  God, 
is  like  a  widow  and  has  no  heir.  Yet  there  shall  be  a 
remnant,  destitute  of  all  right  to  the  promises  (p^d 
therefore  prefigured  historically  by  a  stranger),  m  ho 
will  be  received  in  grace  (similarly  to  the  Gentiles 
and  the  assembly*) — who  will  faithfully  and  heartily 

*  Compare  Micah  v.  3,  last  part. 
I. 


408  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

identify  itself  with  desolate  Israel ;  for  Ruth  clave 
to  her  and  to  her  God.  (See  chap.  i.  16.)  God  will 
own  this  remnant,  which,  poor  and  afflicted  itself, 
will  in  heart  obey  the  commands  given  to  the  people. 

Naomi,  who  in  her  destitution  is  a  type  of  the 
nation,  acknowledges  her  condition;  she  calls  herself 
Mara  (bitterness). 

He  who  was  nearest  of  kin,  who  would  willingly 
have  redeemed  the  inheritance,  refuses  to  do  so,  if 
Euth  must  be  taken  with  it.  The  law  was  never 
able  (nor  the  assembly  either)  to  re-establish  Israel  in 
their  inheritance,  nor  to  raise  up  in  grace  the  name  of 
tlie  dead. 

Boaz  (in  him  is  strength),  upon  whom  the  remnant 
had  no  direct  claim  (and  who  typifies  Christ  risen, 
in  whom  are  the  sure  mercies  of  David),  undertakes 
to  raise  up  the  name  of  the  dead,  and  to  re-establish 
the  heritage  of  Israel.  Acting  in  grace  and  in  kind- 
ness, and  encouraging  the  patient  humble  faith  of  the 
remnant,  the  meek  of  the  earth,  he  shews  himself 
faithful  to  fulfil  the  purpose  and  the  will  of  God  with 
respect  to  this  poor  desolate  family.  Nothing  can  be 
more  touching  and  exquisite  than  the  details  given 
here.  The  character  of  Ruth,  this  poor  woman  of  the 
Gentiles,  has  great  beauty. 

"  Naomi  took  the  child  that  was  born  to  her,  and 
laid  it  in  her  bosom ;"  and  they  said,  "  There  is  a  son 
bom  to  Naomi."  In  fact  the  heir  of  the  promises  will 
be  born  unto  Israel  as  a  nation,  although  the  fulfilment 
of  the  promise  affects  the  remnant  only,  which,  fully 
identifying  itself  with  the  interests  of  God's  people 
has  sought  neither  the  rich  nor  the  poor,  but,  in 
faith  and  obedience,  has  kept  the  testimony  of 
God  amongst  the  people  in  the  path  appointed  by 
Him. 

Thus,  if  on  one  side  the  Book  of  Judges  shews  us 
the  falling  away  of  the  people  of  Israel,  and  their 


RUTH.  409 

failure  under  responsibility,  even  when  God  Was  their 
helper,  on  the  other  side  this  touching  and  precious 
book  sets  before  us,  as  the  dawn  of  better  things, 
grace  acting  in  the  midst  of  difficulties,  securing  the 
fulfilment  of  promise,  and  embellishing  this  scene  of 
misery  and  sin  by  lovely  and  beautiful  instances  of 
faith,  precious  fruits  of  grace,  whether  in  weakness 
and  devotedness,  or  in  strength  and  kindness,  and 
always  in  accordance  with  the  perfect  will  of  God, 
and  assuring  by  this  touching  history,  as  a  type, 
the  full  restoration  of  Israel  to  blessing  according 
to  promise.  It  is  a  refreshing  and  lovely  picture 
in  the  midst  of  the  hard-mindedness  and  sorrows  of 
Israel. 

In  the  succeeding  books  we  shall  see  prophecy, 
and  the  history  of  God's  dealings,  developing  the 
body  of  events  which  tended  to  the  fulfilment  of 
His  designs,  the  first  principles,  the  elements,  of 
which  are  laid  down  in  that  which  is  shewn  us  in 
this.  For  Ruth  furnishes  a  kind  of  intermediate 
link  between  the  fall  of  Israel  under  God's  im- 
mediate government,  and  the  future  fulfilment  of  His 
purposes. 

Prophecy,  which  unfolds  these  purposes  and  gives 
moral  proof  of  this  fall,  begins  with  Samuel :  we 
learn  this  from  the  apostle  Peter,  and  that  Christ  is 
the  object  of  prophecy.  (See  Acts  iii.  24.) 

Eli,  the  last  judge  and  priest,  departs  ;  his  family  is 
to  be  cut  off";  the  ark  of  the  covenant  is  taken  by  the 
Philistines ;  and  Samuel,  consecrated  to  God  in  a  new 
and  extraordinary  manner,  comes  in  with  the  special 
testimony  of  the  Lord. 


I.-IV. 


1  SAMUEL. 

We  have  seen  that  the  Book  of  Ruth  occupies,  in  its 
purport,  an  intermediate  place  between  the  end  of  the 
period  in  which  Israel  was  governed  by  God  Himself, 
who  interposed  from  time  to  time  by  means  of  judges, 
and  the  setting  up  of  the  king  whom  He  selected  for 
them.  This  period,  alas  !  came  to  an  end  through  the 
people's  failure,  and  their  inability  to  make  a  right  use,, 
by  faith,  of  their  privileges. 

The  Books  of  Samuel  contain  the  account  of  the 
cessation  of  Israel's  original  relationship  with  God, 
founded  on  their  obedience  to  the  terms  of  the  old 
covenant,  and  the  special  prescriptions  of  the  Book  of 
Deuteronomy;  the  sovereign  interference  of  God  in 
prophecy ;  and  the  setting  up  of  the  king  whom  God 
Himself  had  prepared,  with  the  circumstances  which 
preceded  this  event.  It  is  not  merely  that  Israel 
failed  under  the  government  of  God :  they  rejected  it. 

Placed  under  the  priesthood,  they  drew  nigh  to  God 
in  the  enjoyment  of  privileges  which  were  granted 
them  as  a  people  acknowledged  by  Jehovah.  We  shall 
see  the  ark — which,  as  it  was  the  nearest  and  most  im- 
mediate, so  was  it  the  most  precious  link  between 
Jehovah  Elohim  and  the  people — fall  into  the  hands 
of  the  enemy.  What  could  a  priest  do,  when  that 
which  gave  his  priesthood  all  its  importance  was  in 
the  enemy's  hands,  and  when  the  place  where  he  drew 
near  to  Jehovah  (the  throne  of  God  in  the  midst  of 
Israel,  the  place  of  propitiation  by  which  in  mercy 
Israel's  relationship  with  God,  through  the  sprinkled 
blood,  was  maintained)  was  no  more  there  ? 


1  SAMUEL.  411 

It  was  no  longer  mere  unfaithfulness  in  the  circum- 
stances in  which  God  had  placed  them.  The  circum- 
stances themselves  were  entirely  changed  through 
God's  judgment  upon  Israel.  The  outward  link  of 
God's  connection  with  the  people  was  broken ;  the  ark 
of  the  covenant,  centre  and  basis  of  their  relationship 
with  Him,  had  been  given  up  by  the  wrath  of  God 
into  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  Priesthood  was  the 
natural  and  normal  means  of  maintaining  the  relation- 
ship between  God  and  the  people :  how  could  it  now  be 
used  for  this  purpose  ? 

Nevertheless  God,  acting  in  sovereignty,  could  put 
Himself  in  communication  with  His  people,  by  virtue 
of  His  grace  and  immutable  faithfulness,  according  to 
which  His  connection  with  His  people  existed  still  on 
His  side,  even  when  all  acknowledged  relationship  be- 
tween Him  and  them  was  broken  off  by  their  unfaith- 
fulness. And  this  He  did  by  raising  up  a  prophet. 
By  his  means  God  still  communicated  in  a  direct  way 
with  His  people,  even  when  they  had  not  maintained 
their  relationship  with  Him  in  their  normal  condition. 
The  office  of  the  priest  was  connected  with  the  integ- 
rity of  these  relations ;  the  people  needed  him  in  their 
infirmities.  Still  under  the  priesthood  the  people 
themselves  drew  nigh  to  God  through  the  medium  of 
the  priest,  according  to  the  relationship  which  God 
had  established  and  which  He  recognised.  But  the 
prophet  acted  on  the  part  of  God  outside  this  relation- 
ship, or  ratlier  above  it,  when  the  people  were  no 
longer  faithful. 

The  setting  up  of  a  king  went  much  farther.  It 
was  a  new  order  of  relationship  which  involved  most 
important  principles.  The  relationship  of  God  with 
the  people  was  no  longer  immediate.  An  au- 
thority was  set  over  Israel.  God  expected  faithful- 
ness from  the  king.  The  -people's  destiny  depended 
upon  the  conduct  of   the  one  who  was  responsible 


412  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

before  Jehovah  for  the  maintenance  of  this  faith- 
fulness. 

It  was  God's  purpose  to  establish  this  principle  for 
the  glory  of  Christ.  I  speak  of  His  kingdom  over 
the  Jews  and  over  the  nations,  over  the  whole  world. 
This  kingdom  has  been  prefigured  in  David  and  in 
Solomon.  To  ask  for  a  king,  rejecting  God's  own  im- 
mediate government,  was  folly  and  rebellion  in  the 
people.  How  often  are  our  follies  and  our  faults  the 
opportunity  for  the  display  of  the  grace  and  wisdom 
of  God  and  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  counsels  hidden 
from  the  world  until  then !  Our  sins  and  faults  alone 
have  conduced  to  the  glorious  accomplishment  of  these 
counsels  in  Christ. 

These  are  the  important  subjects  treated  of  in  the 
Books  of  Samuel,  so  far  at  least  as  the  establishment 
of  the  kingdom.  Its  glorious  condition  and  its  fall  are 
related  in  the  two  Books  of  Kings. 

It  is  the  fall  of  Israel  which  puts  an  end  to  their 
first  relationship  with  God.  The  ark  is  taken;  the 
priest  dies.  Prophecy  introduces  the  king — a  king 
despised  and  rejected,  man  having  set  up  another,  yet 
a  king  whom  God  establishes  according  to  the  might 
of  His  power.  Such  are  the  great  principles  unfolded 
in  the  Books  of  Samuel. 

History  shews  us  here,  as  everywhere,  that  there  is 
but  One  who  has  remained  faithful — an  humbling 
result  for  us  of  the  trial  to  which  God  has  subjected 
us,  but  one  well  adapted  to  keep  us  humble. 

If  we  have  spoken  of  the  fall  of  the  priesthood,  we 
must  not  infer  from  it  that  priesthood  ceased  to  exist. 
It  was  always  necessary  fco  a  people  full  of  weakness 
(as  it  is  to  ourselves  on  earth)  ;  it  interposed  in  the 
things  of  God  to  maintain  individual  relationship  to 
Him  in  them,  but  it  ceased  to  form  the  basis  of  re- 
lationship between  the  whole  people  and  God.  The 
people  were  no  longer  capable  of  enjoying  this  relation- 


I   SAMUEL.  41.3 

ship  through  this  means  alone ;  and  the  priesthocxl 
itself  could  suffice  no  longer,  having  so  deeply  failed 
in  its  standing.  We  shall  do  well  to  dwell  a  little  on 
this,  which  is  the  turning-point  of  the  truths  we  are 
considering. 

In  Israel's  primitive  state,  and  in  their  constitution 
generally,  as  established  in  the  land  given  to  them, 
priesthood  was  the  basis  of  their  relationship  with 
God ;  it  was  that  which  characterised  and  maintained 
it.  (See  Heb.  vii.  11.)  The  high  priest  was  their  head 
and  representative  before  God,  as  a  nation  of  worship- 
pers; and  in  this  character  (I  speak  here  neither  of  re- 
demption from  Egypt  nor  of  conquests,  but  of  a  people 
before  God,  and  in  relationship  with  Him),  on  the 
great  day  of  atonement  he  confessed  their  sins  over 
the  scape-goat.  It  was  not  merely  intercession.  He 
stood  there  as  head  and  representative  of  the  people, 
who  were  summed  up  in  him  before  Jehovah.  The 
people  were  acknowledged,  although  faulty.  They 
presented  themselves  in  the  person  of  the  high  priest, 
that  they  might  be  in  connection  with  a  God,  who, 
after  all,  veiled  Himself  from  their  eyes.  The  people 
presented  everything  to  the  priest;  the  high  priest 
stood  before  God.  This  relationship  did  not  imply  in- 
nocence. An  innocent  man  should  have  stood  himself 
before  God.  "  Adam,  where  art  thou  ?"  This  question 
brings  out  his  fall. 

Still  the  people  were  not  driven  away,  though  the 
veil  was  between  them  and  God ;  the  high  priest,  who 
sympathised  with  the  infirmities  of  the  people,  being 
one  with  them,  maintained  the  relationship  with  God. 
They  were  a  very  imperfect  people,  it  is  true ;  yet  by 
this  means  they  stood  themselves  in  connection  with 
the  Holy  One.  But  Israel  was  not  able  to  maintain 
this  position ;  not  only  was  there  sm  (the  high  priest 
could  remedy  that),  but  they  sinned  against  Jehovah, 
they  turned  away  from  Him,  and  that  even  in  their 


414  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

leaders.  The  priesthood  itself,  which  should  have 
maintained  the  relationship,  wrought  for  its  destruc- 
tion by  dishonouring  God  and  repelling  the  people 
from  His  worship,  instead  of  attracting  them  to  it. 

I  pass  over  the  preparatory  circumstances ;  they 
will  be  considered  in  detail  in  their  place.  God  then 
sets  up  a  king,  whose  duty  it  was  to  preserve  order 
and  to  secure  God's  connection  with  the  people  by 
governing  them,  and  by  his  own  faithfulness  to  God. 
This  is  what  Christ  will  accomplish  for  them  in  the 
ages  to  come  ;  He  is  the  anointed.  When  the  king  is 
established,  the  priest  walks  before  him.  (1  Sam.  ii. 
35.)  It  is  a  new  institution,  the  only  one  capable  of 
maintaining  the  relationship  of  the  people  with  God. 
Priesthood  is  no  longer  here  an  immediate  relationship. 
It  provides  indeed,  in  its  own  functions,  for  the  wants 
of  the  people.  The  king  watches  over  it,  and  secures 
order  and  blessing. 

Now  the  assembly's  position  is  altogether  different. 
The  saint  now  approaches  God  directly.  Together 
with  the  priesthood,  which  is  exercised  for  the  saints 
on  earth,  to  maintain  them  in  their  walk  here  and  in 
the  enjoyment  of  their  privileges,  it  is  united  to  the 
anointed;  the  veil  exists  no  longer.  We  sit  in  the 
heavenly  places  in  Christ,  made  accepted  in  the 
Beloved.  The  favour  of  God  rests  upon  us,  members 
of  the  body  of  Christ,  as  upon  Christ  Himself.  That 
which  has  unveiled  the  holiness  of  God  has  disclosed 
all  the  sin  of  man,  and  has  taken  it  aivay* 

Thus  in  Christ,  members  of  His  body,  we  are  perfect 
before  God,  and  perfectly  accepted.  The  priest  seeks 
neither  to  give  us  this  position,  nor  to  maintain  re- 
lationship with  God  as  to  those  who  are  not  in  this 
position.  The  work  of  Christ  has  placed  us  in  it. 
How  intercede  then  for  perfection  ?     Can  intercession 

*  I  refer  here  to  that  of  His  believing  people. 


I  SAMUEL.  415 

make  the  person  and  the  work  of  Christ  more  perfect 
in  the  sight  of  God  ?  Certainly  not.  But  we  are  in 
Him.  In  what  manner  then  is  this  priesthood  exer- 
cised for  us  ?  In  maintaining  mercy-needing  creatures 
in  their  walk,  and  so  in  the  realisation  of  their  re- 
lationship with  God.*  The  Christian  indeed  enters 
into  a  still  clearer  manifestation  of  God  and  more 
absolute  relationship  with  God,  that  of  being  in  the 
light  as  God  is  in  the  light.  We  are  seated  in  the 
heavenly  lolaces,  made  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  loved  as 
He  is  loved,  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  He  is 
our  life  ;  He  has  given  us  the  glory  tJtat  ^vas  given 
Him.  Now  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  came  down  from 
heaven  after  that  Jesus  was  glorified,  has  introduced 
us  consciously  into  the  unveiled  presence  of  God. 
Nevertheless  we,  though  without  excuse  in  doing  it, 
fail  and  pick  up  defilement  here  below.  Through  the 
advocacy  of  Him  who  is  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us 
our  feet  are  washed  by  the  Spirit  and  the  word,  and 
we  are  rendered  capable  of  maintaining  a  communion 
(of  which  darkness  knows  nothing)  with  God  in  that 
light.  Hereafter,  in  the  presence  of  Jesus  the  King, 
priesthood  will  no  doubt  sustain  the  connection  of  the 
people  with  God,  whilst  He  will  bear  the  weight  of 
government  and  of  blessing  for  the  people  in  every 
sense. 

We  find  then,  in  the  beginning  of  this  book,  priest- 
hood existing  before  God  in  the  original  form  we  have 
mentioned.    Eli,  pious  himself,  and  fearing  God,  main- 


*  There  is  a  shade  of  difference  between  the  priesthood  and 
the  advocacy  of  Christ.  The  priesthood  is  in  Christ  appealing 
in  the  presence  of  God  for  us ;  but  this  as  to  our  place  before 
God  is  perfection.  It  does  not  therefore  refer  to  sin  in  its  daily 
exercise,  but  mercy  and  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.  We 
enter  boldly  into  the  holiest.  Advocacy  refers  to  our  sinning, 
because  the  question,  where  it  is  spoken  of  (1  John  ii.  2),  is 
communion,  and  this  is  wholly  interrupted  by  sin. 

I. 


416  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

tained  no  order  in  the  priestly  family.  The  priesthood, 
instead  of  binding  the  people  to  God,  morally  sepa- 
rated them.  Hophni  and  Phinehas,  the  sons  of  Eli, 
were  at  Shiloh  ;  but  their  conduct  made  the  offering  of 
the  Lord  to  be  abhorred  of  the  people.  Such  was  the 
state  of  things  in  Israel.  At  the  same  time,  in  the 
family  of  Elkanah,  Hannah,  chosen  of  Jehovah  for 
blessing,  was  in  trial ;  the  desires  of  her  natural  heart 
were  not  satisfied,  and  the  adversary  tormented  her 
by  means  of  the  prosperous  Peninnah.  But  He,  whose 
strength  is  perfected  in  weakness,  having  made  mani- 
fest (as  ever  in  such  a  case)  the  powerlessness  of 
nature,  gives  blessing  according  to  His  own  will, 
against  all  hope,  in  order  that  that  which  was  of  Him 
should  be  evidently  wrought  by  His  own  power. 
Hannah  has  a  son  according  to  her  petition,  a  son 
devoted  to  the  Lord.  His  family  was  of  the  tribe  of 
Levi.  (1  Chron.  vi.) 

In  the  beautiful  song  of  chapter  ii.  Hannah  recog- 
nises this  great  principle  of  sovereign  grace,  and  of 
the  power  of  God ;  that  He  brings  down  the  proud 
and  those  who  trust  in  the  flesh,  and  exalts  the  weak 
and  impotent.  "For  the  pillars  of  the  earth  are 
Jehovah's;  and  he  hath  set  the  world  upon  them." 
This  was  what  Israel,  poor  and  fallen,  and  a  feeble 
remnant  waiting  for  Jehovah,  needed  to  learn  ;  that  is, 
that  everything  hung  upon  God  and  God  alone,  who 
did  not  seek  for  power  in  man,  but  manifests  it  in  His 
own  dealings  by  destroying  all  His  enemies,  and  who 
will  at  length  "  give  strength  unto  his  king,  and  exalt 
the  horn  of  his  anointed."  It  is  the  history  of  God's 
interposition  in  favour  of  poor  fallen  Israel ;  and  that 
by  the  manifestation  of  His  power  in  giving  strength 
to  His  king.  His  Christ.  It  is  a  prophecy  of  the  ways 
of  God,  of  the  great  principles  of  His  government 
with  respect  to  the  position  of  Israel,  from  the 
moment  of  its  utterance  until  the  establishment  of 


I  SAMUEL.  417 

the  millennial  kingdom  in  the  Person  of  the  Lord 
Jesus. 

Immediately  after  this  testimony  from  God  upon 
which  faith  might  rest,  the  inward  state  of  the  people 
is  revealed,  and  the  iniquity  of  the  priesthood,  which 
should  have  been  the  instrument  for  cleansing  this 
iniquity  of  the  people,  but  which,  on  the  contrary, 
brought  down  judgment  upon  them.  "  Ye  make  Je- 
hovah's people  to  transgress,"  said  Eli.  "  If  one  man 
sin  against  another,  the  judge  shall  judge  him  ;  but  if 
a  man  sin  against  Jehovah,  who  shall  intreat  for  him  ?" 
Such  was  the  state  of  things  according  to  Eli  himself. 
"  Notwithstanding  they  hearkened  not  unto  the  voice 
of  their  father,  because  Jehovah  would  slay  them. 
And  the  child,  Samuel,  grew  on,  and  was  in  favour 
both  with  Jehovah,  and  also  with  men,"  happy  in 
sharing  (however  feeble  the  copy)  the  testimony  borne 
to  Jesus  Himself. 

As  to  the  sons  of  Eli,  they  are  an  example  of  that 
which  but  too  often  happens.  How  frequently,  alas ! 
do  we  see  that,  when  the  judgment  of  God  is  on  the 
point  of  breaking  forth,  people  are  unconscious  of  it 
(their  moral  perception  being  darkened  by  the  evil). 
The  eyes  of  God  are  elsewhere,  as  well  as  the  spiritual 
discernment  which  He  gives  to  His  own,  as  was  the 
case  here  with  Samuel.  Nevertheless  God  warns  Eli 
by  means  of  a  man  of  God.  His  judgment  on  the 
priestly  family  and  on  the  priesthood  is  pronounced 
before  Jehovah  reveals  Himself  to  Samuel. 

This  judgment  announces  the  change  in  the  order  of 
divine  government,  which  was  to  take  place  through 
the  setting  up  of  a  king,  an  anointed  one  (a  Christ), 
and  through  the  consequent  position  of  the  priesthood, 
as  we  have  already  remarked.  (Ver.  35.)  "  And  I  will 
raise  me  up  a  faithful  priest,  that  shall  do  according  to 
that  which  is  in  mine  heart  and  in  my  mind ;  and  I 
will  build  him  a  sure  house,  and  he  shall  walk  before 
VOL.  L  IL  E  E 


418  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

mine  anointed*  for  ever."  Such,  I  apprehend,  will  be 
millennial  order. 

In  chapter  iii.  God  reveals  himself  to  Samuel ;  and 
he  is  known  to  be  a  prophet  of  Jehovah  from  Dan 
even  to  Beersheba. 

Eli,  judged  for  having  loved  his  sons  more  than 
Jehovah,  comforts  our  hearts  nevertheless  by  his  sub- 
mission. If  he  failed  in  the  energy  of  faithfulness,  he 
was  yet  true  in  heart  to  Jehovah,  and  his  personal 
piety  is  the  more  conspicuous  in  the  devotedness  to 
God's  glory  which  he  manifests  in  these  circumstances, 
finding  his  death  in  the  Ichabod  of  His  people. 

Sad  and  affecting  history  of  the  effect  of  God's 
righteous  judgment  upon  one  whose  heart  was  set 
upon  His  glory  in  His  people,  but  who  had  not  had 
firmness  enough  to  prevent  the  people,  and  even  his 
own  sons,  from  dishonouring  Jehovah  Himself  in  the 
priestly  service ! 

Here  begins  the  display  of  the  means  which  God 
employs  in  His  sovereignty  to  be  in  relationship  with 
His  people,  when  the  ordinary  relations  He  had  esta- 
blished are  interrupted. 

In  chapter  iv.  the  enemies  of  God  and  of  His  people 
display  their  strength  ;  the  Philistines  put  themselves 
in  array  against  Israel.  God,  in  overruling  providence, 
makes  all  things  concur  to  bring  about  the  purposed 
result. 

We  shall  do  well  to  pause  a  moment  here ;  for  the 
Philistines  are  of  considerable  importance,  on  account 
of  the  part  they  take  in  this  history,  as  the  power  of 
the  enemy.  They  appear  to  me  to  represent  the 
power  of  the  enemy  acting  within  the  circle  of  God  s 
people.  They  were  in  the  territory  of  the  Israelites — 
within  the  land,  and  even  en  this  side  of  the  Jordan. 

*  Joshua,  on  the  contrary,  went  in  and  ont  under  the  direo- 
Hon  of  Eleazar,  who  inquired  of  God. 


I  SAMUEL.  419 

They  were  not,  like  the  Egyptians  or  Assyrians, 
enemies  from  without.  Habitually  hostile  to  Israel, 
to  those  who  by  God's  appointment  should  have  pos- 
sessed the  land  of  promise — so  much  the  more  danger- 
ous from  being  always  at  hand,  and  claiming  posses- 
sion of  the  country,  the  Philistines  set  before  us  in 
type  the  power  of  the  enemy  acting  from  within.  I 
do  not  mean  the  flesh,  but  the  enemy  within  the  pale 
of  the  professing  church,  acting  of  course  through  in- 
struments, the  oppressor  of  God's  true  people  to  whom 
the  promises  belong. 

Israel,  corrupt  in  all  their  ways,  and  daring  in  their 
ways  with  God,  because  they  had  forgotten  His 
majesty  and  His  holiness,  seek  to  identify  Jehovah* 
with  them  in  their  unfaithful  condition,  as  He  had 
been  in  their  original  state,  instead  of  coming  before 
Him  to  learn  why  He  had  forsaken  His  people.  God 
will  neither  acknowledge  nor  succour  them.  On  the 
contrary,  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  sign  and  the 
seat  of  His  relationship  with  the  people,  is  taken.  His 
throne  is  no  longer  in  the  midst  of  the  people;  His 
tabernacle  is  empty  ;  all  ordered  relationship  is  inter- 
rupted. Where  can  they  ofler  sacrifice  ?  where  draw 
nigh  to  Jehovah  their  God  !  Eli,  the  priest,  dies  ;  and 
his  pious  daughter-in-law,  overwhelmed  by  these  dis- 
astrous tidings,  pronounces  the  funeral  oration  of  the 
unhappy  people  in  the  name  she  bestows  on  that 
which  could  no  longer  be  her  joy.  The  fruit  of  her 
womb  bears  but  this  impress  of  her  people's  calamity ; 
it  is  only  Ichabod  in  her  sight. 

What  a  blessing  to  have  had  through  grace  the  song 
of  Hannah  already  given  by  the  Spirit  to  sustain  the 
faith  and  hope  of  the  people  !  All  outward  connec- 
tion is  broken ;  but  God  upholds  His  own  majesty ; 

*  Observe  the  contrast  between  this  case  and  that  of  Achau, 
although  there  was  sin  in  the  latter.  The  sin  was  confessed  and 
judged  in  detail,  although  the  people  were  chastised. 

in.,  IV. 


420  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

and  if  unfaithful  Israel  had  not  been  able  to  with- 
stand the  worshippers  of  idols,  the  God  whom  Israel 
had  forsaken  vindicates  His  glory,  and  proves,  even  in 
the  heart  of  their  temple,  that  those  idols  are  but 
vanity. 

The  Philistines  are  obliged  to  acknowledge  the 
power  of  the  God  of  Israel,  whom  Israel  could  not 
glorify.  His  judgments  suggested  a  means  to  theii 
natural  conscience  which,  while  proving  that  the 
influence  of  the  almighty  power  of  God  is  felt  even 
by  creatures  devoid  of  intelligence,  causing  them  to 
act  against  their  strongest  instincts,  manifests  also 
that  it  was  indeed  Jehovah,  the  Omnipotent  God,  who 
had  inflicted  the  chastisement  under  which  they  were 
sufiering. 

God  maintains  His  majesty  even  in  the  midst  of 
Israel.  He  is  no  longer  among  them  securing  their 
promised  blessings.  His  ark,  exposed  through  their 
unfaithfulness  to  the  unworthy  treatment  of  the 
Philistines  and  of  the  inquisitive,  becomes  (as  the 
token  of  God's  presence)  the  occasion  of  judg- 
ment inflicted  on  the  temerity  of  those  who  dared 
to  look  within  it,  forgetful  of  His  divine  majesty 
who  made  it  His  throne  and  kept  His  testimony 
therein. 

But  how  often  the  absence  of  God  causes  His 
value  to  be  felt,  whose  presence  had  not  been  ap- 
preciated ! 

Israel,  still  deprived  of  Jehovah's  presence  and 
glory,  laments  after  Him.  Let  us  remark  here  that 
God  could  not  remain  among  the  Philistines.  Unfaith- 
fulness might  subject  His  people  to  their  enemies, 
although  God  was  there.  But,  left  (so  to  say)  to  Him- 
self, His  presence  judged  the  false  gods.  Association 
was  impossible ;  the  Philistines  desire  Him  not.  You 
cannot  glory  in  a  victory  over  One  who,  when  cap- 
tured, is  your  destroyer.  The  Philistines  get  rid  of  Him. 


I  SAMUEL.  421 

Never  can  the  children  of  Satan  endure  the  presence 
of  the  true  God. 

Moreover  the  heart  of  God  is  not  alienated  from 
His  people.  He  finds  His  way  back  to  the  people  of 
His  choice  in  a  sovereign  manner,  which  proves  Him 
to  be  the  God  of  all  creation.  But,  as  we  have  seen, 
He  asserts  His  majesty.  More  than  fifty  thousand 
men  pay  the  penalty  of  their  impious  temerity.  God 
returns;  but  still  it  needs  that  He  open  a  way  for 
Himself  after  His  own  purposes  and  dealings,  accord- 
ing to  which  He  re-establishes  His  relationship  with 
the  people.  Thus  Samuel  appears  again  on  the  scene 
when,  the  ark  having  abode  in  Kirjath-jearim  twenty 
years  (chap,  vii.),  Israel  laments  after  Jehovah.  The 
ark  is  not  put  back  in  its  place,  nor  is  the  original 
order  restored. 

Samuel  begins  to  act,  by  his  testimony,  upon  the 
conscience  of  the  people,  and  to  put  away  that  which 
weakened  them  by  dishonouring  God.  He  tells  them 
that,  if  they  will  turn  to  Jehovah  with  all  their  heart, 
they  must  put  away  the  strange  gods,  and  serve  Jeho- 
vah alone.  A  mingled  worship  was  intolerable.  Then 
would  Jehovah  deliver  them.  The  prophet  Samuel  is 
now  the  meeting-point  between  the  people  and  God. 
God  now  acknowledges  him  alone. 

The  ark  is  not  found  again  in  its  place  until  the 
king  chosen  of  God  is  established  on  the  throne  ;  it  is 
only  placed  entirely  in  God's  order  when  the  son  of 
David  rules  in  peace  and  in  strength  at  Jerusalem.* 
It  is  consulted  once  (1  Sam.  xiv.  18,  19),  but  its 
presence  is  without  effect  and  without  power.  It 
exists,  but  in  connection  with  those  in  whom  faith 
and  integrity  were  no  longer  found,  so  that  nothing 
resulted   from    it.     It  the  rather  proved   that    God 

*  Compare  Psalms  Ixxviii.  60,  61 ;  cxxxii.     The  ark  is  in  con- 
nection with  Sion,  the  seat  of  kingly  grace.     Solomon  only,  as 
the  man  of  peace,  could  build  the  house. 
V.-VII. 


422  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

was  elsewhere,  or  at  least  that  He  wrought  else- 
where. 

But  we  will  pursue  the  history.  At  Samuel's  call 
the  strange  gods  are  put  away.  The  people  gather 
around  him,  that  he  may  pray  for  them.  They  offer  no 
sacrifice ;  they  draw  water  and  pour  it  out  upon  the 
ground  in  token  of  repentance  (see  2  Sam.  xiv.  14) ; 
they  fast  and  confess  their  sin.  Samuel  judges  them 
there. 

But  if  Israel  assembles,  even  for  humiliation,  the 
enemy  at  once  bestirs  himself  in  opposition ;  he  will 
tolerate  no  act  which  places  the  people  of  God  in  a 
position  which  recognises  Him  as  God. 

The  Israelites  are  alarmed,  and  have  recourse  to 
Samuel's  intercession.  Samuel  offers  a  sacrifice,*  token 
of  entire  surrender  of  self  to  the  Lord,  and  of  the 
people's  relationship  with  Him;  but  it  is  not  before 
the  ark.  He  entreats  Jehovah,  his  prayer  is  heard, 
and  the  Philistines  are  smitten  before  Israel.  And  it 
was  not  an  exceptional  case,  although  they  lost  nothing 
of  their  formidable  character,  or  of  their  hatred  for 
Israel.  Samuel  brings  down  God's  blessing  upon  the 
people,  and  the  hand  of  Jehovah  was  against  the 
Philistines  all  the  days  of  Samuel. 

The  cities  of  Israel  were  restored.  There  was  peace 
between  Israel  and  the  Amorites.  Samuel  judged 
Israel  at  Ramah  and  built  an  altar  there.  All  this  is 
an  exceptional  and  extraordinary  position  for  Israel,  in 
which  they  depended  entirely  on  Samuel,  who,  while 
living  himself  as  a  patriarch,  as  though  there  were  no 
tabernacle,  becomes,  through  his  own  relationship  with 
God,  by  faith,  the  support  and  upholder  of  the  people, 
who  in  fact  had  no  other. 

*  That  is  to  say,  a  burnt- offering.  This  is  remarkable.  It 
was  not  sacrifice  for  sin,  but  sacrifice  which  recognised  the 
relationship  existing  between  the  people  and  God.  Christ 
only,  as  we  have  seen  elsewhere,  is  the  true  burnt-offering. 


I  SAMUEL.  423 

But  faith  is  not  transmitted  by  succession.  Samuel 
could  not  make  prophets  of  his  sons.  They  were  no 
better  as  judges  than  Eli's  sons  had  been  as  priests, 
and  the  people  had  no  faith  themselves  to  lean  im- 
mediately upon  God.  They  ask  to  be  made  like  unto 
the  nations. 

"  Make  us  now  a  king,"  said  they  to  Samuel.  Where 
was  Jehovah  ?  For  Israel,  nowhere.  But  it  was  evil 
in  the  eyes  of  Samuel,  and  he  prayed  unto  Jehovah. 
While  acknowledging  that  the  people  had,  as  usual, 
rejected  Him,  God  commands  Samuel  to  hearken  unto 
their  voice.  Samuel  warns  them  according  to  God's 
testimony,  and  sets  before  them  all  the  inexpediency 
and  consequences  of  such  a  step ;  but  the  people  will 
not  hearken  unto  him.  God  brings  to  the  prophet, 
through  providential  circumstances,  the  man  whom  He 
had  chosen  to  satisfy  the  carnal  wishes  of  the  people. 
In  all  this  He  judges  the  people  and  their  king.  ("  He 
gave  them  a  king  in  his  anger,  and  took  him  away  in 
his  wrath.")  But  He  remembers  His  people.  He  does 
not  forsake  them.  He  acts  by  Saul  on  their  behalf, 
while  shewing  them  their  unfaithfulness,  and  after- 
wards in  cutting  off  the  disobedient  king.  Beauty  and 
height  of  stature  distinguished  the  son  of  Kish.  But 
in  the  signs  that  Samuel  gave  him,  when  he  had 
anointed  him,  there  was  a  meaning  which  should  have 
carried  his  thoughts  beyond  himself. 

How  often  there  is  a  meaning,  a  language,  perfectly 
intelligible  to  one  who  has  ears  to  hear,  but  which  es- 
capes us,  because  our  gross  and  hardened  heart  has  no 
spiritual  intelligence  or  discernment !  And  yet  all  our 
future  hangs  upon  it.  God  has  shewn  our  incapacity 
for  the  blessing  it  involved.  Nevertheless  the  means 
were  not  wanting. 

Although  the  significance  of  this  circumstance  was 
less  evident  than  that  of  the  other  signs,  yet  Rachel's 
sepulchre  should  have  reminded  Saul,  the  son  and  heir 

VII.-X. 


424  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

according  to  the  flesh  of  the  one  who  was  born  there, 
that  the  son  of  the  mother's  sorrow  was  the  son  of  the 
father's  right  hand.  (Gen.  xxxv.  18.) 

Now  God  had  not  abandoned  Israel ;  faith  was  still 
there ;  men  were  going  up  to  God.  There  were  some  in 
Israel  who  remembered  the  God  of  Bethel,  who  had  re- 
vealed Himself  to  Jacob  when  he  fled,*  and  who  in 
His  faithfulness  had  brought  him  back  in  peace ;  and 
God  gave  Saul  favour  in  their  eyes.  The  servants  of 
the  God  of  Bethel  salute  him  and  strengthen  him  on 
his  way.  But  the  hill  of  God  was  possessed  by  the 
garrison  of  the  Philistines — another  circumstance 
which,  by  its  significance,  should  have  gone  to  the 
heart  of  a  faithful  Israelite  who  desired  the  glory  of 
God  and  the  good  of  His  people.  But  the  sign  which 
accompanied  it  made  it  much  more  forcible;  for  the 
Spirit  of  Jehovah  came  upon  Saul  in  this  place,  and 
he  was  turned  into  another  man,  called  therefore  to 
"  do  as  occasion  served  him,  for  God  was  with  him." 
(Chap.  X.  7.)t 

It  often  happens,  that  faith  sets  forth  clearly  what 
should  be  done,  while  the  heart,  waxen  fat  and  unfaith- 
ful, does  not  see  it  at  all. 

And  what  do  these  signs  mean  ?  There  are  those  in 
Israel  who  remember  the  God  of  Bethel,  and  who  seek 
Him — upright  and  prepared  hearts,  who  know  Him  as 
the  resource  of  faith.  But  the  hill  of  God,  the  public 
seat  of  His  strength,  is  in  the  enemy's  hands.  Still,  if 
this  be  so,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  upon  the  man  who 

*  The  God  who  had  said  to  him  in  the  day  of  his  trouble, 
■when  driven  out  from  before  his  enemy,  that  He  would  not 
forsake  him. 

t  Accordingly  it  was  the  Spirit  of  prophecy,  the  Spirit  which 
acted  in  blessing,  which  indicated  the  presence  of  God,  and  that 
to  which  Saul  should  have  recourse,  even  though  (yea,  because) 
the  hill  of  God,  the  pubUc  seat  of  His  authority  in  Israel,  was 
in  the  hands  of  the  enemies  of  the  true  people  of  God.  This 
scene  pictured  the  whole  state  of  Israel. 


I  SAMUEL.  425 

takes  cognisance  of  it,  and  it  is  at  this  very  hill  that 
the  Spirit  comes  upon  him.  The  name  of  God  is  also 
significative  here.  It  is  Ood  abstractedly — God  the 
Creator:  God  Himself  is  in  question.  The  Spirit  of 
Jehovah  comes  upon  Saul,  because  He  resumes  there 
the  course  of  His  relations  with  Israel. 

But  Samuel  is  still  the  only  one  whom  God  recog- 
nises as  the  link  between  Himself  and  the  people.  It 
is  when  Saul  has  had  to  do  with  Samuel,  that  he  is 
another  man.  He  must  wait  for  Samuel,  that  he  may 
know  what  to  do,  and  that  blessing  may  rest  upon 
him.  He  must  thus  acknowledge  that  blessing  is  con- 
nected with  the  prophet,  and  not  act  without  him ;  he 
must  wait  for  him  with  perfect  patience  (seven  days), 
a  patience  which,  submitting  to  God's  testimony,  will 
not  seek  for  blessing  apart  from  His  ways. 

Here  also  we  see  in  the  Philistines  the  enemies  who 
put  faith  to  the  proof.  We  have  often  enemies  over 
whom  we  gain  an  easy  victory,  and  on  whose  account 
we  are  considered  spiritual,  yet  they  are  not  such  as 
(on  God's  part,  and  it  may  also  be  said  on  their  own 
part)  put  faith  to  the  proof.  With  these  patience 
must  have  her  perfect  work.  And  the  Philistines 
held  this  place  with  respect  to  Saul.  It  was  all  well 
that  the  people  should  be  delivered  from  their  other 
enemies ;  but  they  were  not  the  ones  which  were  a 
snare  to  them,  and  which  manifested  the  power  of  the 
enemy  in  the  very  midst  of  Israel  and  the  promises. 

Do  spiritual  powers  rule  over  us  in  the  assembly,  in 
the  place  where  the  promises  of  God  should  be  ful- 
filled ?  And  what  power  do  we  see  to  overthrow  the 
power  of  evil  and  spiritual  wickedness  within  the 
borders  of  the  professing  church  ? 

It  was  from  the  Philistines  that  Saul  should  have 
delivered  the  people  of  God.  (See  chap.  ix.  16.)  The 
hill  of  God  was  in  the  Philistines'  hands.  (See  also 
chap.  xiv.  52.)     If  Saul  had  waited  for  Samuel,  he 

X.,   XI. 


426  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

would  have  declared  unto  him  all  that  he  should  do. 
Now  we  shall  see  that,  two  years  later,  Saul  is  put  to 
the  proof  as  to  this  in  the  presence  of  the  Philistines ; 
and  whatever  may  have  been  the  delay,  the  thing  had 
not  been  altered;  all  the  intermediate  success  should 
have  increased  his  faith  and  strengthened  him  in 
obedience. 

Samuel  calls  the  people  together  at  Mizpeh.  There 
he  sets  before  them  their  foolishness  in  rejecting  the 
God  of  their  salvation.  But  he  proceeds  to  the  choice 
of  a  king;  according  to  the  command  of  God.  God 
meets  the  wishes  of  the  people.  If  the  flesh  could 
have  glorified  God,  nothing  was  wanting  to  induce 
them  to  trust  in  Him.  God  adapts  Himself  to  them  in 
outward  things;  and  further,  as  we  know,  had  the 
people  followed  Jehovah,  Jehovah  would  not  have 
forsaken  them.  (Chap.  xii.  20-25.) 

And  now  that  God  has  set  up  a  king,  those  who 
will  not  own  him  are  "men  of  Belial."  The  people 
however  scarcely  see  God  in  it  at  all :  they  only  recog- 
nise Him  in  those  things  which  the  flesh  can  perceive, 
such  as  the  beauty  of  the  king  and  the  success  of  his 
arms,  that  is  to  say,  the  things  in  which  God  suits 
Himself  to  nature,  and  in  which  He  grants  blessing,  in 
order  that  He  may  be  known  and  trusted.  In  this 
they  rejoice,  but  they  go  no  farther.  Faith  is  not  of 
nature. 

As  yet  all  goes  well  with  Saul ;  he  does  not  take 
vengeance  on  those  who  oppose  him.  Before  his  faith 
is  tried,  his  natural  character  would  gain  him  favour 
with  men.  And  now,  in  those  things  which  have  given 
rise  to  the  carnal  movement  that  led  the  people  to 
desire  a  king,  all  apparently  prospers  to  their  wish. 
The  Ammonites  are  so  thoroughly  defeated,  that  two 
of  them  are  not  left  together.  Here  also  Saul  acts 
with  prudence  and  generosity.  He  does  not  allow  the 
people's  desire  for  vengeance  to  be  carried  out.     He 


I  SAMUEL.  4£7 

owns  the  Lord  in  the  blessing  granted  to  the  people. 
In  truth  God  was  with  them,  granting  to  the  flesh  all 
the  means  and  helps  necessary  for  walking  with  Him, 
had  the  thing  been  possible.  Samuel  is  there  on  God's 
part,  and  supports  by  his  authority  the  king  whom 
God  has  set  up.  At  Samuel's  invitation  the  people 
assemble  at  Gilgal  (a  place  memorable  for  the  blessing 
of  the  people  and  their  association  with  Jehovah,  the 
flesh  being  judged,  on  entering  the  land),  to  renew  the 
kingdom  there,  and  again  to  recognise  a  throne  whose 
authority  had  just  been  confirmed  by  successful  efforts 
for  the  deliverance  of  God's  people.  Peace-ofierings 
and  great  rejoicing  make  the  ceremony  more  im- 
posing. 

Samuel  (chap,  xii.)  receives  the  people's  testimony 
to  his  fidelity.  He  sets  before  them  the  ways  of  God 
towards  them,  their  ingratitude  and  foolishness  in 
having  asked  for  a  king  and  rejected  God.  Neverthe- 
less, while  giving  a  sign  from  God  which  added  the 
weight  of  God's  own  testimony  to  his  words,  he 
declares  to  the  people  that,  if  henceforth  they  would 
obey  Jehovah,  both  the  king  and  the  people  should 
continue  to  follow  Jehovah  (that  is,  they  would  walk 
under  His  blessing  and  guidance) ;  but  if  not,  Jehovah 
would  be  against  them.  For  Jehovah  would  not 
forsake  them,  and  he  himself  (Samuel)  would  as- 
suredly not  cease  to  pray  for  them,  and  would  teach 
them  the  good  and  the  right  way:  that  is  to  say,  he 
places  the  people,  as  to  their  public  conduct,  in  the 
position  they  had  chosen,  and  set  them  under  their 
own  responsibility  before  Jehovah ;  but  at  the  same 
time,  full  of  love  to  them  as  the  people  of  God,  their 
rejection  of  himself  does  not  for  a  moment  suggest 
the  thought  to  him  of  giving  up  his  intercession  or 
his  testimony  for  their  welfare.  Beautiful  picture  of 
a  heart  near  the  Lord,  which,  in  forgetfulness  of  self, 
can  love  His  people  as  its  own !     To  fail  in  this  would 

XII. 


428  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

have  been  to  sin  against  the  Lord.  (Compare  2  Cor, 
xii.  15.) 

Here  then  is  Saul  established  in  his  place,  and  his 
authority  confirmed  by  the  blessing  of  God.  Samuel 
retires,  confining  himself  to  his  prophetic  office,  and 
Saul  is  now  called  to  prove  himself  faithful  and 
obedient  in  his  present  position,  surrounded  by  all  the 
advantages  which  the  blessing  of  God  and  the  solemn 
act  of  His  prophet  could  confer  upon  him. 

Let  us  now  recapitulate  the  history  we  have  been 
examining. 

Israel,  unfaithful,  no  longer  maintain  their  relation- 
ship with  God  under  priesthood.  The  ark  is  taken, 
the  priest  dies,  and  Ichabod  is  written  on  the  condition 
of  the  people.  God  raises  up  a  prophet,  who  becomes 
the  means  of  communication  between  Himself  and  the 
people  ;  but,  threatened  by  the  Ammonites,  the  people 
at  length  demand  a  king.  God  grants  their  request, 
testifying  at  the  same  time  His  displeasure,  since  He 
Himself  was  their  King.  The  Spirit  of  prophecy  con- 
tinues nevertheless  to  be  the  channel  of  divine  com- 
munication to  the  people.  Signs,  which  indicate  the 
state  of  the  people,  are  given  to  Saul,  the  elected  and 
anointed  king:  first  of  all,  some  faithful  ones  who 
own  the  God  of  Bethel — that  is  to  say,  the  faithful  God 
of  Jacob,  who  had  promised  not  to  leave  him  till  He 
had  performed  all  that  He  had  promised  him;  and, 
next,  the  hill  of  God — the  seat  of  authority  among  the 
people — in  possession  of  the  Philistines,  the  power  of 
the  enemy  in  the  land  of  promise. 

The  spirit  of  prophecy  comes  upon  Saul,  shewing 
him  where  God  was  amid  these  circumstances ;  and 
Samuel  tells  him  to  wait  for  him  at  Gilgal.  Mean- 
time, as  we  have  seen,  he  is  strengthened  by  the 
blessing  of  God  upon  his  undertakings. 

Saul  reigns  two  years.  He  then  selects  three 
thousand  men:  two  thousand  are  with  him,  and  one 


I  SAMUEL.  429 

with  Jonathan.  Jonathan,  a  man  of  faith,  acts  with 
energy  against  the  enemies  of  God's  people,  and  smites 
the  Philistines ;  but  the  energy  of  faith,  acting  (as  it 
always  does)  in  the  very  stronghold  of  the  enemy, 
naturally  provokes  their  hostility.  The  Philistines 
hear  of  it :  Saul  is  roused  to  action,  and  calls  together, 
not  Israel,  but  the  "  Hebrews." 

Let  us  remark  here  that  there  is  faith  in  Jonathan. 
The  flesh,  placed  in  the  position  of  leader  to  God's 
people,  follows  indeed  the  impulse  given  by  faith,  but 
does  not  possess  it ;  and  the  word  Hebrews,  the  name 
by  which  a  Philistine  would  have  called  the  people, 
indicates  that  Saul  relied  on  the  gathering  of  the 
nation  as  a  constituted  body,  and  understood  no  better 
than  a  Philistine  would  have  done  the  relation  between 
a  chosen  people  and  God.  And  this  is  the  position  set 
before  us  in  the  history  of  Saul,  It  is  not  premedi- 
tated opposition  to  God,  but  the  flesh  set  in  a  place  of 
testimony  and  used  in  accomplishing  God's  work.  We 
see  in  it  a  person  linked  with  the  interests  of  God's 
true  people,  doing  the  work  of  God  according  to  the 
people's  idea  of  their  need — a  true  idea  as  to  their 
actual  need ;  but  he  is  one  who  seeks  his  resources  in 
the  energy  of  man,  an  energy  to  which  God  does  not 
refuse  His  aid  when  there  is  obedience  to  His  will,  for 
He  loves  His  people ;  but  which  in  principle,  in  moral 
and  inward  motive,  can  never  of  itself  go  beyond  the 
flesh  from  which  it  springs.  In  the  midst  of  all  this 
faith  can  act,  and  act  sincerely,  and  this  is  Jonathan's 
case.  God  will  bless  this  faith,  and  He  always  does 
so,  because  it  owns  Him ;  and  in  this  instance  (and  it 
is  His  gift)  because  it  sincerely  seeks  the  good  of  God's 
people. 

All  this  is,  in  principle,  a  kind  of  picture  of  the 
professing  church,  which  in  this  point  of  view  antici- 
pates the  true  reign  of  Christ,  and  in  this  position 
even  fails  in  her  faithfulness  to  God.     True  faith,  in 

xnL 


430  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  midst  of  such  a  system,  never  rises  so  high  as  the 
glory  o£  the  coming  One,  the  true  rejected  David,  but 
it  loves  Him  and  cleaves  to  Him.  If  the  church  is 
merely  professing,  she  persecutes  Christ ;  but  that  in 
her  which  acts  by  faith  loves  and  owns  Him,  even 
when  He  is  hunted  like  a  partridge  on  the  mountains. 

Jonathan  having  thus  in  faith  attacked  the  Phili- 
stines, Saul,  who  ostensibly  leads  the  people  before 
God,  is  put  to  the  proof.  Will  he  shew  himself 
competent  ?  Will  he  remember  the  true  principle  on 
which  the  blessing  of  the  people  rests  ?  Will  he  act 
as  a  royal  priest,  or  will  he  acknowledge  the  prophet 
to  be  the  true  link  of  faith  between  the  people  and 
God — a  link  the  importance  and  necessity  of  which 
he  ought  to  have  recognised,  since  he  owed  to  it  his 
present  place  and  power,  and  it  had  proved  to  him 
its  own  mission  and  prophetic  authority  by  esta- 
blishing his  ?  When  the  critical  moment  arrives, 
Saul  fails. 

It  is  worth  while  to  retrace  here  the  tokens  of  the 
unbelief  of  the  flesh. 

The  Philistines  are  smitten.  The  nation,  active  and 
energetic,  hear  of  it ;  nothing  could  be  more  natural. 
Saul  has  but  the  same  resource — no  call  upon  God,  no 
cry  to  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel ;  Samuel  does  not 
occur  to  his  faith,  although  he  remembers  what 
Samuel  had  told  him.  If  the  Philistines  have  heard, 
the  Hebrews  must  hear  also.  Israel  fears ;  God  gives 
no  answer  to  unbelief  when  the  trial  of  faith  is  His 
object.  Saul  calls  the  people  after  him  to  Gilgal,  but 
they  were  soon  scattered  from  him  at  the  report  of  the 
Philistines  having  gathered  together.  Saul  is  at 
Gilgal,  and  Samuel  comes  again  into  his  mind.  It 
was  no  longer  as  when  the  kingdom  had  been  re- 
newed. The  circumstances  naturally  suggested  Samuel 
as  a  resource.  Saul  tarries  seven  days  for  him  accord- 
ing to  his  word.    He  waits  for  him  long  enough  to 


I  SAMUEL.  431 

satisfy  the  exigence  of  conscience.  Nature  can  go 
a  long  way  on  this  principle ;  but  it  has  not  that  sense 
of  its  own  weakness,  and  that  all  depends  on  God, 
which  makes  it  wait  on  God,  as  the  alone  resource  and 
worker.  Then,  as  the  people  once  brought  the  ark 
into  the  camp,  he  offers  the  burnt-offering.  But,  if  he 
had  had  confidence  in  God,  he  would  have  understood 
that,  whatever  might  be  the  result,  he  should  wait  for 
Him ;  that  it  was  useless  to  do  anything  without  Him, 
and  that  he  ran  no  risk  in  waiting  for  Him.  A  faith- 
ful God  could  not  fail  him.  He  had  thought  of 
Samuel,  and  of  his  having  told  him  to  wait,  so  that 
he  was  without  excuse;  he  remembered  that  the 
guidance  and  blessing  of  God  were  found  with  the 
prophet.  But  he  looks  at  circumstances ;  the  people 
are  scattered,  and  Saul  seeks  to  bring  God  in  by  an 
act  of  devotion  without  faith.  It  was  the  decisive 
moment ;  God  would  have  confirmed  his  kingdom  over 
Israel,  would  have  established  his  dynasty.  But  now 
He  had  made  choice  of  another. 

Observe  here,  that  it  is  not  through  being  defeated 
by  the  Philistines  that  Saul  loses  the  throne.  The 
fault  was  between  himself  and  God.  The  Philistines 
do  not  attack  him.  It  is  enough  for  Satan  if  he  suc- 
ceeds in  frightening  us  away  from  the  pure  and  simple 
path  of  faith.  Samuel  departs  after  having  made 
known  to  Saul  the  mind  of  God.  The  Philistines  pil- 
lage the  land,  which  is  defenceless.  The  people  more- 
over had  neither  sword  nor  spear. 

What  a  picture  of  the  state  of  God's  people !  How 
often  we  find  that  those  who  profess  to  be  the  chil- 
dren of  God,  to  be  of  the  truth,  and  heirs  of  the 
promises,  are  unarmed  before  the  enemies  who  despoil 
them! 

But  faith  in  God  is  always  blest;  and  if  God  has 
shewn  the  effect  of  unbelief,  He  also  shews  its  folly, 
since  wherever  faith  is  found,  there  all  His  strength  is 
XIII. 


432  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

displayed ;  and  then  it  is  the  enemy  who  is  defence- 
less. Jonathan  makes  up  his  mind  to  attack  the 
Philistines  in  the  energy  which  he  derives  from  faith 
in  God ;  and  if  imbelief  is  manifest  in  Saul,  the  beauty 
of  faith  is  exhibited  in  his  son. 

The  difficulties  are  not  lessened.  The  Philistines  are 
in  garrison,  and  their  camp  situated  in  a  place  of  un- 
usually difficult  access,  a  narrow  pathway  up  perpen- 
dicular rocks  being  the  only  means  of  approach.  The 
Philistines  were  there  in  great  number,  and  well 
armed.  But  it  is  hard  for  faith  to  endure  the  oppres- 
sion of  God's  people  by  the  enemy,  and  the  dishonour 
thus  done  to  God  Himself.  Jonathan  endures  it  not. 
Where  does  he  seek  for  strength  ?  His  thoughts  are 
simple.  The  Philistines  are  uncircumcised ;  they  have 
not  the  help  of  the  God  of  Israel.  "There  is  no 
restraint  to  Jehovah  to  save  by  many  or  by  few ;"  and 
this  is  the  thought  of  Jonathan's  faith,  that  fair  flower 
which  God  caused  to  blossom  in  the  wilderness  of 
Israel  at  this  sorrowful  moment.  He  does  not  think 
about  himself.  Jehovah,  says  he,  has  delivered  them 
up  to  Israel.  He  trusts  in  God,  and  in  His  unfailing 
faithfulness  towards  His  people:  his  heart  rests  in 
this,*  and  he  does  not  imagine  for  an  instant  that  God 
is  not  with  His  people,  whatever  their  condition  may 
be.  This  characterises  faith.  It  not  only  acknow- 
ledges that  God  is  great,  but  it  recognises  the  indis- 
soluble bond  (indissoluble  because  it  is  of  God)  between 
God  and  His  people.  The  consequence  is,  that  faith 
forgets  circumstances,  or  rather  nullifies  them.  God  is 
with  His  people.  He  is  not  with  their  enemies.  .Ail 
the  rest  is  but  an  opportunity  of  proving  the  real 
dependence  of  faith.  Thus,  there  is  no  boasting  in 
Jonathan ;  his  expectation  is  from  God.      He  goes  out 

*  See  the  same  proofs  of  faith  in  David,  when  he  went  out 
against,  (xoliath. 


1  SAMUEL.  4o3 

and  meets  the  Philistines.  He  is  there  a  witness  for 
God.  If  they  are  bold  enough  to  come  down,  he  will 
wait  for  them  and  not  create  difficulties  for  himself, 
but  he  will  not  turn  away  from  those  which  meet  him 
in  his  path.  The  indolent  and  at  the  same  time  foolish 
and  imprudent  confidence  of  the  enemy  is  but  a  sign 
^  o  Jonathan  that  Jehovah  has  delivered  them  up.  Had 
they  come  down,  they  would  have  lost  their  advantage  ; 
in  bidding  him  come  up,  they  set  aside  the  insurmount- 
able difficulty  of  access  to  the  camp.  Happy  in  having 
a  faithful  companion  in  his  work  of  faith,  Jonathan 
seeks  no  other  assistance.  He  does  not  talk  of  the 
Hebrews ;  but  he  says,  "  Jehovah  has  delivered  them 
up  into  the  hand  of  Israel."  He  climbs  the  rock  with 
his  armour-bearer.  And  in  truth  Jehovah  was  with 
him ;  the  Philistines  faU  before  Jonathan,  and  his 
armour-bearer  slays  after  him.  But  while  honouring 
the  arm  which  faith  had  strengthened,  God  manifests 
Himself.  The  dread  of  God  took  hold  of  the  Phili- 
stines, and  everything  trembles  before  the  man  whom 
laith  (God's  precious  gift)  had  led  into  action. 

Faith  acts  of  itself.  Saul  is  obliged  to  number  the 
^eople  to  find  out  who  is  absent.  Alas !  we  are  entering 
into  the  sad  history  of  unbelief.  Saul  endeavours  to 
obtain  some  directions  from  the  ark,  whilst  elsewhere 
God  was  triumphing  over  the  enemy  without  Israel. 
The  tumult  of  their  defeat  continues  to  increase ;  and 
unbelief,  which  never  knows  what  to  do,  tells  then 
the  priest  to  withdraw  his  hand.  The  king  and  the 
priest  were  not  the  link  between  God  and  the  people. 
There  was  neither  the  people's  faith  in  God  without  a 
king,  nor  the  king  whom  God  Himself  had  given. 

Here  again,  instead  of  Israel  (whom  Jonathan  alone 
recognised),  we  find  those  whom  even  the  Spirit  of  God 
calls  Hebrews*  who,  although  they  were  "  of  the  foun- 

*  This  is  the  more  remarkable,  because  the  Spirit  calls  those 
who  -were  with  Saul  and  Jonathan  Israelites.   This  gives  special 
VOL.  L  XIV  F  F 


434  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

tain  of  Jacob,"  are  among  the  Philistines,  content  to  be 
at  ease  among  the  enemies  of  God. 

Now  that  the  victory  is  gained,  all  are  glad  to  share 
the  triumph  and  pursue  the  Philistines. 

And  poor  Saul,  what  does  he  do  ?  Never  can  un- 
belief— however  good  its  intentions  in  joining  the 
work  of  faith — do  anything  except  spoil  it.  Saul 
speaks  of  avenging  himself  on  his  enemies.  Jehovah 
is  not  in  his  thoughts;  he  thinks  of  himself,  and 
hinders  the  pursuit  by  his  carnal  and  selfish  zeal.  May 
God  preserve  us  from  the  guidance  and  help  of  un- 
belief in  the  work  of  faitli !  God  Himself  can  succour 
us  through  every  means ;  but  when  man  mixes  himself 
up  with  the  work,  he  does  but  spoil  it,  even  when 
seeking  to  bring  in  strength. 

Saul,  at  the  moment  of  such  blessing,  is  zealous  to 
maintain  the  idea  of  honouring  Jehovah's  ordinances, 
as  he  sought  to  do  previously  in  asking  His  counsel  at 
the  ark,  making  much  of  His  name,  as  though  the 
victory  had  been  due  to  him,  and  it  was  only  some 
hidden  sin  which  prevented  his  obtaining  an  answer 
from  God.  He  had  nearly  put  Jonathan  to  death, 
through  whom  God  had  wrought.  He  would  disco vei- 
the  sin  by  bringing  in  God,  who  acts  indeed,  but  only 
to  make  manifest  the  folly  of  the  poor  king. 

Observe  that  faith  in  full  energy  can  thankfully 
avail  itself  of  the  refreshment  which  God  sets  before 
ib  in  its  toilsome  course,  whilst  the  carnal  zeal  of  that 
A/hich  is  but  an  imitation  of  faith,  and  which  never 
rots  with  God,  makes  a  duty  of  refusing  it.  All  thjit 
hiaul  can  do,  when  he  takes  the  lead,  is  to  prevent  their 
1  caping  the  entire  fruit  of  the  victory.     His  interven- 

force  to  the  word  "  Hebrews,"  wherever  it  is  found.  God  does 
not  refuse  the  name  of  Israelite  to  the  most  timorous  of  the 
people  (chap.  xiii.  G),  but  He  refuses  it  to  those  who  join  the 
Piiilistines.  The  idea  was  lost  of  the  connection  between  the 
pjople  and  God.    It  was  a  nation  Hke  any  other. 


I  SAMUEL.  435 

tion  could  only  spoil  the  work  of  others ;  he  has  no 
faith  to  perform  one  himself. 

Nevertheless  God  has  pity  on  Israel,  and  keeps 
their  enemies  in  check  by  means  of  Saul ;  for  although 
unbelieving,  he  had  not  yet  turned  his  hatred  against 
God's  elect.     He  was  not  yet  forsaken  of  Jehovah. 

But  this  painful  and  solemn  moment  is  at  hand. 
Meanwhile  he  strengthens  himself.  There  was  con- 
stant war  with  the  Philistines ;  but  Saul,  warlike  as 
he  was,  could  not  overcome  them,  as  David  or  even 
Samuel  did.  He  sought  carnal  means  amongst  his 
fellows  to  attain  his  object. 

Observe  here  with  what  frightful  rapidity,  and  how 
even  at  once,  the  enemy  gains  the  upper  hand  when  we 
are  not  walking  in  the  ways  of  God.  (Compare  vii.  12, 
14,  and  xiii.  16-23.) 

Observe  also  that  all  the  forms  of  piety  and  of 
Jewish  religion  are  with  Saul ;  "  Jehovah's  priest  in 
Shiloh  (chap.  xiv.  3),  wearing  an  ephod,"  and  the  ark. 
(Ver.  18.)  He  consults  with  the  priest.  He  prevents 
their  eating  flesh  with  blood.  He  builds  an  altar.  The 
priest  consults  God ;  and,  God  giving  no  answer,  Saul 
is  ready  to  slay  Jonathan  as  guilty,  because  he  had 
eaten  in  spite  of  the  oath. 

Observe,  at  the  same  time,  that  it  is  the  first  altar 
Saul  had  built ;  that  the  priest  is  of  the  family  which 
God  had  condemned.  He  builds  his  altar  when  re- 
jiicted,  and  after  the  outward  blessing  which  God  had 
given,  and  which  he  attributes  to  himself,  although  he 
had  only  spoilt  it. 

On  the  other  hand  Jonathan's  faith  acts  without 
taking  counsel  of  flesh  and  blood:  as  the  people  said 
(chap.  xiv.  45),  he  wrought  loith  God.  The  people  did 
not  know  that  he  was  absent.  Happy  Jonathan  !  faith 
had  led  him  so  far  in  advance  that  he  did  not  even 
hear  the  senseless  curse  which  his  father  invoked  on 
whoever  tasted  food.      The  folly  of  another's  unbelief 

XIV. 


436  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

did  not  reach  him.  He  was  at  liberty,  as  he  went 
along,  to  avail  himself  of  the  kindness  of  his  God 
with  joy  and  thanksgiving,  and  he  pursued  his  course 
refreshed  and  encouraged — happy  walk  of  simplicity 
which  acts  with  God ! 

The  consideration  of  these  two  chapters  is  very  in- 
structive, as  setting  before  us  the  contrast  between  the 
walk  of  faith  and  that  of  the  flesh,  in  the  position 
which  the  latter  takes,  by  virtue  of  its  profession,  in 
the  work  of  God.  It  was  the  first  time  that  Saul 
had  faced  the  enemy  on  whose  account  God  raised 
him  up. 

Nevertheless  Saul  is  put  to  a  final  proof.  Jehovah, 
by  the  mouth  of  Samuel,  sends  him  to  smite  Amalek, 
and  utterly  destroy  them  and  all  that  belonged  to 
them.  They  were  the  cruel  and  determined  enemies 
of  God's  people.  (Deut.  xxv.  17-19.)  They  had  been 
chief  among  the  nations,  their  name  and  their  pride 
were  everywhere  known  (Num.  xxiv.  7,  20) ;  but  it 
was  a  nation  doomed  of  God. 

God  now  entrusts  Saul  with  the  fulfilment  of  Deu- 
teronomy xxv.  19.  In  this  case  all  Israel  accompanied 
him  without  fear.  These  were  not  the  enemies  from 
within  who  were  daily  wearing  away  their  strength 
and  courage.  The  victory  is  complete.  The  only 
question  now  is  that  of  faithfulness  to  God,  and  of 
preferring  His  glory  to  self-interest.  But  Saul  fears 
the  people.  The  Spirit  of  God  says  ''Saul  and  the 
people ;"  Saul  says  "  the  people ;"  and  that  it  was  for 
God  they  spared.  But  our  excuses,  even  when  true, 
only  condemn  us.  Saul,  not  having  faith,  not  looking 
to  God,  fears  the  people  more  than  God.  What  a  slave 
is  the  unbeliever!  If  not  the  slave  of  the  enemy, 
he  is  that  of  the  people  whom  he  appears  to  govern. 
Saul,  unfaithful  to  God  in  the  midst  of  the  people, 
and  surrounded  by  blessings  from  Jehovah,  is  at  length 
deprived  of  the  kingdom. 


I 


I  SAMUEL.  437 

No  humiliation,  no  brokenness  of  heart — he  con- 
fesses his  sin,  hoping  to  avoid  its  punishment ;  but, 
unable  to  escape  it,  he  entreats  Samuel  to  honour  him 
in  spite  of  it.  Samuel  does  so  and  then  forsakes  him. 
Everything  changes  now,  and  David  appears  on  the 
scene.  It  is  well  to  remark,  that  the  connected  history 
of  Saul's  reign  closes  with  the  end  of  chapter  xiv. 

Chapter  xv.  is  given  as  a  separate  history  on  account 
of  the  importance  of  its  contents — the  definite  rejec- 
tion of  Saul,  a  rejection  which  introduces  David. 

In  chapter  xvi.  Samuel  is  sent  of  Jehovah  to  anoint 
this  His  chosen  one.  AU  glorying  in  the  flesh  and  its 
birthright  are  here  set  aside;  and  the  youngest,  de- 
spised and  forgotten  of  all,  who  kept  the  sheep,  is 
chosen  of  God ;  "  for  Jehovah  seeth  not  as  man  seeth." 
Samuel,  taught  of  God,  hesitates  not  in  his  decision, 
and  can  accept  none  of  the  seven  who  are  at  home. 
"Are  here  all  thy  children?"  At  length  he  anoints 
David,  brought  in  from  the  field. 

But  God  does  not  set  David  at  once  in  the  height  of 
power,  as  He  did  in  the  case  of  Saul.  He  must  make 
his  way  by  grace  and  faith  through  all  kinds  of  diffi- 
culties ;  and,  although  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  he 
must  act  in  the  presence  of  a  power  devoid  of  the 
Spirit,  and  which  God  has  not  yet  set  aside.  He  must 
be  subject  and  be  humbled,  he  must  feel  his  entire 
dependence  on  God,  that  God  is  sufficient  in  all 
circumstances;  and  his  faith  must  be  developed  by 
trial  in  which  God  is  felt  to  be  all.  Beautiful  type*  of 
One  who,  without  sin,  journeyed  through  far  more 
painful  circumstances !  and  not  only  a  type,  but  at  the 
same  time  a  vessel  prepared  by  God  for  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  could  fill  him  with  sentiments  which, 
while  describing  so  touchingly  the  sufferings  of  Christ 
Himself  and  His  sympathy  with  His  people,  exhibit, 
to  those  who  were  to  tread  in  weakness  the  same  path 
as  Himself,  their  resource  in  God.      For  one  cannot 

XV.,  XVI. 


438  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

doubt  that  the  trials  of  David  gave  rise  to  the  greater 
part  of  those  beautiful  psalms,  which,  depicting  the 
circumstances,  the  trials,  and  the  complaints  of  the 
remnant  of  Israel  in  the  last  days,  as  well  as  of  Christ 
Himself  (who,  in  Spirit,  has  identified  Himself  with 
them,  and  has  undertaken  their  cause),  have  thus 
furnished  so  many  other  burdened  souls  with  the 
expression  and  the  relief  of  their  sorrows ;  an<l 
although  their  interpretation  cf  these  psalms  may 
have  been  incorrect,  yet  their  hearts  were  not  mis- 
taken.* 

We  will  return  to  our  history. 

The  Spirit  of  Jehovah  came  upon  David  and  for- 
sook Saul,  who,  at  the  same  time,  is  troubled  by  an 
evil  spirit.  The  providence  of  God  brings  in  David 
by  means  of  one  of  Saul's  servants  who  knew  him, 
and  presents  him  to  Saul.  Saul  loves  him,  and  keeps 
him  in  his  presence;  he  becomes  his  armour-bearer,  and 
he  plays  on  a  harp  when  the  evil  spirit  troubles  Saul. 
David,  in  God's  sight,  is  the  anointed  king,  but  he 
must  suffer  before  he  reigns,  however  great  his  energy 
may  be. 

The  Philistines,  that  type  of  the  enemy's  power, 
present  themselves  again  with  their  champion  at  their 
head,  against  whom  no  one  dares  to  fight.  David  had 
returned  home,  and  was  living  in  the  simplicity  of  his 
usual  life. 

Although  that  which  precedes  gives  the  general  idea 
of *the  position  in  which  he  had  been  placed,  it  appears 
that  David  had  not  remained   long  with   the   king. 

*  This  unintelligent  use  of  the  Psalms,  however,  has  tended  to 
keep  pious  souls  down  below  their  privileges  as  Christians.  A 
child's  place  with  the  Father  is  never  found  in  any  of  the 
Psalms,  nor  the  spiritual  feelings  generated  by  the  conscious- 
ness of  the  relationship.  The  word  may  be  used  as  a 
comparison,  but  the  relationship  is  never  recognised,  and  could 
not  be. 


I  SAMUEL.  4SU 

(Chap.  xvii.   15.)      His  father  sends  him  to  see  his 

brothers,  who  are  in  Saul's  army.  There  he  sees  tht? 
Philistine  who  defied  the  armies  of  Israel.  Jonatlia;i 
does  not  appear  here.  There  is  but  one  who  can 
desti\>y  this  champion,  who  centres  in  his  own  person 
all  the  energy  of  evil.  David's  faith  sees  no  difficulty 
in  it  because  he  sees  God,  and  in  the  enemy  an  enemy 
of  God  without  strength.  He  was  but  one  of  the 
*'  uncircuoncised ;"  the  rest  matters  little.  In  the  pei  - 
formance  of  his  ordinary  duties  David  had  already 
met  with  difficulties  too  great  for  a  full-grown  man ; 
yet,  although  a  mere  youth,  he  had  overcome  them  for 
a  very  simple  reason — "  Jehovah  delivered."  He  had 
not  boasted  of  this  (it  was  the  fulfilment  of  his  duty); 
but  he  had  learnt  in  it  the  strength  and  faithfulness 
of  Jehovah.  And  this  experience  is  now  repeated. 
Man's  armour  is  rejected;  faith  knows  it  not.  God 
will  perform  the  work  by  the  most  simple  means. 

David  declares  wherein  his  strength  consists.  "I 
come  to  thee  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  of  hosts."  He 
then  identifies  liimself  with  the  people  of  God.  "  All 
the  earth  shall  know  that  there  is  a  God  in  Israel." 
Remark  how  the  simplicity  of  faith  rises  to  the  con- 
sciousness of  power  and  its  effects  in  the  hands 
of  God.  (Chap.  xvii.  46.)  So  ever  when  God  leads  the 
heart. 

The  stone  which  sinks  into  the  forehead  of  Goliath 
deprives  him  of  strength  and  of  life.  David  cuis 
off  the  head  of  Goliath  with  his  own  sword,  like 
Him  who  by  death  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power 
of  death. 

The  whole  army  of  Israel  profits  by  David's 
triumph.  Saul,  who  had  forgotten  him,  will  not 
suflfer  him  to  go  away.  Alas  !  the  flesh,  and  even  the 
flesh  in  rebellion,  can  love  Jehovah's  elect  on  ac- 
count of  his  kindness  and  the  relief  he  ministers ;  but 
it  knows  him  not.  When  he  is  doing  Jehovah's  work, 
XVL,   XVII. 


440  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

he  is  as  much  a  stranger  to  Saul  as  if  they  had  never 
met. 

But  when  Christ  makes  Himself  known,  the  rem- 
nant (which  Jonathan  represented)  loves  Him  as  his 
own  soul,  and  this  beloved  one  becomes  the  object  of 
his  whole  affection.  This  does  not  however,  in  its 
bearing,  go  beyond  the  personal  reign  of  Christ. 
Jonatlian  represents  the  remnant  which  has  loved  Him 
in  humiliation.  As  to  this  world,  it  is  so  always ;  there 
is  a  remnant  who  love  Christ,  and  desire  His  kingdom, 
although  it  will  put  an  end  to  the  economy  in  which 
they  stand.  Of  the  assembly,  properly  so  called,  there 
is  nothing  here.  It  is  a  remnant  who  desire  the 
coming  of  Christ.  Saul,  who  sought  his  own  glory 
and  endeavoured  to  uphold  his  house  by  carnal  means, 
seeks  the  death  of  him  who  is  to  come  and  establish 
the  kingdom.     So  the  Jews  with  Christ. 

The  faith  of  David  had  rather  a  different  character 
from  that  of  Jonathan,  although  both  conquered  the 
Philistines.  Jonathan  is  not  deterred  by  difficulties: 
he  sees  the  God  of  Israel  and  does  the  work  of  God 
which  Saul  neglects.  It  is  the  true  and  energetic 
faith  of  God's  people.  But  David,  the  king — secretly 
so  indeed,  but  chosen  and  anointed — meets  face  to  face 
the  great  enemy  of  his  people  in  all  his  might,  the 
mere  sight  of  whom  dismayed  the  people,  who  fled 
before  him. 

That  which  distinguishes  the  faith  of  Jonathan  most 
touchingly  is  his  attachment  to  one  who  (to  judge 
after  the  manner  of  men,  as  Saul  did)  eclipses  his 
glory.  But  Jonathan  is  absorbed  by  his  affection  for 
the  one  whom  God  has  chosen.  He  sees  in  him  the 
true  head  of  Israel — worthy  to  be  so — who,  however 
despised  at  the  present  moment,  must  prosper  and 
reign  as  of  God.  It  was  also  David's  qualities  which 
gained  his  affection.  It  was  a  personal  attachment. 
He  could  appreciate  David,  and  he  forgot  his  own 


I  SAMUEL.  441 

interests  in  thinking  of  him.  The  voice  and  the 
words  of  David  sink  deep  into  his  heart,  and  bind 
him  to  the  king  whom  God  has  chosen,  while  un- 
known, and  in  spite  of  everything.  Saul,  the  pro- 
fessed head  of  the  people,  jealous  of  any  one  who 
might  displace  either  himself  or  his  descendants,  is  at 
enmity  with  David  and  forsaken  of  God;  he  is  the 
instrument  of  the  enemy  against  Jehovah's  anointed. 
At  length  he  falls  by  the  more  direct  and  open  power 
of  the  enemy  of  God's  people.  Sorrowful  end  of  that 
which  had  been  a  vessel  of  blessing  and  an  instrument 
in  the  work  of  God,  although  but  in  a  carnal  way. 

God  causes  David's  true  glory  to  outshine  the 
official  importance  of  Saul.  The  victories  of  the 
former  are  sung  in  such  a  manner  as  to  excite  the 
king's  jealousy. 

We  will  now  briefly  trace  the  features  of  David's 
faith  in  these  new  circumstances.  Never  does  he  lift 
his  hand  against  Saul ;  he  serves  him  obediently,  he 
does  his  duty,  and  patiently  bears  the  jealousy  and 
malice  which  pursue  him. 

Poor  Saul !  troubled  by  the  evil  spirit,  David  plays 
on  the  harp  to  soothe  him,  and  Saul  seeks  to  slay  him. 
David  escapes.  Saul  fears  him  ;  for  the  God  by  whom 
he  is  himself  forsaken  is  with  David.  He  employs 
him  at  a  distance  from  himself,  but  where  he  is  more 
than  ever  in  the  view  of  the  people.  God  always 
carries  out  His  purposes  in  spite  of  all  the  carnal 
precautions  of  man.  David  is  prudent.  He  has  the 
wisdom  of  God,  who  is  with  him  in  all  his  ways. 
Energetic  and  unpretending,  always  successful,  he  is 
beloved  by  all  Israel  and  Judah,  before  whom  he 
goes  in  and  out  with  all  the  strength  and  superiority 
of  faith. 

Saul  seeks  to  turn  all  this  to  his  own  account ;  ap- 
parently he  honours  David,  but  he  only  does  so  in 
order  to  expose  him  to  the  enemy  and  get  rid  of  him. 

XVIII. 


442  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

David  abides  in  his  lowliness,  and  Merab  is  given  to 
another.  Michal  affords  Saul  a  more  specious  oppor- 
tunity. As  he  was  only  required  to  destroy  the  power 
of  the  enemies  of  God's  people,  David  accepts  Saul's 
proposal  and  succeeds.  Saul  perceives  more  and  more 
that  Jehovah  is  with  David,  and  becomes  still  more 
afraid  of  hiin :  sad  development  of  a  sad  state  of  soul ! 
Yet  Saul  was  not  deficient  in  fine  points  of  natural 
character,  which  manifested  themselves  at  times  in 
better  feelings.  But  God  was  not  in  them.  (Chap, 
xix.)  Jonathan's  intercession  has  power  over  his 
father,  and  for  a  time  all  is  well.  But  Saul,  being 
forsaken  of  God,  cannot  bear  that  He  should  be  with 
David.  War  breaks  out ;  and  David,  God's  own  instru- 
ment in  what  He  does  for  His  people,  defeats  the 
Philistines,  and  drives  them  away. 

It  will  be  observed  here,  that  it  is  the  Philistines 
\vho  are  there,  through  whom  the  power  of  faith  is  in 
question.  It  is  with  them  that  the  battle  of  God  and 
of  faith  is  fought,  that  David  always  succeeded,  and 
that  Saul  failed. 

Saul  is  again  troubled ;  aiid  David,  who  seeks  to  re- 
fresh him,  narrowly  avoids  being  slain.  He  makes  his 
escape  and  goes  away  to  Samuel.  Remark  here  how 
the  grief,  which  egotism  and  self-love  produce,  makes 
room  for  the  action  of  the  evil  spirit  on  the  soul. 

The  power  reappears  here,  which,  hidden  as  it 
was,  still  governed  the  fate  of  Israel.  David  recog- 
nises it,  and,  when  he  can  no  longer  remain  with 
Saul,  he  does  not  seek  in  anywise  to  magnify  him- 
self by  rising  up  against  the  outward  form  which 
God  had  inwardly  judged  but  not  destroyed.  In- 
stead of  opposing  it,  he  contents  himself  with  ac- 
knowledging that  manifestation  of  the  power  of 
God  which  had  placed  Saul  in  his  royal  position, 
and  from  which  he  had  himself  received  the  testi- 
mony and  the  commiuiication  of  the  strength  and  of 


I  SAMUEL.  44:) 

the  will  of  God;  he  takes  refuge  with  Samuel.  He 
is  pursued  thither  by  Saul  and  by  his  messengers,  who, 
with  their  master,  are  subjected  to  this  same  power — 
a  power  which  does  not  influence  their  hearts  or  guide 
their  conduct,  a  power  of  which  Saul  had  forfeited  the 
blessing.  What  a  picture  of  a  useless,  ruined  vessel ! 
sometimes  prostrate  under  the  energy  of  Satan,  some- 
times prophesying  in  that  of  God,  from  whom  his 
heart  is  far  away,  by  whom  he  is  forsaken.  His  out- 
ward conduct  is  not  disorderly ;  he  does  no  harm 
except  when  Jehovah's  anointed  excites  his  jealousy 
and  his  hatred. 

David  is  now  driven  away  from  the  presence  of 
Saul,  and  becomes  a  wanderer  in  the  earth.  It  is  no 
longer  entire  submission  to  Saul,  whilst  himself  the 
vessel  of  the  energy  of  God.  Driven  away  by  Saul, 
David  had  returned  to  the  source  of  God's  testi- 
mony ;  and  Saul  had  again  dared  to  seek  his 
life,  even  when  he  was  with  Samuel.  He  has  com- 
pletely thrown  off  the  last  restraint,  and  forgotten 
all  that  should  have  reminded  him  of  God,  and 
stayed  his  hand.  Seeking  his  own  glory,  and  taking- 
advantage  of  his  acquired  position,  the  presence  of 
Samuel  has  no  longer  any  hold  upon  his  conscience. 
It  is  even  no  longer  "  Honour  me  before  the  elders  of 
my  people ;"  he  does  not  value  the  prophet  at  all ;  he 
comes,  in  spite  of  himself,  under  an  influence  which 
he  has  despised.  David  is  thus  shielded  from  his 
malice.  He  could  not  now  return  to  Saul.  It  would 
have  been  to  unite  himself  with  the  despisal  of  God's 
testimony.  For,  what  can  be  done  when  a  man  pro- 
phesies, and  yet  runs  counter  to  the  power  which  he 
cannot  deny  ?  David  takes  flight.  But  Saul's  state  is 
again  tested  by  this  state  of  things.  Jonathan  can 
scarcely  credit  his  father's  ill-will.  But,  before  putting 
it  to  the  proof,  his  devotion  to  David  is  very  plainly 
manifested.  His  faith  and  his  heart  acknowledge  that 
XIX.,  XX. 


444  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

which  the  blinded  Saul  cannot  receive.  (Chap.  xx. 
13-17.) 

Even  when  David  is  driven  away,  Jonathan's  faith 
is  not  shaken  ;  his  heart  is  not  separated  from  the  one 
whom  his  soul  loved,  when,  radiant  with  youth  and 
the  glory  of  his  victory  over  Goliath,  David  replied  to 
^jaul  with  a  modesty  that  heightened  its  lustre.  He 
loves  him  w^hen  dishonoured  and  a  fugitive.  He  ac- 
knowledges him  as  God's  elect,  and  links  the  hopes  of 
his  house  with  the  glory  of  his  beloved.* 

But  Jonathan  does  not  foHow  David,  and  he  faUs 
with  Saul.  Whatever  opinion  we  may  entertain  with 
respect  to  the  typical  meaning  of  this  part  of  his 
liistory,  we  see  in  him  that  whatever  is  allied  to  the 
i-arnal  system,  w^hich  is  outwardly  connected  with  the 
interests  of  the  people  and  name  of  God,  falls,  as 
regards  this  world,  with  the  system  that  perishes 
entirely. 

David,  informed  by  Jonathan  of  Saul's  state  of 
mind,  departs ;  and  Jonathan  returns  into  the  city. 

The  elect  king  is  now  rejected.  He  repairs  to  the 
priest,  who  gives  him  the  hallowed  bread,  according  to 
the  sovereign  grace  of  God,  who  rises  above  the  ordi- 
nances that  are  connected  with  blessing,  when  that 
blessing  is  rejected — when  He  himself  is  rejected  in 
His  chosen  one,  and  in  the  power  of  His  testimony. 
When  this  is  the  case.  He  sets  faith  above  ordinances 
in  His  sovereign  grace.  Since  God  Himself  and  His 
testimony  are  rejected,  the  shewbread  was  considered 
■common.     God  in  fact  was  ordering  all  anew. 

It  was  precisely  the  case  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The 
Person  of  the  rejected  One  is  above  all  the  carnal  or- 

*  See  chapter  xxiii.  16,  17.  But  what  Jonathan  proposed 
there  could  not  be  ;  that  is,  connection  between  the  old  system 
in  the  flesh  and  God's  grace  and  purpose.  Jonathan,  though 
loving  David,  walked  with  the  old,  which  God  was  going  to 
judge. 


I  SAMUEL.  445 

dinances,  which  have  lost  their  signification  where  He 
is.  Christ  submitted  indeed  to  all  the  ordinances  and 
authorities ;  but  the  rejection  of  God's  testimony  in 
Him  caused  it  to  be  perceived  by  degrees  that  He  was 
One  greater  than  the  ordinances — One  who  set  them 
aside,  and  replaced  them  by  the  manifestation  of  the 
efiectual  and  eternal  grace  of  God.  It  was  much  more 
important  to  give  David  food  than  to  keep  that  which 
had  grown  old.  God  cared  more  for  him  than  for  the 
bread  of  the  tabernacle. 

David  then  takes  the  sword  of  Goliath.  It  was  by 
the  power  of  death  that  the  Lord  destroyed  all  his 
strength  who  had  the  power  of  death.  Death  is  the 
best  weapon  in  the  arsenal  of  God,  when  it  is  wielded 
by  the  power  of  life. 

David,  his  mind  full  of  Saul's  enmity,  seeks  refuge 
among  the  Philistines.  What  business  had  he  there  ? 
This  time  God  drives  him  thence  without  chastisement. 
but  abundantly  proving  to  him  at  the  same  time  that 
he  was  out  of  place  there.  We  escape  from  the  wisdom 
which  leads  us  into  the  midst  of  God's  enemies,  by  the 
shame  of  that  folly  which  causes  us  to  be  driven  out 
again. 

David  now  takes  his  place  fully  with  the  excellent 
of  the  earth.  (Heb.  xi.  38.)  There  the  prophet  joins 
him ;  he  is  guided  in  a  direct  manner  by  the  plain 
testimony  of  God,  and  soon  after  he  is  joined  by  the 
priest  also ;  so  that,  rejected  as  he  is,  all  that  belonged 
to  the  testimony  and  the  dealings  of  God  gathers 
around  him.  He  was  the  king;  the  prophet  was 
there ;  the  priest  was  there  also.'  The  outward  forms 
were  elsewhere.  Saul,  on  the  contrary,  as  he  had 
shewn  his  contempt  for  Samuel  by  pursuing  David 
even  into  his  presence,  without  pity  as  without  fear  of 
God,  and  without  remorse,  rids  himself  of  the  pricvsts 
by  the  hand  of  a  stranger,  anEdomite,  a  merciless 
enemy   of  the   people,  when   the   consciences   of  the 

XX.-XXII. 


44*6  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

latter  would  have  withheld  his  hand.  It  is  on  this 
occasion  that  the  priest  is  brought  by  God  to  David,  in 
like  manner  as  we  find  the  prophet  there  after  Saul 
had  manifested  his  contempt  of  him.  Thus  a  hostile 
king,  he  is  a  despiser  of  the  prophet,  an  enemy  of  the 
priest  of  God. 

What  a  sad  history  of  the  gradual  but  progressive 
fall  of  one  who,  having  the  form  of  good,  has  not 
faith  in  God,  and  whom  God  has  forsaken !  How 
sure  are  the  ways  of  God,  whatever  appearances 
may  be  ! 

David,  despised  as  he  may  be,  is  the  king  and  saviour 
of  the  people ;  he  puts  the  Philistines  to  flight  with 
great  slaughter.  He  finds  nothing  but  treachery  in 
Israel,  of  which  Saul  makes  use  in  the  hope  of  seizing 
David.  But  as  the  wisdom  of  the  prophet  is  with 
David,  so  has  he  also  God's  answer  by  the  ephod  of 
the  priest  which  is  with  him. 

Let  us  observe  in  passing,  that  Saul  has  greatly  ag- 
grandised himself  to  outward  view.  He  is  no  longer 
with  his  six  hundred  men  who  followed  him  trembling ; 
he  can  speak  of  his  captains  of  thousands  and  captains 
of  hundreds  ;  he  can  bestow  fields  and  vineyards ;  he 
has  his  Doeg-,  the  head  over  his  herdsmen.  Before 
God,  inwardly,  he  makes  frightful  progress  in  evil ;  he 
is  not  only  forsaken  of  God,  but  he  breaks  through 
all  the  restraints  of  conscience,  and  of  the  testimony 
and  ordinances  of  God.  For  the  prophet  Samuel  and 
the  priests  ought  to  have  been  a  restraint  to  one  who 
professed  to  be  identified  with  the  interests  of  God's 
people. 

Outward  progress  in  prosperity,  joined  to  actual 
progress  in  evil  inwardly,  is  a  very  solemn  thing.  It 
is  at  once  a  snare  to  the  fiesh  and  a  trial  to  faith. 
David,  on  the  contrary,  is  apparently — and  in  fact,  as 
to  circumstances — driven  out  from  the  people.  He  has 
neither  home  nor  refuge.      But  the  testimony  of  God. 


I  SAMUEL.  447 

in  the  person  of  the  prophet  Gad,  and  communion  with 
God  by  the  priest's  ephod,  are  his  portion  in  his  exile. 
Cast  out  by  man,  he  is  where  the  resources  of  God  are 
realised  according  to  the  need  of  His  people. 

Remark  also  that  David  himself  acts  as  priest,  to 
obtain  the  expression  of  God's  mind.  He  takes  the 
ephod  to  seek  counsel  of  God ;  he  eats  the  shewbread, 
a  remarkable  type  of  Christ,  teaching  us  that,  when 
all  is  ruined,  blessing  is  made  over  to  those  who  by 
i  aith  walk  in  obedience,  understanding  the  duty  of  tL(3 
1  )eliever  who  discerns  the  moral  place  of  faith,  what  it 
owes  to  God,  and  how  it  may  rely  on  Him. 

Remark,  also,  that  that  which  here  distinguishes 
David  is  not  shining  deeds,  the  fruit  of  the  power  of 
faith,  but  the  instinct  and  intelligence  of  that  which  is 
suitable  to  'his  position,  a  moral  discernment  of  that 
which  is  pleasing  to  God,  and  of  the  line  of  conduct 
^vhich  His  servant  should  pursue  as  the  vessel  of  His 
spiritual  energy,  while  the  power  which  belongs  to 
him  is  in  the  hands  of  another.  It  is  the  walk  of  one 
who  has  apprehended  that  which  is  suitable  to  this 
difficult  position,  in  all  the  circumstances  it  brings 
him  into  ;  who  respects  that  which  God  respects,  and 
does  the  work  of  God  without  fear  when  God  calls 
him:  a  remarkable  type  of  Jesus  in  all  this,  an 
example  for  us. 

Besides  this  spiritual  perception,  these  moral  suita- 
bilities, the  greater  part  of  this  history  sets  before  us 
the  way  in  which  God  makes  everything  tend  towards 
the  accomplishment  of  His  purposes  (in  spite  of  all  the 
motives  and  intentions  of  men)  in  order  to  place 
David,  through  patience  and  the  energy  of  faith,  in 
the  position  He  had  prepared  for  him. 

Nevertheless  David  needs  the  intervention  and  the 
safeguard  of  God.  Having  quitted  Keilah  (chap,  xxiii.), 
in  consequence  of  God's  warning,  he  goes  into  the 
N\ildemess.     There  he  is  surrounded  by  Saul's  men. 

XXII.,   XXIII. 


448  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

But  at  the  moment  when  Saul  would  have  taken  him, 
the  Philistines  invade  the  land,  and  Saul  is  obliged  to 
return. 

"  And  David  went  up  and  dwelt  in  the  strongholds 
of  En-gedi."  Saul  pursues  him  thither,  after  following 
the  Philistines,  more  occupied  with  his  jealousy  of  the 
king  whom  God  had  chosen  than  with  the  enemies  of 
his  people.  But  this  expedition  is  not  to  his  honour. 
An  opportunity  to  kill  his  persecutor  presents  itself 
to  David  ;  but  tlie  fear  of  God  rules  him,  and  even 
Saul's  heart  is  touched  for  the  moment  by  a  preserva- 
tion which  proved  that  David  respected  him  in  a  way 
he  had  not  imagined.  He  sees  clearly  what  the  result 
will  be,  and  engages  David  to  protect  his  posterity  ; 
but  David  does  not  return  to  Saul.  The  relationship 
was  broken. 

At  length  Samuel  dies.  This  forms  an  epoch,  because 
he  who  was  the  true  link  between  the  people  and  God 
was  gone.  Israel  acknowledged  him  when  dead, 
although  they  had  despised  him  while  living. 

And  now  David's  position  changes,  and  Abigail  is 
brought  in.  Jonathan  never  separated  from  the  system 
in  which  he  stood,  never  united  himself  to  David, 
although  loving  him,  and  never  shared  his  sufferings. 
But  Abigail  identifies  herself  with  him ;  existing  rela- 
tionships do  not  prevent  her  acknowledging  David ; 
and  she  is  united  to  him  after  her  husband's  death. 
Jonathan  prefigures  the  remnant  in  the  character  of 
the  remnant  of  Israel,  who  acknowledge  the  futui-e 
king,  and  adhere  to  him,  but  go  no  farther.  As  regards 
old  Israel  they  come  to  nothing  with  it ;  they  will  l)e 
blessed  as  reigned  over  in  the  kingdom,  but  not  be  as- 
sociated with  Christ  on  the  throne.  Jonathan  does 
not  suffer  with  David,  and  does  not  reign  with  him. 
He  remains  with  Saul,  and,  as  to  that  position,  his 
career  ends  with  Saul.  Abigail,  and  even  the  malcon- 
tents who  joined  David,  shared  his  sufferings.   Abigail 


I  SAMUEL.  449 

separates  herself  completely  from  the  spirit  of  her 
husband ;  and  it  is  on  account  of  her  faith  and  wisdom 
that  David  spares  Nabal's  life.  God  judges  the  latter, 
and  then  Abigail  becomes  the  wife  of  David. 

Historically  David  had  nearly  failed  in  his  high 
standing.  In  fact  it  is  on  account  of  the  faithful 
remnant,  the  Abigail  of  the  foolish  nation,  that  Israel 
itself  has  been  spared ;  and  the  Lord's  connection 
with  the  assembly  is  in  the  character  of  pure  grace, 
not  in  that  of  the  avenger  (as  hereafter  with  Israel). 
At  this  time  it  is  that  David,  during  his  rejection,  sur- 
rounds himself  with  those  who  will  be  the  companions 
and  the  retinue  of  his  glory  in  the  kingdom.  But  he 
also  takes  a  wife. 

Abigail  speaks  of  Saul  as  a  man.  Jehovah,  she 
says,  will  make  a  sure  house  to  David.  This  is  the  in- 
telligence of  faith.*  It  is  the  truth  of  God's  counsels 
(2  Sam.  vii.  11),  and  in  its  fulness,  as  to  this.  She 
was  forming  for  herself,  without  knowing  it,  the  posi- 
tion of  the  assembly,  in  the  future  she  was  preparing 
for  herself,  t 

*  In  fact,  when  the  priesthood  had  been  judged,  nothing  re- 
mained for  faith,  which  apprehended  the  mind  of  God,  except 
the  prophet  Samuel  and  the  king  given  by  God,  David.  Abigail 
understands  this.  The  assembly  should  think  as  God  Himself 
thinks,  in  spite  of  existing  circumstances.  Abigail  thinks 
nothing  of  Saul.  Samuel  is  dead ;  David  is  now  everything  to 
her.  "  The  la/w  and  the  prophets  were  until  John.  Since  that 
time  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  preached,  and  every  man  presseth 
into  it."  Where  were  the  high  priests  and  all  their  company  ? 
Nevertheless  the  Lord  submitted  to  them  as  to  an  ordinance,  as 
David  did  to  Saul. 

f  She  takes  a  much  more  humble  place  than  Jonathan  did, 
and  one  which,  even  at  the  time,  acknowledged  David  much 
more  fiilly.  It  is  not  a  fnend  like  Jonathan ;  it  is  a  submissive 
soul  which,  in  spirit,  gives  David  his  place  according  to  God, 
taking  her  own  place  before  him.  It  is  exactly  that  which  dis- 
tinguishes the  spirit  of  the  assembly — of  the  true  Christian. 

In  Jonathan  we  see  the  remnant  under  the  Jewish  aspect. 
But  Abigail  enters  into  the  spirit  of  God's  purposes  respecting 
VOL.  L  XXIV.,   XXV.  G  G 


450  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Alas !  Saul  is  unchanged  ;  instigated  by  the  Ziphites, 
he  seeks  David  anew,  but  it  is  only  to  fall  again,  and 
more  publicly,  into  David's  hands.  Observe  that 
David  now  appeals  more  directly  to  the  Lord  to 
judge  between  him  and  Saul.  The  separation  is 
more  complete.  Saul  was  incorrigible.  This  appeal 
to  God  was  becoming.  It  is  not  becoming,  it  is  not 
according  to  the  way  of  the  Spirit,  to  accustom  our- 
selves to  evil.  "  Righteous  Father,"  said  the  Lord  at 
length,  "  the  world  hath  not  known  thee :  but  I  have 
Ivnown  thee;  and  these  have  known  that  thou  hast 
sent  me." 


David,  although  he  was  now  in  distress ;  and  David,  who,  while 
thoroughly  submissive,  can  act  according  to  the  faith  that  owns 
him,  hears  her  voice,  and  accepts  her  person. 

Let  us  mark  the  features  of  Abigail's  faith.  All  rests  upon 
her  appreciation  of  David  (it  is  this  which  forms  a  Christian's 
judgment — in  every  respect  he  appreciates  Christ) ;  his  title  as 
owned  of  God ;  his  personal  perfection  ;  and  that  which  belonged 
to  him  according  to  the  counsels  of  God.  She  thinks  of  him 
according  to  all  the  good  which  God  has  spoken  of  him  ;  she 
sees  him  fighting  God's  battles,  where  others  only  see  a  rebel 
against  Saul ;  and  all  this  from  her  heart.  She  judges  Nabal, 
and  looks  upon  him  as  already  judged  of  God  on  account  of 
this,  for  with  her  everything  is  judged  according  to  its  connec- 
tion with  David  (ver.  26)  ;  a  judgrtient  which  God  accomplishes 
ten  days  later,  although  Nabal  was  at  peace  in  his  own  house, 
and  David  an  exile  and  outcast.  Nevertheless  the  relation  of 
Abigail  to  Nabal  is  recognised  until  God  executes  judgment. 
She  judges  Saul.  He  is  but  a  man,  because,  to  her  faith,  David 
is  king.  All  her  desire  is  that  David  may  remember  her. 
Jonathan  says,  when  he  goes  out  to  David,  "  I  shall  be  next 
unto  thee  ;"  and  David  abides  in  the  wood,  while  Jonathan  re- 
turns to  his  house.  In  the  order  of  things  which  God  had 
judged  (a  judgment  that  faith  recognised)  he  remains  with  his 
family  and  shares  its  ruin.  This  is  important  to  a  Christian. 
For  instance,  he  respects,  in  so  far  as  based  on  God's  authority, 
official  Christianity — which,  in  the  world,  is  the  religion  of  God 
while  God  bears  with  it — and  does  not  stand  up  against  it.  As  to 
faith  and  personal  walk,  this  Christianity  is  nothing  at  all ;  just 
as  Saul  was  only  a  man  to  Abigail's  faith. 


I  SAMUEL.  451 

That  which  characterised  David  in  everything  is, 
that  he  puts  himself  entirely  into  Jehovah's  hands ;  it 
is  the  spirit  of  Christ  in  the  Psalms. 

But  David,  after  all,  is  only  a  man ;  and  immediately 
after  this  testimony  that  God  was  with  him  (a  testi- 
mony that  even  Saul  acknowledged),  his  faith  fails, 
and  he  passes  over  into  the  midst  of  the  enemies  of 
God's  people.  God,  no  doubt,  makes  use  of  this  means 
to  remove  David  from  peril.  But  at  the  same  time,  he 
is  tried  and  chastened,  and  is  exposed  to  the  dreadful 
necessity  of  appearing  ready  to  fight  against  Israel. 
There  is  but  One  whose  perfection  and  wisdom  were 
His  safeguard  in  every  trial. 

We  may  remark  that  it  was  immediately  after  an 
evident  interposition  of  God  (chap.  xxvi.  12)  that 
David's  faith  fails.  It  is  the  same  with  Elijah.  (1 
Kings  xix.)  One  would  say  that,  in  our  hearts,  faith 
exhausts  itself  by  an  unusual  effort.  Faith  may  carry 
us  through  the  crisis;  but  the  heart,  which  was  the 
vessel  of  faith,  is  terrified  by  it ;  whilst  in  Jesus  we 
find  an  equability  of  perfection  altogether  divine. 

David  removes  to  a  distance  from  the  royal  city. 
In  the  land  of  the  Philistines  he  gains  their  king's 
favour,  not  by  faith,  but  by  a  prudence  inconsistent 
with  truth.  It  is  an  unhappy  position ;  nevertheless, 
God  does  not  forsake  him.  He  chastises  him,  and  in  a 
painful  manner,  but  He  spares  and  preserves  him.  We 
have  seen  similar  ways  of  the  Lord  in  the  case  of  the 
fugitive  Jacob. 

Achish,  who  knows  David,  wishes  to  employ  him  in 
his  service,  and  David  cannot  refuse;  for  when  he 
who  possesses  the  energy  which  the  Spirit  of  God 
imparts  by  faith,  has  placed  himself  in  a  false  position 
through  unfaithfulness,  he  has  no  power  against  the 
one  under  whose  authority  he  has  placed  himself; 
and  if  he  does  not  use  the  energy  with  which  he  is 
sndowed  in  favour  of  his  protector,  he  very  naturaJly 

XXVI.,  XXVII. 


452  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

excites  his  jealousy.  He  would  have  avoided  all  this 
by  going  to  Ziklag,  but  he  could  not.  God  in  His 
mercy  preserved  David,  but  he  was  now  in  a  sad  and 
false  position. 

Saul,  as  well  as  Israel  at  present,  was  in  a  still 
worse,  having  succour  neither  from  God  nor  from  the 
enemy.  Saul  is  forsaken  of  God.  Samuel  is  dead ; 
so  that  Israel  is  no  longer  in  connection  with  God 
through  him. 

David,  who  at  least  made  head  against  the  Philis- 
tines, was,  through  Saul's  own  doings,  in  their  midst. 
The  outward  zeal  of  the  king  had  put  down  all  those 
who  had  the  spirit  of  witchcraft.  He  seeks  direction 
from  God,  but  obtams  no  answer.  He  has  now  neither 
conscience  nor  faith.  The  case  is  urgent;  and  he 
throws  himself,  not  into  outward  service  to  God,  as 
formerly  (he  has  the  sad  and  solemn  conviction  that  it 
belongs  to  him  no  more),  but  into  those  things  which 
he  had  condemned  and  cut  off  as  evil  when  he  main- 
tained a  religious  character — things  which  he  still 
knew  were  evil.  But  the  Philistines  were  there,  and 
his  heart  greatly  trembles.  He  seeks  out  a  woman 
who  had  a  familiar  spirit.  God  meets  him  here. 
Samuel  ascends,  but  in  such  a  manner  as  to  terrify  the 
woman.  She  recognises  the  presence  of  a  power 
superior  to  her  enchantments.  Samuel  declares  to 
Saul,  without  reserve  and  without  any  sympathy 
(for  this  was  no  longer  possible),  the  solemn  judg- 
ment of  God. 

In  chapter  xxix.  God,  in  His  loving-kindness,  brings 
David  out  of  his  difficulty  by  means  of  the  jealousy 
of  the  lords  of  the  Philistines.  Nevertheless,  to  main- 
tain his  credit  with  Achish,  David  falls  still  lower,  it 
seems  to  me,  and  protests  that  he  is  quite  ready  to 
fight  against  the  enemies  of  the  Philistine  king,  that 
is  to  say,  against  the  people  of  God.  This  appears  to 
me  the  most  wretched  part  of  David's  life — at  any 


I  SAMUEL.  453 

rate,  before  he  was  king.  God  makes  him  sensible  of 
it ;  for  while  he  is  there,  the  Amalekites  strip  him  of 
everything  and  burn  Ziklag,  and  his  followers  are 
ready  to  stone  him. 

All  this  is  grievous;  but  the  grace  of  God  raises 
him  up  again,  and  the  effect  of  this  chastisement  is  to 
bring  him  back  to  God,  for  he  was  ever  true  to  Him 
in  heart.  David  encouraged  himself  in  Jehovah  his 
God,  and  inquires  of  Him  what  he  shall  do.  What 
patience,  what  kindness  in  God !  What  care  He  takes 
of  His  people,  even  while  they  are  turning  away  from 
Him! 

David  is  truly  brought  back  to  God,  and  rescued 
from  his  false  position,  and  he  walks  and  acts  with 
God.  God  was,  unknown  to  him,  preparing  a  very 
different  position  for  him,  and  was  purifying  and  pre- 
paring him  for  it.  How  dreadful  would  it  have  been, 
had  David  been  with  the  Philistines,  and  taken  part  in 
the  defeat  of  God's  people,  and  in  the  death  of  him 
whose  life  he  had  often  spared  so  touchingly !  How 
far  the  child  of  God  may  go  astray  when  he  puts  him- 
self under  the  protection  of  unbelievers,  instead  of 
relying  on  the  help  of  God  in  all  the  difficulties  which 
beset  the  path  of  faith !  It  is  through  these  very 
difficulties  that  every  grace  is  developed. 

And  observe  the  danger  the  believer  is  in — if  his 
faith  be  not  simple,  but  fails  ever  so  little — of  being 
thrown  into  the  arms  of  God's  enemies  through  the 
persecution  of  professors.  Nature  grows  weary,  and 
seeks  comfort  afar  from  the  narrow  path  which  leads 
through  the  briars.  This  happens  whenever  the  people 
of  God,  following  their  own  will,  confide  their  interests 
to  those  who  seek  nothing  but  their  own  advantage  in 
a  less  difficult  position,  which  is  neither  that  of  God 
nor  that  of  faith.  And  the  more  glorious  a  work 
there  is  for  faith,  the  more  nature  grows  weary,  if 
faith  becomes  weak.      Ziklag  is  taken  during  David's 

XXVIII.-XXX. 


454  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

absence,  but  he  pursues  the  spoilers,  and  recovers  all 
the  booty. 

David,  upright  and  generous,  found,  in  the  difficulty 
which  arose  from  the  selfishness  of  his  people,  an 
opportunity  to  institute  that  which  was  conformable 
to  the  will  of  God;  and  instead  of  seeking  to  enrich 
himself  through  his  share  of  the  spoil,  he  uses  it  to 
maintain  kindly  relations  with  the  elders  of  his 
people,  and  to  prove  to  them  that  Jehovah  is  still 
with  him. 

Chapter  xxxi.  recounts  the  solemn  death  of  Saul 
and  of  Jonathan  also,  closing,  with  the  total  discom- 
fiture of  Israel,  this  touching  history.  The  whole 
account  of  Saul  and  his  family,  as  raised  up  to  with- 
stand the  Philistines,  is  ended :  Saul  and  his  sons  fall 
into  their  hands ;  they  are  beheaded,  their  armour 
sent  in  triumph  to  the  house  of  the  Philistines'  idols, 
and  their  bodies  hung  upon  the  walls  of  Beth-shan. 
Sad  end,  as  that  of  the  flesh  will  ever  be  in  the  battle 
of  Jehovah  ! 

Let  us  briefly  retrace  the  history  of  David.  Sim- 
plicity of  faith  keeps  him  in  the  place  of  duty,  and 
contented  there,  without  desire  to  leave  it,  because  the 
approbation  of  God  suffices  him.  Consequently  he 
can  there  reckon  upon  the  help  of  God,  as  thoroughly 
secured  to  him  ;  he  acts  in  the  strength  of  God.  The 
lion  and  the  bear  fall  under  his  youthful  hand.  Why 
not,  if  God  was  with  him  ?  He  follows  Saul  with 
equal  simplicity,  and  then  returns  to  the  care  of  his 
sheep  with  the  same  satisfaction.  There,  in  secret,  he 
had  understood  by  faith  that  Jehovah  was  with  Israel ; 
he  had  understood  the  nature  and  force  of  this  rela- 
tionship. He  sees,  in  the  condition  of  Israel,  something 
which  does  not  answer  to  this ;  but,  as  for  himself,  his 
faith  rests  upon  the  faithfulness  of  God.  An  uncir- 
cumcised  Philistine  falls  like  the  lion.  He  serves  Saul 
as  musician  with  the  same  simplicity  as  before ;  and, 


I  SAMUEL.  45  ) 

whether  with  him,  or  when  Saul  sends  him  out  as 
captain  of  a  thousand,  gives  proof  of  his  valour.  He 
obeys  the  king's  commands. 

At  length  the  king  drives  him  away ;  but  he  is  still 
in  the  place  of  faith.  There  is  little  now  of  military 
achievement,  but  there  is  the  discernment  of  that 
which  became  him,  when  the  spiritual  power  was  in 
him,  but  the  outward  divine  authority  was  in  other 
hands.  It  was  the  same  position  as  that  of  Jesus  in 
Israel.  David  does  not  fail  in  this  position,  its  diffi- 
culties only  the  better  bringing  out  all  the  beauty  of 
God's  grace  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit's  work,  while 
very  peculiarly  developing  spiritual  affections  and 
intimate  relationship  with  God,  his  only  refuge.  It  is 
especially  this  which  gave  rise  to  the  Psalms.  Faith 
suffices  to  bring  him  through  all  the  difficulties  of  his 
position,  in  which  it  displays  all  its  beauty  and  all  its 
grace.  The  nobleness  of  character  which  faith  im- 
parts to  man,  and  which  is  the  reflection  of  God's 
character,  produces  in  the  most  hardened  hearts,  even 
in  those  ^vho,  having  forsaken  God,  are  forsaken  of 
Him  (a  state  in  which  sin,  selfishness,  and  despair, 
combine  to  harden),  feelings  of  natural  affection,  the 
remorse  of  a  nature  which  awakens  under  the  in- 
fluence of  something  superior  to  its  malice — something 
which  sheds  its  light  (painful,  because  momentary  and 
powerless)  upon  the  darkness  which  encompasses  the 
unhappy  sinner  who  rejects  God.  It  is  because  faith 
dwells  so  near  God  as  to  be  above  evil,  that  it  with- 
draws nature  itself  from  the  power  of  evil,  although 
nature  has  no  power  of  self-mastery.  But  God  is  with 
faith ;  and  faith  respects  that  which  God  respects,  and 
invests  one  who  bears  something  from  God  with  the 
honour  due  to  that  which  belongs  to  God,  and  which 
recalls  God  to  the  heart  with  all  the  affection  that 
faith  entertains  for  Him,  and  all  that  pertains  to 
Him.     This  is  always  seen  in  Jesus,  and  wherever 

XXXT. 


456  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

His  Spirit  is ;  and  it  is  this  that  gives  such  beauty, 
such  elevation,  to  faith,  which  ennobles  itself  with 
the  nobility  of  God,  by  recognising  that  which  is 
noble  in  His  sight,  and  on  account  of  its  relationship 
to  Him,  in  spite  of  the  iniquity  or  abasement  of  those 
who  are  invested  with  it.  Faith  acts  on  God's  behalf, 
and  reveals  Him  in  the  midst  of  circumstances,  in- 
stead of  being  governed  by  them.  Its  superiority 
over  that  which  surrounds  it  is  evident.  What 
repose,  to  witness  this  amid  the  mire  of  this  poor 
world ! 

But,  although  faith,  in  the  place  it  gives  us  in  this 
world,  suffices  for  all  that  we  meet  with  in  it,  yet 
alas !  commimion  with  God  is  not  perfect  in  us.  In- 
stead of  doing  our  duty  whatever  it  be  without 
weariness,  because  God  is  with  us,  and  when  we  have 
slain  the  lion,  being  ready  to  slay  the  bear,  and, 
through  this,  more  ready  still  to  slay  Goliath — in- 
stead of  faith  being  strengthened  by  victory,  nature 
grows  weary  of  the  conflict ;  we  lose  the  normal  posi- 
tion of  faith,  we  debase  and  dishonour  ourselves. 
What  a  difference  between  David,  who,  by  the  fruit 
of  grace,  draws  tears  from  the  heart  of  Saul,  re- 
opening (at  least  for  the  moment)  the  channel  of  his 
affections,  and  David,  unable  to  raise  his  hand  against 
the  Philistines  whom  he  had  so  often  defeated,  and 
boasting  himself  ready  to  fight  against  Israel  and  the 
king  whose  life  he  had  spared ! 

My  brethren,  let  us  abide  in  the  place  of  faith,  appa- 
rently a  more  difficult  one,  yet  the  place  where  God  is 
found,  and  where  grace — the  only  precious  thing  in 
this  world — flourishes,  and  binds  the  heart  to  God  by 
a  thousand  links  of  affection  and  gratitude,  as  to  One 
who  has  known  us,  and  who  has  stooped  to  meet  our 
need  and  the  desires  of  our  hearts.  Faith  gives 
energy ;  faith  gives  patience ;  and  it  is  often  thus  that 
the  most  precious  affections  are  developed — affections 


I   SAMUEL.  457 

which,  if  the  energy  of  faith  makes  us  servants  on 
earth,  render  heaven  itself  happy,  because  He  who  is 
the  object  of  faith  is  there,  and  fills  it  in  the  presence 
of  the  Father. 

Nature  makes  us  impatient  with  circumstances,  be- 
cause we  do  not  sufficiently  realise  God,  and  draws  us 
into  situations  where  it  is  impossible  to  glorify  Him. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  well  to  observe,  that  it  is 
when  man  had  thoroughly  failed,  when  even  David's 
faith  had  been  found  wanting,  and — departing  from 
Israel — he  had  thrown  himself  among  the  Philistines, 
it  was  then  that  God  gave  him  the  kingdom.  Grace  is 
above  all  failure :  God  must  glorify  Himself  in  His 
people. 


II   SAMUEL. 

The  Second  Book  of  Samuel  sets  before  us  the  defini- 
tive establishment  of  David  in  the  kingdom;  and 
afterwards,  the  miseries  of  his  house,  when  prosperity 
had  opened  the  door  to  self-will. 

The  path  of  faith  and  its  difficulties,  is  that  in 
which  we  walk  with  God,  and  in  wliich  we  celebrate 
the  triumph  which  His  presence  secures  to  us.  A  state 
of  prosperity  makes  it  evident  how  little  man  is  able 
to  enjoy  it  without  its  becoming  a  snare  to  him.  Pro- 
sperity not  being  the  path  of  faith,  that  is  to  say,  of 
strength,  the  evil  of  the  heart  comes  out  in  the  walk. 
Compare  2  Samuel  xxii.  (the  psalm  by  which  David 
closes  the  path  of  difficulty)  with  chapter  xxiii.,  whicli 
contains  his  last  words,  after  his  experience  of  the 
enjoyment  of  the  prosperity  and  glory  in  which  faith 
had  placed  him. 

Nevertheless  piety,  and  pious  (and  hence  generous) 
sentiments,  were  genuine  in  David.  He  did  not  pre- 
tend to  feel  for  Saul's  misfortunes,  and  then  seize 
upon  the  kingdom  without  regret  as  soon  as  Saul  had 
ceased  to  exist.  David's  heart  was  really  melted 
when  he  heard  of  Saul's  death.  Woe  to  the  hard- 
hearted man  who,  impelled  by  the  hope  of  reward, 
thought  to  be  the  bearer  of  good  tidings  in  announcing 
it  to  him.  Whatever  Saul's  misfortunes,  he  was  the 
king  of  Israel  to  David.  Whatever  his  faults,  he  was 
an  unfortunate  king.  David  had  been  beloved  by  him, 
and  had  dwelt  in  his  house,  where  the  king's  affliction 
manifested  itself,  and  commanded  the  respect  of  all 
around   him.     And  if  Saul  had  unjustly  persecuted 


II  SAMUEL.  459 

David,  at  this  moment  it  was  readily  forgotten.  Now 
that  he  has  fallen,  David  will  only  remember  that 
which  can  do  him  honour;  and,  above  all,  that  it  is 
Jehovah's  anointed,  and  Jehovah's  people,  who  have 
fallen  before  their  enemies. 

David  causes  the  man  to  be  put  to  death  who,  de- 
luded by  selfishness,  accused  himself  of  lacking  all 
fear  of  Jehovah,  all  good  and  generous  feeling.  For 
David  fears  God ;  and  Jehovah's  anointed  is  precious 
in  his  sight.  He  then  pours  out  his  heart  before  God 
in  the  touching  accents  of  a  grief  which,  in  solemn 
and  affecting  language,  recalls  whatever  would  exalt 
Saul,  and  expresses  the  tender  and  affectionate  recol- 
lections which  his  heart  suggests.  Bdautiful  exhibi- 
tion of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  of  God !  David  is  in 
no  wise  discouraged,  for  his  faith  is  in  action.  If  this 
misfortune  grieves  him,  it  gives  him  also  the  oppor- 
tunity of  guarding  against  a  similar  calamity.  He 
bade  them  teach  the  children  of  Judah  the  use  of  the 
bow,  by  which  weapon  Saul  was  slain.  David,  still 
humble,  goes  on  well.  He  asks  Jehovah  if  he  should 
go  up  to  Judah,  and  to  which  place;  and  Jehovah 
directs  him.  David  testifies  also  to  the  men  of  Jabesh- 
gilead  his  satisfaction  at  their  conduct  with  respect 
to  Saul. 

Nevertheless  war  has  not  yet  ceased ;  if  not  against 
enemies  from  without,  it  is  carried  on  against  those 
from  within.  That  which  was  linked  with  Saul's 
fleshly  importance  cannot  support  David.  All  is  how- 
ever now  changed,  for  Ishbosheth  was  not  Jehovah's 
anointed,  and  to  make  him  king  was  in  fact  to  rebel 
against  God.  David  makes  war  upon  him  by  his 
captains. 

Alas  !  the  history  of  this  period  plunges  us  into  the 
ways  of  man.  It  is  no  longer  merely  David  walking 
in  the  path  of  faith.  It  is  Joab,  a  clever,  ambitious, 
bloody-minded,  and  heartless   man.      It  is  Abner,  a 

I. 


460  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

man  morally  superior  to  Joab,  but  who  fights  on 
fleshly  principles  as  a  party  man  against  the  king 
whom  God  has  chosen.  Abner  is  related  to  Ishbosheth 
as  Joab  is  to  David.  When  his  pride  has  been 
wounded,  he  throws  himself  into  David's  interests, 
and  Joab  kills  him  as  much  from  jealousy  as  to 
avenge  his  brother's  death.  And  wherein  is  the 
prowess  and  valour  of  the  chiefs  of  Benjamin  and 
Judah  now  manifested  in  this  "  field  of  strong  men"  ? 
In  slaying  each  other.  The  Philistines  were  forgotten. 
But  the  family  of  Saul  were  entirely  in  the  wrong. 
It  was  nature  which,  with  its  pretended  rights,  would 
not  submit  to  God  and  to  His  will. 

As  David  now  begins  to  do,  so  will  Christ,  the  King 
of  Judah,  bring  all  around  into  subjection  to  Himself 
after  He  has  taken  the  throne. 

It  is  well  however  to  observe,  that  David  does  not 
appear  in  all  this.  Joab  is  the  actor;  and  it  appears 
to  me,  from  the  details  given,  that  evil  had  already 
begun.  I  do  not  see  that  David  had  sought  counsel  of 
Jehovah ;  and  Joab  had  certainly  not  done  so,  for  he 
was  nothing  more  than  an  ungodly  man,  who  imder- 
stood  that  it  was  more  prudent  to  honour  God,  and  not 
to  depart  too  far  from  Him  merely  to  gratify  one's 
passions ;  but  this  did  not  preserve  him  from  being  at 
length  ensnared  in  his  own  calculations.  And,  after 
all,  it  is  not  the  energy  of  Joab  which  puts  the  king- 
dom into  David's  hands  ;  but  the  wounded  pride  of 
Abner,  the  chief  of  Ishbosheth's  party,  who  ends  by 
reaping  from  men  that  which  he  had  sown.  But  all 
this  is  very  sad. 

By  providential  means  God  accomplishes  His  pur- 
poses, and  David  is  successful.  Generally  also,  in  his 
combats  at  this  period,  and  in  his  exaltation,  he  typi- 
fies the  Lord  Jesus.  And  I  doubt  not  that  the  esta- 
blishment of  Christ's  kingdom  will  be  accomplished  in 
detail  after  His  appearing  \  the  prophecies  of  Zeehariah 


II   SAMUEL.  461 

and  Micah  v.  prove  this  ;  but,  as  a  history,  we  are,  as  1 
have  said,  in  the  midst  of  men.  In  the  matter  of 
Ishbosheth's  death  David  maintains  his  integrity ;  and 
with  respect  to  Abner's  assassination  he  manifests  the 
sentiments  which  become  a  man  of  God.  Neverthe- 
less chapter  iii.  89  exhibits  the  weakness  of  man  as 
the  instrument  of  God's  government.  David  appeals 
to  the  God  of  judgment. 

The  election  of  one  in  whom  God's  counsels  are  ac- 
complished must  necessarily  take  place  before  his  esta- 
blishment in  the  place  which  Jehovah  had  appointed. 
It  is  still  more  evident  that  this  election  precedes  the 
rest  of  the  chosen  one,  and  this  is  true  as  to  Christ 
Himself ;  only  He  came  down  into  it  in  grace. 

David,  the  king  of  Judah  in  Hebron  for  seven  years 
and  a  half,  becomes  the  king  of  all  Israel  upon  Ish- 
bosheth's death.  And  now  David  is  no  longer  the  man 
of  faith  who,  himself  the  head  of  the  armies  of  Israel 
walking  in  dependence  upon  God,  guided  the  enter- 
prises which  the  circumstances  of  Israel  required  of 
faith  ;  but  he  is  a  king  who  can  exalt  whom  he  will. 
The  man  very  soon  appears,  the  energetic  man,  but  not 
the  man  of  God.  "Whosoever  getteth  up  to  the 
gutter,"  the  king  said  should  be  rewarded ;  "he  shall 
be  chief  and  captain."  (Chap.  v.  8.)  Joab  goes  up,  and 
he  has  natural  claims  upon  David.* 

Nevertheless,  in  the  main  David  is  guided  by  God, 
and  he  takes  the  city  which  God  had  chosen  for  His 
throne  upon  the  earth.  It  was  on  this  account  he 
could  say  of  those  who  had  it  in  possession,  "  they  are 
hated  of  David's  soul ;"  for  in  fact  they  who  possess 

*  Joab  was  evidently  clever  and  enterprising:  but  it  is  re- 
markable that  he  is  not  named  among  those  who  distinguished 
themselves  by  brilHant  exploits,  when  individual  faith  had  to 
fight  for  God's  gloiy.  Wlien  it  is  a  question  of  being  chief  and 
captain,  a  place  which  David  had  held  till  then,  Joab  imme- 
diately comes  forward. 

IL-y. 


462  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  true  seat  of  God's  power,  the  place  which  He 
loves,  and  who,  trusting  to  their  natural  strength, 
resist  and  scoff  at  the  king  whom  God  has  chosen, 
are  more  hateful  than  any  people,  and  are  hated  by 
those  who  have  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  who  establishes 
His  throne  upon  the  earth. 

It  is  well  to  remark  here,  that  David  is  a  type  of 
Christ  in  rejection,  and  of  Christ  making  war  in 
power  for  the  establishment  of  the  millennium;  as 
Solomon  is  of  Christ  reigning  in  millennial  peace. 
David's  wars  with  the  Philistines  are  subsequent  to 
the  taking  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  the  entire  subjuga- 
tion of  Israel  to  David.  It  is  not  David,  neither  is  it 
Christ  reigning  over  the  earth,  who  takes  Jerusalem. 
Christ  will  descend  from  heaven  for  the  destruction  of 
Antichrist ;  but  He  destroys  the  enemies  of  Israel  by 
means  of  His  own  people,  after  having  established 
His  throne  in  Zion.  (Compare  Zech.  ix.  and  x.)  I 
do  not  enlarge  upon  this ;  I  merely  point  out  the 
grand  features  which  the  word  supplies  on  this 
subject. 

David  establishes  himself  in  Zion ;  he  is  acknow- 
ledged by  some  friendly  Gentiles ;  he  is  conscious  too 
that  it  was  God  who  made  him  king.  But  the  natural 
heart  soon  shews  itself.  Strengthened  in  his  kingdom 
by  Jehovah,  he  does  what  he  likes,  he  follows  his  own 
will.  (Compare  Deut.  xvii.  17.) 

Nevertheless  the  consolidation  of  his  power  does 
not  overthrow  the  hopes  of  his  former  enemies;*  it 
excites  their  jealousy.  They  neither  know  the  arm  of 
his  strength,  nor  the  purpose  of  Jehovah  who  exalted 
him.  They  rush  on  to  destruction.  And  now,  with 
the  danger  that  awakens  him,  we  find  again  the  man 

*  It  is  evident,  from  many  Old  Testament  prophecies,  that  it 
will  be  the  same  when  Christ  returns  to  the  earth.  And  yet 
at  that  period,  if  man  exalts  himself,  it  will  be  but  for  sudden 
destruction. 


II   SAMUEL.  408 

of  God,  the  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  inquiring  of  Je- 
hovah, and  obedient  to  His  word.  He  gains  signal 
victories  under  the  express  guidance  of  God,  whose 
strength  goes  before  him  and  puts  his  enemies  to  flight. 
Accordingly  he  gives  God  the  glory. 

Although  God  has  established  a  king  in  power,  who 
is  at  the  same  time  the  victorious  leader  of  His  people, 
yet  the  bonds  of  the  covenant  are  not  yet  restored. 
The  ark  is  still  in  the  place  where  individual  piety  had 
sheltered  it  when  God  was  obliged  to  be  the  guardian 
of  His  own  glory.  David  would  bring  it  to  the  place 
Adhere  his  throne  is  now  established.  He  desires  that 
the  Jehovah  of  hosts,  who  dwells  between  the  cheru- 
bim, should  be  honoured,  and  that  He  should  be  at 
the  same  time  the  glory  of  the  king  of  Israel's  throne. 
They  are  bound  together  in  his  mind.  Now  the  king- 
dom of  Melchisedec  was  not  yet  in  exercise,  not  even 
in  type.  For  Melchisedec  is  king  of  Salem  (this  is, 
king  of  peace).  God  was  still  maintaining  His  own 
glory.  He  could  bless  David,  the  elected  and  anointed 
king  ;  but  that  order  of  things  which  united  all  to- 
gether under  the  king's  authority  was  not  yet  in  force. 
It  was  to  be  set  up  later  under  Solomon. 

Israel  should  have  acknowledged  God's  order.  But 
even  while  seeking  to  honour  God,  David  thinks  of 
himself,  and  there  is  definitively  but  a  faulty  imita- 
tion of  that  which  the  Philistine  priests  had  done 
when  acted  upon  by  the  terror  of  Jehovah.  The 
result  was  unhappy.  What  man  had  done,  man  seeks 
to  sustain;  but  in  doing  this  he  touches  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  and  falls  before  His  majesty.  Jehovah  vindi- 
cates His  glory.  He  dwells  not  yet  in  the  midst  of  His 
people. 

At  once  pained  and  alarmed — pained  because  his 
heart  truly  sought  Jehovah's  glory,  although  he  did 
not  understand  its  height,  and  had  forgotten  the 
majesty   of    Him   whom   his   heart   desired   to   have 

VI. 


464  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

nearer  to  him — David  leaves  the  ark  in  the  house  of 
Obed-edom;  and  there  Jehovah  shews  that  it  is  His 
nature  to  bless,  whenever  His  majesty  is  not  so  for- 
gotten that  men  deal  with  Him  as  they  think  proper. 
If  we  detract  from  His  glory,  He  maintains  it ;  as  also 
He  manifests  what  He  is  by  the  blessing  He  bestows. 
The  heart  and  affections  of  David  are  restored;  he 
causes  the  ark  to  be  carried  from  Obed-edom's  house, 
and  places  it  in  the  tabernacle  he  had  pitched  for  it. 
Here  we  only  see  David,  and  we  see  him  clothed  with 
the  ephod.  He  is  the  head  of  his  people,  when  he  re- 
establishes the  relationship*  between  them  and  his 
God,  and  it  is  with  joy,  with  offerings,  and  songs  of 
triumph.  It  is  he  also  who  blesses  the  people,  being 
in  all  this  a  remarkable  type  of  Jesus,  and  of  that 
which  He  will  perform  in  Israel  in  the  last  days. 

All  this  however  was  not  building  the  temple,  which 
was  a  work  reserved  for  the  Prince  of  Peace.  It  was 
the  king,  by  faith  head  of  the  people,  acting  up  to  a 
certain  point  for  faith  as  priest,  on  the  principle  of 
Melchisedec,  although  the  order  and  the  blessing- 
belonging  to  that  title  were  not  yet  established.  The 
king  offers  sacrifices,  he  blesses  the  people.  As  their 
sole  head,  he  had  united  all  Israel,  he  had  beaten  his 
enemies. 

But  after  all  it  was  a  transitional  period.  The  ark 
of  the  covenant  abode  still  in  a  tent;  David  had 
triumphed,  but  the  peace  he  enjoyed  was  but  transi- 
tory. The  establishment  of  the  ark  on  the  hill  of 
Zion  formed  however  an  epoch ;  for  mount  Zion  was 
the  seat  of  royal  grace,  where  the  king  who  had 
suffered — and  as  having  suffered — had  established  his 

■^  I  say  "  relationship,"  because,  in  fact,  the  ark  of  the  cove- 
nant was  the  outward  link,  the  sign  of  the  formal  relationship 
between  God  and  Israel.  This  gives  much  importance  to  the 
circumstance  we  are  considering.  The  loss  of  the  ark  had  been, 
on  the  contrary,  the  Ichabod  of  the  people. 


II   SAMUEL. 

throne  in  power  and  grace  with  respect  to  Israel. 
This  is  the  key  to  Revelation  xiv. — a  book  in  which 
the  Lamb  is  always  (as  it  appears  to  me)  the  Messiah 
who  has  suffered,  but  who  is  seated  on  the  throne  of 
God  while  waiting  for  the  manifestation  of  His  glory ; 
seated  there  in  this  character,  although  as  such  He 
had  accomplished  things  far  otherwise  important  (for 
salvation  and  the  assembly  are  far  more  excellent  than 
the  kingdom) ;  but  it  is  evidently  the  kingdom  that 
we  have  to  do  with  here.  I  doubt  not  that  the 
hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  who  are  with  the 
Lamb  on  mount  Zion,  are  those  who  have  suffered  for 
Messiah's  sake  in  the  spirit  of  His  own  sufferings  in 
the  midst  of  Israel.  They  are  with  Him  in  His  kingly 
position  in  Zion,  and  follow  Him  whithersoever  He 
goeth.  They  are  morally  near  enough  to  heaven  to 
learn  its  song,  which  none  other  on  earth  can  learn. 
They  are  the  firstfruits  of  the  earth.  They  are  not  in 
heaven. 

This  explains  Hebrews  xii.  22  also;  in  which  we 
find  Zion  in  contrast  with  Sinai,  where  the  people  had 
been  placed  under  their  own  responsibility,  the  law 
having  the  sanction  which  the  terror  of  Jehovah's  pre- 
sence gave  it.  But  in  the  passage  referred  to,  Zion  is 
clearly  distinguished  from  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.* 

I  doubt  not  that  at  the  end  a  similar  relation  will 
exist  between  Christ  and  the  remnant  of  His  people 
who  have  waited  for  Him.  It  is  a  period  during 
which  Jesus  is  fully  triumphant,  and  acts  in  power 
and  as  a  king,  but  does  not  yet  rule  in  peace ;  and 
during  which  He  forms,  develops,  and  establishes,  the 

*  The  construction  of  the  sentence  (Heb.  xii.  22)  makes  it 
more  easy  to  distinguish  the  different  j^arts  of  which  it  is  com- 
posed. The  word  "  and  "  separates  them  :  Zion — the  city  of  the 
Uving  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem — the  angels,  the  general 
assembly — the  church  of  the  firstborn,  whose  names  are  written 
in  heaven — God  the  judge  of  all,  &c. 

VOL.  I.  VI.  HH 


4b6  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

relationship  of  His  people  with  Himself  on  the  earth 
in  His  triumphs  and  in  His  kingdom,  according  to  the 
rights  of  which  He  will  subject  His  enemies  to  Him- 
self. The  Psalms  also  open  this  part  of  Christ's  reign 
to  us  prophetically  and  in  type.  (See  Psalm  ex.)  After 
having  seated  David's  Lord  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  in  the  heavens,  the  Spirit  says,  "  Jehovah 
shall  send  the  rod  of  thy  strength  out  of  Zion ;  rule 
thou  in  the  midst  of  thine  enemies.  Thy  people  shall 
be  willing  in  the  day  of  thy  power,  in  the  beauties  of 
holiness  from  the  womb  of  the  morning  [the  morning 
of  His  glory,  the  dawn  of  day]  ;  thou  shalt  have  the 
dew  of  thy  youth  [of  the  young  men  who  follow 
Him]."  The  whole  of  this  psalm  unfolds  the  same 
idea,  the  warlike  kingdom  of  Christ,  having  Zion 
chosen  of  God  for  its  seat,  and  the  place  whence  His 
power  shall  go  forth  during  the  triumphant  wars  of 
the  Messiah. 

Let  us  pursue  this  latter  point. 

After  having  described  the  ruin  of  Israel,  Psalm 
Ixxviii.  shews  us  Jehovah  awaking  ;  but  it  sets  aside 
all  rights  of  inheritance,  and  testimony  to  His  former 
dealings  with  Israel ;  for  (1  Chron.  v.)  the  birthright 
was  Joseph's — "  He  chose  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the 
mount  Zion  which  he  loved.  He  chose  David  his 
servant,  and  took  him  from  the  sheepfolds,"  &c.  This 
psalm  mentions  indeed  His  sanctuary,  but  the  moun- 
tain on  which  it  was  built  is  never  represented  as  the 
object  of  God's  election.  This  psalm  reaches  farther 
than  our  present  history;  but  it  applies  election  to 
David  and  to  Zion. 

Psalm  cxxxii.  sets  before  us  precisely  the  sentiments 
with  which  the  Spirit  inspired  David  when  he  placed 
the  ark  upon  mount  Zion.  It  is  but  a  tabernacle,  but 
it  is  that  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob  on  the  earth. 
And  Jehovah  has  chosen  Zion.  There  the  horn  of 
David  shall  bud. 


II   SAMUEL.  467 

Observe  here,  that  Jehovah's  answer  goes  each  time 
beyond  the  request  and  desire  of  David — a  beautiful 
testimony  to  the  rich  goodness  of  God.  Jehovah's  rest 
is  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  He  will  enjoy  this  rest 
here  in  the  midst  of  His  own,  although  He  establishes 
His  glory  in  the  temple ;  and  it  is  there  that  every 
one  speaks  of  it.  In  the  wilderness  this  glory  had  not 
had  a  place  of  rest.  Israel  was  on  a  journey,  and 
Jehovah,  who  dwelt  among  the  people,  went  before 
them  to  search  out  a  resting-place  for  them.  (Num. 
X.  33.)  Neither  was  it  the  case  at  Shiloh,  when  His 
rest  among  them  depended  on  their  faithfulness.  "  He 
forsook  the  tabernacle  of  Shiloh,  and  delivered  his 
strength  into  the  enemy's  hand."  (Psalm  Ixxviii.  61, 
62.)  Election  and  grace  alone — by  means  of  "  one 
chosen  out  of  the  people  " — (Psalm  Ixxxix.  19) — esta- 
blish the  rest  of  God  among  His  people. 

There  is  yet  a  remark  to  make  on  the  subject  of 
Psalm  cxxxii.  We  have  seen  that  God  maintains  His 
majesty  in  His  government,  and  does  not  allow  any 
one  to  touch  His  ark.  He  gives  David  time  to  learn 
that  God  is  a  God  of  blessing  and  of  grace ;  but,  how- 
ever good  the  intentions  of  His  people  may  be,  it  is 
necessary  that  truths  that  what  He  is,  should  be 
clearly  demonstrated  in  His  public  dealings.  If  it 
were  otherwise,  if  His  government  were  not  stable, 
all  would  go  to  ruin;  the  levity  of  man  would  con- 
stantly lead  him  into  the  paths  of  self-will.  It  is 
true  that  God  is  full  of  patience,  and  that  after 
having  formed  the  relationship  between  His  people 
and  Himself,  He  continues  to  act  according  to  this 
relationship  as  long  as  possible,  although  forced  to 
chasten  at  the  same  time ;  but  judgment  comes  at 
length. 

In  the  case  we  are  considering,  God  had  broken  this 
relationship  as  originally  established  by  His  sitting 
between  the  cherubim ;  He  had  delivered  His  strength 

VL 


468  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

into  captivity,  His  glory  into  the  enemy's  hand.  David, 
as  victor,  restores  to  Him  His  place,  but  on  a  new  prin- 
ciple, that  of  grace  and  power.  Nevertheless,  in  ex- 
amining Psalm  cxxxii.,  we  discover  much  deeper 
sentiments,  a  heart  which  desires  to  have  God  glorified 
among  His  people  in  a  much  more  developed  and  much 
more  intimate  manner  than  was  indicated  by  that 
which  the  outward  pomp  and  train,  in  which  Israel 
could  take  part,  represented ;  sentiments  to  which  God 
responded  in  a  very  different  way  than  by  the  death 
of  Uzzah.  This  psalm,  it  is  true,  was  written  after 
the  touching  communications  which  are  revealed  in 
2  Samuel  vii.,  as  verses  11, 12  prove.  It  teaches  us  how- 
ever in  what  spirit  David  went  to  fetch  the  ark,  the 
ardent  desire  of  his  heart  to  find  a  habitation  for 
Jehovah,*  which,  as  we  have  seen,  Christ  will  accom- 
plish. Now  it  appears  to  me,  that  it  was  the  consci- 
ousness of  this  desire  that  led  to  David's  failure.  Alas 
for  man !  In  the  consciousness  of  it  he  seeks  to  put 
it  into  execution,  and  he  a  little  forgets  the  supreme 
glory  of  God,  the  sin  which  had  caused  God's  depar- 
ture from  His  people,  and  the  majesty  proper  to  Him. 
When  God  acts  according  to  the  requirements  of  His 
glory,  and  smites  the  man  who  lent  David  his  assist- 
ance in  accomplishing  the  desire  of  his  heart,  David  is 
displeased.  The  death  of  Uzzah  was  the  result  of 
David's  conduct,  and  he  is  angry  with  Jehovah  when 
this  result  takes  place.  This  was  truly  the  flesh.  God 
made  David  sensible  of  that  which  was  becoming  to 
the  service  of  the  God  of  Israel  (see  1  Chron.  xv.  12, 
13),f  and  He  restored  his  soul  by  shewing  him  that 
He  was  the  true  source  of  blessing,  and  that  the 
leaving  the  ark  aside  was  leaving  blessing  aside  too. 

*  We  may  compare  Exodus  xv.  2  in  the  English  Version, 
though  the  translation  is  questionable.    But  see  Ex.  xxix.  46. 

t  This  is  not  mentioned  in  Samuel ;  because  it  is  David  as 
the  type  of  the  Lord,  whom  the  Spirit  sets  before  us  here. 


II   SAMUEL.  469 

Moreover  the  position  of  David,  zealously  maintain- 
ing a  sense  of  Jehovah's  glory  in  the  midst  of  his  ex- 
altation, as  portrayed  in  the  psalm,  is  of  the  highest 
moral  beauty,  and  has  a  very  peculiar  aspect  in  re- 
ference to  the  divine  economies.  The  place  which 
Solomon  occupies  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple 
presents,  no  doubt,  a  more  striking  picture.  The 
Melchisedec  priesthood  is  there  in  its  simplicity  and 
its  fulness,  but  this  was  the  fruit  of  the  accomplish- 
ment of  blessing ;  and  the  moral  condition  of  those 
who  took  part  in  it  was  much  less  the  result  of  deep 
exercise  of  heart,  and  of  the  close  communion  with 
God  which  is  its  consequence ;  it  was,  therefore,  much 
less  connected  with  the  intelligent  expectation  of 
Christ.  Solomon  enjoyed  the  present  realisation  of 
the  glory  upon  which,  in  its  true  accomplishment  in 
Christ,  David  relied  by  faith  ;  Solomon  does  not  go  to 
a  higher  source  than  David's  faith,  and  the  responsi- 
bility of  the  people  which  flowed  from  it.  The  temple 
is  the  scene  of  this.  David  rises  higher.  He  lays 
hold  of  God's  purpose,  as  to  the  seat  of  Jehovah's 
kingdom ;  and  at  a  time  when  this  required  faith,  he 
becomes,  as  far  as  possible,  the  royal  priest,  and  conse- 
quently ascends  to  God  Himself,  who  is  the  source  of 
this  priesthood.  Taught  of  God,  he  has  understood 
the  election  of  Zion,  the  seat  of  Christ's  kingly  glory ; 
and  in  this  sense  his  moral  position,  when  dancing 
before  the  ark  as  an  obscure  man,  and  to  his  shame 
before  the  world,  appears  to  be  a  much  higher  one 
than  that  of  Solomon  upon  his  brazen  scattbld. 

The  ark  is  also  the  sign  of  the  re-establishment  of 
God's  power  in  the  midst  of  His  people  by  this  moral 
link ;  but  this  re-establishment  takes  place,  by  what 
was  in  type  the  victory  and  the  energy  of  Christ  who 
prevails  over  His  enemies,  as  will  be  the  case,  and  not 
merely  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  glory. 

In  all  this  part  of  the  history  David  (though  as  to 
VL 


470  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE    BIBLE. 

himself  with  individual  failure)  is  more  personally  a 
type  of  Christ.  It  is  while  difficulty  exists,  before  the 
reign  of  peace,  when  power  will  have  removed  every 
obstacle  to  the  full  enjoyment  of  it,  that  he  restores 
the  people's  connection  with  God,  and  blesses  and 
feeds  them  as  Melchisedec.  Blessing  flows  from  his 
person  in  the  presence  of  all  that  still  opposes  it,  and 
in  spite  of  every  difficulty.  The  position  which  David 
vstill  takes  is  that  of  servant,  the  immediate  servant  of 
God,  by  grace.  He  is  not  a  priest  upon  his  throne  ; 
but  the  king  makes  himself  a  priest,  and  this  while 
still  performing  service. 

Samuel,  as  given  to  Jehovah,  was  clothed  with  a 
linen  ephod.  It  was  the  priestly  garment,  and  he  was 
not  a  priest  after  the  order  of  Aaron.  He  served  in 
the  tabernacle,  by  grace  and  by  the  Spirit,  as  one 
chosen  and  set  apart  for  God.  He  was  in  his  right 
place,  but  on  God's  part  it  was  in  grace,  when  the 
gloomy  night  of  Ichabod  already  threatened  the 
people  with  its  darkness.  Here  it  is  the  king  who, 
taking  this  place,  puts  on  the  priestly  ephod ;  not  the 
garments  which  God  had  given  the  priests  for  glory 
and  for  beauty,  but  those  which  distinguished  the 
priest  considered  as  the  type  of  Christ  as  priest,* 
and  which  belonged  to  the  essence  of  his  functions  ;•(" 
and  in  fact  he  took  the  place  rather  of  a  Levite,  that 
is,  of  one  set  apart  to  serve  before  the  ark,  before 
Jehovah.     The  leading  idea  connected  with  the  ephod 

*  For  the  high  priest  (after  the  strange  fire  offered  on  the 
day  of  their  consecration)  it  seems,  never  wore  the  garments 
of  glory  and  beauty  in  the  most  holy  place.  He  only  went  in 
in  white  garments  on  the  day  of  atonement. 

t  This  priesthood  He  exercises  now.  The  glorious  garments 
He  will  come  out  in.  He  is  personally  already  crowned  with 
glory  and  honour,  but  the  all  things  are  not  put  under  Him; 
nor  has  He  taken  His  Melchisedec  throne,  which  indeed  will  be 
on  earth.  He  is  on  His  Father's  throne,  while  His  fellow  heirs 
are  being  gathered. 


II   SAMUEL.  471 

is  that  he  who  wears  it  presents  himself  to  God.  But, 
even  thouoli  making  request,  Melchisedec  rather  pre- 
sents him.self  to  the  people ;  although  he  is  before 
God  for  the  people,  as  king  and  priest  upon  his 
throne. 

Having  offered  his  sacrifices,  the  king  blesses  the 
people.  There  were  yet  the  Bhilistines,  the  Syrians, 
and  other  nations,  to  be  subdued ;  but  the  connection 
of  the  people  with  God  was  established  and  main- 
tained in  security  by  the  king  in  Zion,  although  the 
ark  on  which  this  connection  rested  was  still  within 
curtains.  Blessing  was  also  secured  through  the  king 
himself,  who  had  brought  the  sign  of  the  covenant 
and  the  elect  king  together  in  the  place  which  God 
had  chosen,  and  who  was  still  the  servant  for  this. 
Tlie  ephod  did  not  pertain  to  Melchisedec ;  but,  in 
honouring  Jehovah  who  had  preserved  the  people,  he 
who  wore  it  maintained  as  priest  the  blessing  of  the 
people  before  God.  Michal,  who  in  the  spirit  of  Saul 
her  father  only  dreamt  of  earthly  glory,  cannot  parti- 
cipate in  this.  Abasement  before  Jehovah  was  incom- 
prehensible to  her.  She  neither  understood  nor  tasted 
His  glory  or  the  joy  of  knowing  Him  as  the  heart's 
sole  master.  That  which  belongs  to  Saul  can  have  no 
share  in  David's  kingdom,  nor  can  it  suffer  with  a 
despised  and  rejected  one.  In  short,  we  have  a  king 
devoted  to  Jehovah  and  to  the  people,  who  secures 
and  communicates  blessing  to  the  latter;  and  not  as 
yet  a  king  characterised  above  all  by  the  enjoyment 
of  established  blessing,  which  is  Solomon's  condition. 

Now  the  first  of  these  two  conditions  appears  to  m© 
to  represent  Christ,  such  as  He  has  always  been  in 
principle  and  in  right,  and  especially  such  as  He  will 
be  after  the  destruction  of  Antichrist,  and  before  the 
destiuction  of  tliose  enemies  who  will  still  oppose 
themselves  to  the  establishment  of  His  kingdom  in 
peace.      His   people,  all  Israel,  will  be  united  under 

VI. 


472  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

Him.  The  rod  of  His  strength  will  go  out  of  Zion, 
and  He  will  rule  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies  (Psalm 
ex.) ;  but  it  will  not  yet  be  the  fulfilment  of  Psalm 
Ixxii.  or  of  Zechariah  vi.  12,  13.  Compare  also  Psalm 
ii.,  in  which  Christ  is  looked  upon  as  the  Son  of  God 
born  upon  earth,  and  in  which  His  universal  rights  to 
the  possession  of  the  egirth,  which  flow  from  this,  are 
set  forth,  acknowledged  by  God  and  proclaimed  to  the 
kings  of  the  earth. 

In  Psalm  ex.  Christ  is  seated  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  waiting  until  His  enemies  are  made  His  foot- 
stool. 

In  Psalm  viii.  He  is  the  Son  of  man,  and  all  things 
are  put  under  Him. 

Under  Solomon  all  Israel  rejoices  in  all  the  good 
things  which  Jehovah  had  bestowed  upon  Solomon,  as 
well  as  upon  David.  Here  David  in  his  own  person 
provides  that  which  is  necessary  to  feed  the  people, 
and  deals  to  every  one  a  "  good  piece."*  He  returns  to 
bless  his  house,  for  David  has  his  own  house  to  which 
he  returns  after  having  blessed  Israel ;  it  is  something 
nearer  to  him  than  Israel.  Miehal,  we  have  seen, 
could  not  really  belong  to  it.      David  finds  it  a  joyful 

*  Psalm  ii.  shews  us  the  King  set  upon  the  holy  hill  of  Zion, 
the  Son  of  God  begotten  in  time  (a  distinct  thing  from  His  rela- 
tionship as  Son,  one  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was — a 
doctrine  taught  in  John  i.,  Hebrews  i.,  Colossians  i.,  and  else- 
where— yet  I  do  not  believe  one  could  be  without  the  other, 
though  the  "therefore"  of  Luke  i.  35  shews  it  to  be  a  distinct 
thing,  and  His  Sonship  in  this  place  is  also  a  truth  of  the 
greatest  importance),  owned  as  such  by  Jehovah,  and  the  kings 
of  the  earth  charged  to  submit  to  Him.  Psalm  viii.  speaks  of 
Him  as  the  Son  of  man  to  whom  all  things  are  subjected  ac- 
cording to  the  eternal  purposes  of  God.  In  Psalm  ex.  He  who 
had  been  despised  and  rejected,  being  seated  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,  is  to  rule  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies. 

Compare  Psalms  xxiv.,  cii.  In  the  first,  He  is  acknowledged 
as  Jehovah  of  hosts,  the  King  of  glory,  after  having  conquered 
His  enemies :  in  the  second,  as  the  Creator  Himself. 


II   SAMUEL.  473 

thing  to  humble  himself  before  Jehovah,  and  he  re- 
proves her.  How  overwhelming  was  the  reply  he 
made  her ! 

Ardently  desiring  Jehovah's  glory,  David  is  troubled 
at  dwelling  in  a  house  of  cedar,  while  Jehovah  dwelt 
within  curtains.  He  wishes  to  build  Him  a  house — a 
good  desire,  yet  one  which  God  could  not  grant.  The 
work  of  building  the  temple  belonged  to  the  Prince  of 
Peace.  David  represented  Christ  as  suffering  and  con- 
quering, and,  consequently,  not  as  enjoying  the  earthly 
kingdom  by  undisputed  right,  and  opening  to  all 
nations  the  gates  of  the  temple  in  which  the  Lord  of 
righteousness  was  to  be  worshipped.  He  returns  then, 
so  to  say,  into  his  own  personal  position,  in  which  God 
blessed  him  in  a  very  peculiar  manner.  David  was 
more  than  a  type ;  he  was  truly  the  stock  of  that 
family  from  which  Christ  Himself  should  spring. 
This  is  taught  in  the  beautiful  seventh  chapter.  An 
elect  vessel  to  maintain  the  cause  of  Jehovah's  people 
in  suffering,  and  to  re-establish  among  them  the  glory 
of  the  Lord's  name  (vers.  8,  9),  Jehovah  had  been  with 
him ;  and  David,  most  especially  honoured  in  this,  was 
also  in  his  faithfulness  a  vessel  of  promise  of  the 
future  peace  and  prosperity  destined  for  Israel  in  the 
counsels  of  God.  But  these  were  yet  future  things. 
The  perpetuity  of  the  kingdom  over  Israel  is  esta- 
blished in  his  family,  which  God  will  chasten  if  need- 
ful, but  not  cut  off.  His  son  shall  build  the  house. 
Already,  at  the  time  of  the  exodus,  the  man  in  whom 
was  the  Spirit,  desired  tc  prepare  a  habitation  for 
Jehovah.  (Ex.  xv.  2.)*  But  the  Messiah  was  needed 
for  this.  Till  then  Israel  was  a  wanderer,  and  God 
with  him. 

The  following  are  the  chief  subjects  of  the  revela- 

*  The  translation  is  very  questionable ;  it  was  however  God's 
thought.     See  Exodus  xxix.  46. 

VIL 


474  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

tion  made  to  David,  and  of  his  reply : — the  sovereign 
call  of  God ;  that  which  God  had  done  for  Da\'id ;  the 
certainty  of  future  rest  for  Israel ;  the  establishment, 
on  God's  part,  of  David's  house ;  his  son  shall  be  the 
Son  of  God,  shall  build  the  house;  the  throne  of  his 
Son  shall  be  established  for  ever. 

David's  first  thought — and  it  is  always  so  when  the 
Spirit  of  God  works — was  not  to  rejoice,  but  to  bless 
God.  These  are  the  striking  features  of  the  prayer  of 
thankfulness  :  he  is  in  peace  and  freedom  before  God ; 
he  goes  in  and  sits  before  Him  ;  he  acknowledges  at 
the  same  time  his  own  nothingness,  and  how  unworthy 
he  was  of  all  that  God  had  already  done.  Yet  this 
was  but  a  small  thing  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  had 
declared  to  him  the  future  glories  of  his  house.  It 
was  God,  and  not  the  manner  of  man.  What  could  he 
say  more  ?  God  knew  him ;  there  lay  his  coiiiidence 
and  his  joy.  He  acknowledged  that  God  did  it  in 
truth  and  "  of  his  own  heart."  It  was  grace  to  make 
His  servant  know  it.  The  effect  of  all  this  was  to 
make  David  recognise  the  excellency  of  Jehovah. 
There  was  none  beside  Him,  and  none  upon  the  earth 
therefore  to  be  compared  to  His  elect  people,  whom  He 
went  to  redeem  for  a  people  to  Himself,  and  whom  He 
had  now  confirmed  to  Himself,  that  Israel  might  be 
His  people  for  ever,  and  that  He  Himself  might  be 
their  God.  The  highest  kind  of  prayer  is  that  which 
does  not  spring  from  a  sense  of  need,  but  from  the 
desires  and  the  intelligence  which  the  revelation  of 
God's  purposes  produces — purposes  which  He  will 
fulfil  in  love  to  His  people  and  for  the  glory  of  Christ. 
Finally  he  asks  that  his  house  may  be  the  place  of 
God's  own  blessing.  In  a  word,  he  desires  that  the 
purposes  of  God,  which  had  awakened  all  his  affec- 
tions, may  be  accomplished  by  Jehovah  Himself,  who 
had  revealed  them  unto  His  servant. 

Being  entirely  delivered  from  the  insurrections  of 


II   SAMUEL.  475 

the  people,*  David  exercises  his  power  in  bringing  his 
enemies  into  subjection.  The  Philistines,  who  dwelt 
within  the  land  of  Israel,  are  subjugated.  Metheg- 
ammcth  signifies  "bridle  of  the  capital."  David  held 
the  key  of  power.  Moab  is  subdued  and  made  tribu- 
tary. At  length  the  outward  enemies,  the  Syrians, 
also,  are  either  conquered  or  submit  themselves.  The 
Edomites  become  David's  servants,  and  Jehovah  pre- 
serves David  whithersoever  he  goes. 

In  all  this  we  have  again  the  man  of  faith  and  the 
type  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  King  in  Zion,  who  is  victorious 
over  the  enemies  of  Israel,  and  puts  Israel  in  posses- 
sion of  the  promised  land  (Gen.  xv.  18)  as  far  as  the 
Euphrates.  He  dedicates  the  spoil  to  Jehovah.  He 
reigns  over  all  Israel,  and  executes  judgment  and 
justice  unto  all  his  people.  The  companions  of  his 
pilgrimage  participate  in  the  glory  of  his  kingdom — a 
type,  in  all  this,  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 

He  acts  in  grace  also  towards  the  humble  remnant 
of  Saul's  house  ;  and  if  Mephibosheth  is  not  associated 
with  the  glory  of  his  kingdom,  he  enjoys  the  privilege 
of  the  king's  table,  who  shews  hiin  kindness  ;  although 
Mephibosheth  belongs  to  the  family  of  his  enemy  and 
persecutor,  but  at  the  same  time  to  that  little  rem- 
nant which  favoured  the  king  whom  God  had  chosen 
(being  itself,  on  that  account,  hated  by  those  in 
power).  He  enjoys  also  the  whole  of  his  family's 
inheritance. 

This  touching  and  beautiful  testimony  to  David's 
kindness  and  faithfulness  through  grace,  appears  to 
me  to  give  us  a  picture  of  Christ's  relations  to  the 
remnant  of  Israel,  or  at  least  that  of  the  spirit  of 
these  relations.  It  was  "  the  kindness  of  God  "  which 
sought  out  the  family  of  Saul,  the  enemy  of  David's 

*  Compare  Psalm  xviii.  43,  where  the  righteous  suffering 
Christ  (under  the  figure  of  David)  is  the  source  of  all  blessings 
for  Israel  from  Egypt  to  the  end. 

VIII.,  IX. 


476  THE    BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

crown — and  which  rests  upon  the  representative  of 
Jonathan,  whose  history  we  have  read,  and  who  typi- 
fies those  that  will  attach  themselves  to  Christ  in 
prospect  of  the  kingdom,  to  which  their  thoughts  are 
limited.  The  remnant  enjoys  the  eifect  of  the  esta- 
blishment of  the  kingdom,  but  does  not  rank  among 
those  that  surround  the  throne  after  having  shared 
the  sufferings  of  the  despised  and  rejected  king. 

Chapter  x.,  the  details  of  which  we  pass  over,  sets 
before  us  the  general  principle  of  the  king's  rule  in 
Zion.  When  grace  is  despised  by  those  to  whom  it  is 
manifested,  the  king's  judgment  follows.  Opposition 
and  rebellion  only  serve  to  establish  his  authority  in 
the  very  place  where  resistance  is  attempted.  It  is  use- 
less to  strive  against  the  power  of  God's  chosen  king. 

The  history  of  David  and  the  wife  of  Uriah  follows. 
David  is  no  longer  acting  by  faith  in  God's  service. 
When  the  time  comes  at  which  kings  go  forth  to  war, 
he  stays  at  home  at  his  ease,  and  sends  others  in  his 
place  to  fight  Jehovah's  battles.  At  ease  and  in  indo- 
lence he  falls  readily  into  sin,  as  was  the  case  when 
he  sought  for  rest  among  the  Philistines.  He  was  no 
longer  standing  by  faith. 

The  nearer  David  was  to  God,  the  more  ineffectual 
were  his  attempts  to  conceal  his  sin.  Given  up  to 
himself  for  the  time  in  chastisement,  he  adds  a  second 
transgression  to  the  first ;  he  completes  it,  and  enjoys 
its  fruit,  now  that  the  removal  of  every  obstacle  gives 
a  semblance  of  lawfulness  to  his  course.  What  a  sad 
history  !  What  unworthiness !  He  forgets  his  posi- 
tion as  king,  and  a  king  from  God.  Was  it  reigning 
in  righteousness  to  take  advantage  of  his  royal  power 
to  oppress  Uriah  ?  He  makes  himself  a  slave  to  the 
wretched  Joab  by  rendering  him  accessory  to  his 
crime.  How  degrading !  How  much  happier  was 
he,  when,  though  hunted  like  a  partridge  in  the 
mountains,  lie  had  a  living   faith   and  a  good  con- 


II  SAMUEL.  477 

science  !  But  who  can  shun  the  eye  of  God  ?  Ac- 
cordingly God,  who  knows  and  loves  him,  fails  not  to 
visit  his  sin. 

This  was  a  very  great  sin:  David  committed  it  in 
secret ;  God  punishes  it  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel.  If 
David  knew  not  how  to  glorify  God,  nor — while  reign- 
ing in  His  name — to  maintain  a  true  testimony  as  to 
the  nature  of  God's  kingdom ;  if  he  had  on  the  con- 
trary falsified  its  character,  God  Himself  will  know 
how,  in  the  sight  of  all  men,  to  retrace  its  features 
through  the  chastisement  He  will  send  upon  the  man 
who  has  thus  dishonoured  Him,  and  who  had  taken 
away  the  only  witness  to  His  government  which  God 
had  set  up  before  men. 

This  history  shews  us  how  far  sin  can  blind  the 
heart,  even  while  the  moral  judgment  continues 
sound ;  it  shews  also  the  power  of  the  faithful  word 
of  God.  God  manifests  at  the  same  time  the  sover- 
eignty of  His  grace ;  for  although  He  chastened  David 
by  the  child's  death,  it  is  another  son  of  Bathsheba 
who  was  the  elect  of  God,  who  became  king  and  the 
head  of  the  royal  family,  the  man  of  peace  and  bless- 
ing, the  beloved  of  Jehovah.  David  submits  himself 
under  the  hand  of  God;  his  heart  bows  under  it  in 
the  depth  of  its  affections.  He  understands  it  better 
than  his  servants  do,  although  more  guilty  than  they. 
He  acts  becomingly  according  to  spiritual  intelligence. 
There  was  confidence  in  God  and  intimacy  with  Him  ; 
and  therefore  David  can  lay  open  the  tenderest  part  of 
his  heart  to  God,  the  part  in  which  God  had  wounded 
him ;  but  when  the  will  of  God  is  manifest,  he  submits 
entirely. 

We  see  here  the  evident  work  of  the  Spirit.  It 
is  the  same  Spirit  who  wrought  in  Jesus  at  Geth- 
semane,  although  both  the  occasion  and  the  extent  of 
the  suffering  were  not  only  dirterent,  but  far  other- 
wise important ;  but  the  heart  is  opened  to  God  com- 
X.-XII. 


478  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

pletely  and  the  submission  complete  when  God's  will 
is  known. 

The  sin  of  David  has  been  extremely  great ;  but  we 
can  plainly  see  in  him  the  precious  work  of  the  Spirit. 
Confounded  by  the  simple  faithfulness  of  Uriah,  he 
cannot  escape  the  hand  of  God !  David  is  pardoned, 
for  he  confesses  his  sin;  but  as  to  His  government, 
God  shews  Himself  to  be  inflexible,  and  while  sparing 
the  king — for  he  deserved  death — He  announces  to 
him  that  the  sword  shall  never  depart  out  of  his  house. 
We  have  seen  a  similar  case  in  Jacob's  unfaithfulness. 
David's  punishment  also  answers  to  his  sins  (compare 
vers.  10,  12  with  the  history  of  Absalom).  As  to 
David's  affections,  the  chastisement  was  in  the  death 
of  his  child,  a  chastisement  which  he  deeply  felt ;  and 
the  public  government  of  God  was  manifested  in  that 
which  was  done,  according  to  His  word,  before  all 
Israel  and  before  the  sun. 

It  is  possible  that  the  children  of  Amnion  deserved 
severe  judgment,  and  that  this  period  was  the  time  of 
their  judgment ;  they  were  the  insolent  enemies  of  the 
king  whom  God  had  set  up,  and  who  had  given  proof 
of  his  kind  feeling  towards  them.  But  as  to  his 
personal  condition,  I  know  not  whether  David  would 
have  treated  his  enemies  in  this  manner  when  he  was 
walking  in  the  narrow  path  of  faith.  As  a  type,  this 
judgment  brings  to  mind  the  righteous  judgment  of 
the  Messiah,  and  the  dieadful  consequences  of  having 
despised  and  insulted  Him  even  in  His  glory.  We 
learn  from  it  also,  that  when  a  people  are  ripe  for 
judgment,  God  will  bring  it  upon  them,  even  although 
others  may  seek  to  act  in  grace. 

When  David  had  shewn  that  he  had  forgotten  God, 
and  had  failed  in  his  entire  dependence  upon  Him,  the 
evils  in  his  house  soon  broke  out.  He  had  added  to  the 
number  of  his  wives.  The  root  of  bitterness  buds  and 
brings  forth  bitter  fruits. 


II   SAMUEL.  479 

Although  in  the  main  David's  heart  was  upright 
before  God  and  deeply  acknowledged  Him,  yet,  when 
once  out  of  that  path  of  humble  dependence  which  is 
produced  by  faith  and  the  sense  of  God's  presence,  he 
embittered  the  remainder  of  his  days  through  follow- 
ing his  own  will  in  the  midst  of  his  blessings.  There 
is  sin  in  his  house,  wrath  on  account  of  the  sin,  vacilla- 
tion through  partiality  for  Absalom.  Joab  appears  on 
the  scene,  as  is  the  case  every  time  that  these  matters 
of  intrigue  and  wickedness  recur  in  the  history.  This 
is  all  that  need  be  said  of  the  sorrowful  story  of 
Amnon  and  Absalom. 

David's  partiality  for  Absalom  had  yet  other  and 
more  painful  results,  and  heavy  chastisements.  It  is 
painful  to  see  the  conqueror  of  Goliath  driven  from 
his  home  and  his  throne  by  his  beloved  son,  and  that 
under  God's  hand.  For  if  God  had  not  allowed  it, 
who  could  have  driven  God's  elect  from  the  royal  seat 
in  which  Jehovah  had  placed  him  ?  The  sword  was  in 
liis  house ;  the  word  of  God,  sharper  than  a  two-edged 
sword.  How  just  is  Jehovah !  But  whom  He  loves 
He  chastens.  Accordingly,  whilst  all  this  is  a  mani- 
festation of  the  righteous  rule  of  God,  it  is  to  David 
an  occasion  of  deep  heart-exercise,  and  of  a  more  real 
and  more  intimate  knowledge  of  God;  for  his  heart 
was  truly  and  eternally  bound  to  God,  so  that  all  his 
sorrows  bore  fruit,  although  they  were  occasioned  by 
his  faults. 

In  this  respect  also,  although  the  cause  of  his  grief 
was  so  widely  different  from  that  of  the  Lord's  grief, 
he  becomes  the  type  of  Christ  in  suffering,  and  the 
vessel  of  the  expression  of  His  sympathy  for  His 
people.  This  is  even  so  much  more  the  case,  because 
with  a  faithful  heart,  and  in  a  certain  sense  witli  per- 
fect integrity  towards  God,  the  king's  faults  and  trans- 
gressions gave  rise  to  those  confessions  and  to  that 
humiliation  which  the  Spirit  of  Christ  will  produce  in 
xiii.-xvin. 


4^0 


THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 


the  remnant  of  Israel;  so  that  on  the  one  hand  he 
speaks  of  his  integrity,  while  on  the  other  he  confesses 
his  faults.  Now  that  is  what  Christ  causes  His  people 
to  say,  and  what  He  says  for  them. 

Nevertheless  we  must  remember  it  is  not  David 
himself,  as  a  godly  man,  who  speaks  in  the  Psalms ;  it 
is  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  he  utters  them; 
and  it  is  a  very  precious  thing  for  us  that,  in  cir- 
cumstances where  faith  might  fail  and  the  heart  be 
discouraged,  the  word  supplies  us  with  language 
suitable  to  faith,  and  to  faith  in  one  who  has  per- 
haps been  unfaithful :  a  precious  testimony  that,  even 
in  this  condition,  God  does  not  cast  us  off,  and  that 
Christ  sympathises  with  us,  since  He  furnishes  us 
with  expressions  and  sentiments  adapted  to  such  a 
condition. 

The  Psalms  supply  this,  and  in  especial  suitability 
to  the  remnant  of  Israel  in  the  last  days.  They  are 
characterised  by  integrity  of  heart  and  confession  of 
sin.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  gives  the  sentiments,  and 
assures  of  His  sympathy.  Psalm  xvi.  gives  us  very 
strikingly  this  position  of  Christ.  His  goodness  ex- 
tends not  to  God.  It  is  not  His  divine  place,  "  equal 
with  God,"  which  He  is  taking.  He  calls  Jehovah  His 
Lord ;  but  of  the  saints  on  earth  He  says,  "  in  whom  is 
all  my  delight."  By  His  baptism,  which  was  the  ex- 
pression of  this.  He  connected  Himself,  not  with  Israel 
in  their  sin,  but  with  the  first  movement  of  the  Spirit 
responding  in  the  remnant  to  the  condemnation  of  the 
people  as  such.  This  is  the  principle  of  the  Psalms — 
the  upright  and  faithful  man  in  the  midst  of  the  per- 
verse nation,  the  object  of  the  counsels  and  purposes 
of  God.  The  book  opens  with  this  distinction  drawn 
by  God ;  it  next  presents  us  with  the  King  in  Zion  ac- 
cording to  the  decree  of  God,  rejected  by  the  nation 
and  hated  by  the  heathen  who  oppress  the  people. 
All  this  develops  itself  through  a  variety  of  circum- 


II  SMIUEL.  481 

stances,  and  all  the  relationships  of  the  remnant  are 
there  depicted,  as  well  as  all  affections  of  the  heart. 
All  connected  with  it  is  gone  over  by  the  hand  and  the 
pen  of  God,  and  according  to  the  Spirit  and  the  sym- 
pathies of  Christ. 

Chapter  xx.  ends  this  part  of  David's  history,  and 
his  history  in  general.  He  is  re-established  on  his 
throne,  and  has  overcome  the  efforts  of  his  enemies 
and  the  rebellion  of  his  own  people.  The  order  of  his 
court  and  oflScers  is  restored  in  peace.  Sundry  details 
are  added  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

And,  first  of  all,  the  government  of  God,  who  for- 
gets nothing,  and  with  whom  everything  has  its 
results,  is  recalled  to  David  and  to  his  people  by 
means  of  the  Gibeonites.  It  is  no  longer  necessary 
for  the  establishment  of  God's  economy  that  David 
should  pursue  the  house  of  Saul.  There  is  a  righteous 
judgment,  a  moral  principle  of  God,  which  is  above  all 
economies. 

Saul  in  his  formal  and  fleshly  zeal,  although  it  was 
for  God,  had  not  acted  in  the  fear  of  God.  It  is  this 
which  especially  distinguishes  a  godly  zeal  from  a  zeal 
for  the  outward  interests  of  His  kingdom.  Saul  for- 
gets the  oaths  which  Israel  made  to  the  Gibeonites. 
God  remembers  it,  and  does  not  despise  the  poor 
Gibeonites.  David  also  recognises  its  obligation; 
after  having  inquired  of  Jehovah  on  account  of  the 
thrice  repeated  chastening  upon  Israel,  he  submits  to 
the  demand  of  the  Gibeonites.*  The  whole  house  of 
Saul  perishes,  except  the  little  remnant  attached  to 
David.      With  respect  to  the  latter,  the  circumstances 

*  However,  in  yielding  to  the  Gibeonites,  David  did  not  con- 
sult Jehovah  as  to  what  he  should  do.  We  see  the  government 
of  God  as  to  Saul's  house,  and  Saul's  act  towards  those  he  had 
wronged ;  but  though  in  its  general  character  righteous  and 
upright,  had  he  consulted  Jehovah,  some  happier  way  of  being 
righteous  might  have  been  found. 

VOT,.  T.  XX.  II 


482  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

of  Rizpah's  touching  and  faithful  affection  awaken  in 
David's  heart  the  remembrance  of  brighter  moments 
in  poor  Saul's  career,  and  he  pays  the  last  honours  to 
his  memory.  After  this  God  was  entreated  for  the 
land. 

If  with  a  sling  and  a  stone  faith  can  overthrow  its 
enemies,  the  flesh  is  at  fault  before  their  attacks. 
David,  when  king,  as  we  have  clearly  seen,  gave  him- 
self up  more  to  his  lusts  and  to  his  own  will  than 
David  suffering. 

Nevertheless  it  is  beautiful  to  see  that,  where  faith 
has  acted  amid  the  people's  ruin,  it  has  stirred  up 
many  other  instruments,  who — animated  and  en- 
couraged by  its  success — act  fearlessly  with  the  same 
power  as  that  which  wrought  the  first  deliverance.  It 
is  well  however  to  observe,  that  to  conquer  valiant 
foes,  when  all  Israel  was  flushed  with  success  and 
strengthened  the  hands  of  the  mighty  men,  is  a  very 
different  thing  from  the  faith  which  reckons  upon 
God,  when  strength  and  success  are  on  the  enemy's 
side  and  the  people  are  fleeing  before  him.  The  latter 
was  David's  case  with  Goliath ;  the  former,  that  of  the 
men  who  slew  the  other  giants. 

The  songs  that  follow  contain  instruction  of  deep 
interest.  In  chapter  xxii.  David  comes  forth  from  his 
sufferings  and  his  affliction  with  a  song  of  triumph 
and  of  praise.  He  had  learnt  what  God  was  in  his 
sufferings.  He  celebrates  all  that  God  had  been  for 
him,  all  that  he  had  found  Him  to  be  in  his  necessities 
and  dangers,  the  effect  of  God's  power  on  his  behalf, 
and  the  glorious  and  blessed  result  of  this  power.  All 
this  is  given  in  a  song,  the  expression  of  which  will 
only  be  fully  accomplished  in  Christ  Himself. 

In  chapter  xxiii.  he  celebrates  his  prosperity.  But 
what  a  difference !  He  declares,  it  is  true,  what  Christ 
will  be  when  He  reigns ;  and  he  does  so  in  language  of 
most  attractive  beauty,  a  beauty  which  ravishes  the 


II  SAMUEL.  483 

mind  and  transports  it  into  the  reign  of  Christ,  that 
blessed  "  world  to  come  of  which  we  speak."  But  then 
this  sorrowful  thought  presents  itself — "my  house  is 
not  so  with  God." 

In  the  first  of  these  two  songs  there  is  something 
more  of  profound  interest.     David  speaks  as  a  pro- 

Ehet ;  and,  as  he  had  done  in  so  many  other  instances, 
e  personifies  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Lord  Jesus  in  con- 
nection with  Israel.  This  song  then  sets  before  us  the 
sufierings  of  Christ  (as  the  representative  of  Israel, 
and  often  speaking  of  the  nation  as  though  it  were 
Himself),  sufierings  which  obtained  also  other  deliver- 
ance of  far  surpassing  excellence,  as  the  cause  of  the 
deliverance  out  of  Egypt  and  of  all  Israel's  blessings, 
until  the  establishment  of  Messiah's  glory  in  the  age  to 
come.  He  surrounds  the  agony  of  Christ  with  the 
whole  history  of  Israel  in  salvation  and  in  blessing, 
from  Pithom  and  Rameses  unto  the  destruction  of  the 
violent  man  at  the  end  of  days,  and  the  submission  of 
the  nations  to  Messiah's  sceptre ;  and  he  gives  a  voice 
to  their  distress  in  Egypt. 

In  chapter  xxiii.  the  covenant  is,  "  all  his  salvation 
and  all  his  desire,"  although  at  that  time  "  he  made  it 
not  to  grow."  Judgment  must  be  executed  ere  the 
full  blessing  he  expected  could  be  brought  in ;  and 
these  thorns  of  iniquity  must  be  "utterly  burned  in 
the  same  place."  This  will  take  place  at  the  coming  of 
Christ. 

If  God  honours  and  glorifies  David,  He  does  not 
forget  those  whom  the  energy  of  David's  faith  had 
brought  aroimd  him.  The  Holy  Ghost  enumerates 
the  mighty  men  of  David,  and  recounts  their  deeds 
of  valour  and  devotedness — deeds  which  obtain  a 
name  and  a  place  for  them  when  God  writes  up 
the  people.  (Psalm  Ixxxvii.)  Joab  is  not  among 
them. 

Chapter  xxiv.  leads  us  into  a  subject  which   re- 

XXI.-XXIV. 


484  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

quires  particular  notice.  The  wrath  of  God  is  kindled 
again  against  Israel.  It  is  not  in  the  mind  of  the 
Spirit  to  inform  us  on  what  occasion  this  took 
place,  but  to  lay  open  God's  dealings  both  in  govern- 
ment and  grace.  In  the  preceding  chapter  God 
"  writeth  up "  the  mighty  men  who  prefigure  the 
companions  of  the  true  David  in  glory.  Here  it  is 
His  grace  in  staying  His  anger  and  bringing  in  His 
blessing. 

God  punishes  the  pride  and  rebellion  of  Israel  by 
leaving  them  to  the  consequences  of  the  impulse  of 
David's  natural  heart.  Joab's  habitual  cleverness  and 
good  sense  made  him  perceive  its  folly.  The  flesh, 
when  it  is  in  another,  is  easily  discerned.  Joab  felt 
that  it  was  not  worth  while  to  despise  God  when 
nothing  was  to  be  gained  by  it ;  for  in  this  way  the 
flesh  fears  God.  But  the  thing  was  of  Jehovah,  and 
Satan  gains  his  point. 

When  in  truth  can  man's  good  sense  avail  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  will  of  God  in  chastening,  and  to  Satan's 
malice  ?  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  be  given  up  to  his 
power.  Nine  months  of  sin  on  David's  part,  and  of 
patience  on  God's  part,  shew  us  the  fatal  influence  of 
the  enemy;  but  the  sin  accomplished  only  awakens 
David's  conscience.  The  enjoyment  of  the  fruit  of 
our  sin  undeceives  us.  It  is  the  pursuit  of  it  which 
allures  our  hearts.  When  Satan  has  succeeded  in 
inducing  the  children  of  God  to  commit  the  evil  to 
which  he  tempts  them,  he  cares  no  longer  to  conceal 
from  them  its  emptiness  and  folly.  Happily,  where 
there  is  life,  conscience  resumes  its  power  in  such  a 
case. 

Nevertheless  chastening  must  follow  sin  which  has 
been  carried  out  in  spite  of  so  much  long-suffering. 
But  God,  who  reaches  His  servant's  conscience,  brings 
into  play  the  sincere  affections  of  his  heart,  in  order 
to  bring  about  His  own  sovereign  purpose.    David  ex- 


II  SAMUEL.  485 

hibits  that  never-failing  token  of  a  heart  that  knows 
the  Lord — confidence  in  God  above  all,  and  at  what- 
ever cost.  "  Let  me  fall  into  the  hand  of  Jehovah." 
Sweet  and  precious  thought  of  what  the  Lord  is  unto 
His  people !  and  well  He  knows  how  to  fill  the  heart 
with  the  certainty  that  He  deserves  its  confidence. 
Even  while  chastening,  God  is  more  loving,  more 
faithful,  more  worthy  of  confidence  than  any  other. 
The  plague  breaks  out ;  but  in  the  midst  of  judgment 
Jehovah  remembers  mercy,  and  commands  the  destroy- 
ing angel,  when  he  had  reached  Jerusalem,  to  stay  his 
hand.  It  is  Jerusalem,  the  city  of  His  affections,  that 
attracts  His  attention.  God  chooses  it  for  the  place 
where  His  altar  shall  be  built,  and  His  grace  shewn 
forth — His  appointed  mercy-seat.  It  is  there  that  His 
wrath,  justly  kindled  against  Israel,  ceases ;  and  sin 
gives  occasion  to  the  establishment  of  the  place  and 
of  the  work  in  which  He  and  His  people  shall  meet, 
according  to  that  grace  which  has  put  away  the  sin. 
This  characterises  the  cross  of  Christ ;  this  will  stay 
the  plague  in  Israel,  and  introduce  the  reign  of  the 
true  Prince  of  Peace.  David  stands  in  the  breach  to 
deliver  the  people ;  and  at  his  own  cost  (ver.  17),  and, 
typically  according  to  the  counsels  of  God,  he  offers 
the  sacrifice  of  appeasement. 

The  thoughts  on  the  First  Book  of  Chronicles  will 
contain  a  fuller  examination  into  this  latter  part  of 
David's  history.  But  it  is  a  striking  close  to  this 
book,  after  all  the  governmental  history  of  David,  that 
it  closes  with  the  atoning  sacrifice  which  stops  the 
wrath  through  grace,  and  lays  the  foundation  of  the 
meeting-place  of  God  with  Israel  and  the  place  of  their 
worship. 


XXIV. 


I   KINGS. 

The  Books  of  Kings  shew  us  the  kingly  power  esta- 
blished in  all  its  glory ;  its  fall,  and  God's  testimony  in 
the  midst  of  the  ruin ;  with  details  concerning  Judah 
after  the  rejection  of  Israel,  until  Lo-ammi  had  been 
pronounced  upon  the  whole  nation.  In  a  word,  it  is 
the  trial  of  kingly  power  placed  in  the  hands  of  men, 
not  absolute,  as  in  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  kingly  power 
having  the  law  for  its  rule ;  as  there  had  been  a  trial 
of  the  people  set  in  relationship  with  God  by  means  of 
priesthood.     Out  of  Christ  nothing  stands. 

Although  the  kingly  power  had  been  placed  under 
the  responsibility  of  its  faithfulness  to  Jehovah ;  and 
although  it  had  to  be  smitten  and  punished  whenever 
it  failed  in  this,  it  was  yet  at  this  time  established  by 
the  counsels  and  the  will  of  God.  It  was  neither  a 
David,  type  of  Christ  in  his  patience,  who,  through 
difficulties,  obstacles,  and  sufferings,  made  himself  a 
way  to  the  throne ;  nor  a  king  who,  although  exalted 
to  the  throne  and  always  victorious,  had  to  be  a  man 
of  war  to  the  end  of  his  life ;  a  type  in  this,  I  doubt 
not,  of  what  Christ  will  be  in  the  midst  of  the  Jews 
at  His  return,  when  He  will  commence  the  coming  age 
by  subjecting  the  Gentiles  to  Himself,  having  been 
already  delivered  from  the  strivings  of  the  people. 
(Psalm  xviii.  43,  44.)  It  was  the  king  according  to 
the  promises  and  the  counsels  of  God,  the  king  esta- 
blished in  peace,  head  over  God's  people  to  rule  them 
in  righteousness,  son  of  David  according  to  the  pro- 
mise, and  type  of  that  true  Son  of  David,  who  shall  be 
a  priest  upon  His  throne,  who  shall  build  the  temple  of 


I  KINGS.  487 

Jehovah,  and  between  whom  and  Jehovah  there  shall 
be  the  counsel  of  peace.    (Zech.  vi.  13.) 

Let  us  examine  a  little  the  position  of  this  kingly 
power  according  to  the  word ;  for  responsibility  and 
election  met  in  it,  as  well  as  the  foreshadowing  of  the 
kingdom  of  Christ. 

In  chapter  vii.  of  the  Second  Book  of  Samuel  we 
have  seen  the  promise  of  a  son  whom  God  would  raise 
up  to  David,  and  who  should  reign  after  him,  to  whom 
God  would  be  a  father,  and  who  should  be  His  son, 
who  should  build  the  temple  of  Jehovah,  and  the 
throne  of  whose  kingdom  God  would  establish  for 
ever.  This  was  the  promise :  a  promise  which,  as 
David  himself  understood,  will  be  fully  accomplished 
only  in  the  Person  of  Christ.  (1  Chron.  xvii.  17.) 
Here  is  the  responsibility :  "  If  he  commit  iniquity, 
I  will  chasten  him  with  the  rod  of  men,  and  with 
the  stripes  of  the  children  of  men  "  (2  Sam.  vii.  14) ; 
which  David  well  miderstood  also.  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9.) 

The  book  which  we  are  considering  shews  us  that 
this  responsibility  was  fully  declared  to  Solomon. 
(Chap.  ix.  4-9.) 

Psalm  Ixxxix.  28-37  sets  the  two  things  also  before 
us  very  plainly,  namely,  the  certainty  of  God's 
counsels,  His  fixed  purpose,  and  the  exercise  of  His 
government  in  view  of  man's  responsibility. 

In  the  Book  of  Chronicles  we  have  only  what  re- 
lates to  the  promises  (1  Chron.  xvii.  11-14),  for 
reasons  of  which  we  will  speak  when  we  examine  that 
book. 

From  all  these  passages,  we  perceive  that  the  royaltj'' 
of  David's  family  was  established  according  to  the 
counsels  of  God  and  the  election  of  grace  ;  that  the 
perpetuity  of  this  royalty,  dependent  on  the  faithful- 
ness of  God,  was  consequently  infallible  ;  but  that  at 
the  same  time  the  family  of  David,  in  the  person  of 
Solomon,  was  in  fact  placed  upon  the  throne  at  that 


488  THE    BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

time  under  the  condition  of  obedience  and  faithfulness 
to  Jehovah.*  If  himself  or  his  posterity  were  to  fail 
in  faithfulness,  God's  judgment  would  be  executed; 
a  judgment  which  nevertheless  would  not  prevent 
God's  fulfilling  that  which  His  grace  had  assured  to 
David. 

The  Books  of  Kings  contain  the  history  of  the 
establishment  of  the  kingdom  in  Israel  under  this 
responsibility,  that  of  its  fall,  of  the  longsuffering  of 
God,  of  God's  testimony  amid  the  ruin  which  flowed 
from  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  first  king,  and  finally 
that  of  the  execution  of  the  judgment,  a  longer  delay 
of  which  would  but  have  falsified  God's  own  character, 
and  the  testimony  that  should  be  given  to  the  holiness 
of  that  character.  Such  delay  would  have  borne  a 
false  testimony  with  respect  to  that  which  God  is. 

We  shall  see  that,  after  Solomon's  reign,  the  greater 
part  of  the  narrative  refers  to  the  testimony  given  by 
the  prophets  Elijah  and  Elisha  in  the  midst  of  Israel, 
and  in  general  to  that  kingdom  which  had  entirely 
departed  from  God.  Little  is  said  of  Judah  before 
the  complete  ruin  of  Israel.  After  this  the  ruin  of 
Judah,  brought  on  by  the  iniquity  of  their  kings, 
is  not  long  delayed,  although  there  were  moments  of 
restoration. 

Before  David's  death  the  iniquity  and  ambition  of 

*  This  is  the  universal  order  of  God's  ways :  to  set  up  blessing 
first  under  the  responsibility  of  man,  to  be  accomplished  after- 
wards according  to  His  counsels  by  His  power  and  grace.  And 
it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  first  thing  man  has  always  done  is  to 
fail.  Thus  Adam,  thus  Noah,  thus  under  law,  thus  the  priest- 
hood, thus  as  here  the  royalty  under  law,  so  Nebuchadnezzar 
where  it  was  absolute,  so,  I  add,  the  church.  Already  in  the 
apostles'  days  all  sought  their  own,  not  the  things  of  Jesus 
Christ.  God  continues  His  own  deahngs  in  grace  in  spite  of 
this,  all  through,  besides  His  government  according  to  respon- 
eibility  in  the  public  body  in  this  world,  but  a  government  full 
of  patience  and  grace. 


I  KINGS.  489 

a  son  -whom  he  "  had  not  displeased  at  any  time  "  led 
to  the  solemn  proclamation  of  Solomon,  to  whom  God 
had  destined,  and  David  promised,  the  throne.  In  this 
circumstance  Joab,  long  restrained  by  prudence  in 
David's  lifetime,  shews  himself  as  he  is.  He  makes 
himself  necessary  to  Adonijah,  as  he  had  been  to 
David.  Abiathar,  long  under  the  sentence  of  God, 
takes  the  same  course.  Solomon,  the  elect  of  God, 
who  held  his  rights  from  God,  did  not  suit  them.  But 
after  all,  man's  prudence  fails  before  the  judgment  of 
God.  God  arranges  events  in  such  a  manner  as,  sooner 
or  later,  to  exhibit  the  most  prudent  in  their  true  light. 
Apparently  all  goes  on  well.  The  elder  and  beloved 
son  of  the  king,  the  captain  of  the  host  whom  David 
himself  could  not  resist,  and  the  priest  who  had  always 
accompanied  David,  are  there,  as  well  as  all  the  king's 
sons,  excepting  the  elect  of  God;  but  the  thought  of 
God,  or  His  will,  had  no  place  there.  The  companions 
of  David,  who  had  truly  served  with  him  for  the  glory 
of  God,  were  not  there  either. 

The  prophet  of  God,  the  witness  to  His  will,  is  em- 
ployed in  the  fulfilment  of  that  will,  and  Solomon  is 
proclaimed  king,  and  inaugurated  before  the  eyes  of 
David  himself. 

David's  faith,  if  it  had  not  energy  enough  to  give 
each  one  his  place  in  judgment,  had  at  least  full  intel- 
ligence of  what  was  proper.  He  communicates  his 
judgment  to  Solomon,  who  is  to  execute  it  according 
to  his  word.*      Solomon  at  first  shews  clemency  to 

*  It  is  to  David  also,  and  not  to  Solomon,  that  God  communi- 
cated the  plan  of  the  temple.  Solomon,  in  glory,  performs  these 
things,  and  possesses  the  requisite  discernment  for  executing 
justice  and  judgment ;  but  it  is  in  David  that  intelligence  dis- 
plays itself.  In  fact  if  Christ,  reigning  in  glory,  exercises  just 
judgment,  He  is  already  wisdom ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  in  His  con- 
nection with  the  assembly  in  the  present  time  of  grace,  that  the 
communication  of  the  purposes  of  God,  and  the  intelligence  of 
His  ways,  are  found. 

I. 


490  THE  BOOKS  OP  THE  BIBLE. 

Adonijah ;  but  the  still  restless  will  of  the  latter,  who 
desired  the  deceased  king's  wife,  awakens  the  righteous 
judgment  destined  for  those  who  had  failed  in  in- 
tegrity, and  who  had  risen  up  against  God's  anointed. 
It  is  the  first  character  attached  to  the  king  reigning 
in  glory.  He  executes  righteous  judgment  in  the  earth. 
There  is  no  escaping  the  vigilance  of  this  judgment. 
This  is  seen  in  the  case  of  Shimei. 

We  find  at  the  same  time  the  fulfilment  of  the  word 
given  to  Samuel,  namely,  the  humiliation  of  the  priest. 
Solomon,  Jehovah's  anointed,  sends  Abiathar  away, 
and  puts  Zadok  in  his  place. 

But  there  is  another  element  in  the  history  of  the 
king  of  glory,  in  which  he  oversteps  the  limits  of  the 
king  of  Israel's  legitimate  position ;  he  allies  himself 
with  the  Gentiles,  and  marries  Pharaoh's  daughter. 
Neither  the  house  of  Solomon,  nor  that  of  Jehovah, 
was  yet  built ;  but  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh,  whom 
the  king  espouses  in  grace,  dwells  in  the  place  where 
the  suffering  and  victorious  king  had  provisionally 
placed  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  which  secures  blessing 
to  the  people,  and  which,  when  placed  in  the  temple, 
will  form  the  source  of  blessing  for  Israel.  This  ark 
was  not  a  covenant  made  with  Pharaoh's  daughter; 
but  she  dwelt  where  the  symbol  6f  the  covenant  was 
hidden,  and  she  was  placed  under  the  safeguard,  and 
sheltered  by  the  power,  of  Him  who  had  made  this 
covenant,  and  who  could  not  break  it,  whatever  might 
be  the  unfaithfulness  of  a  people  who  ought  always  to 
have  enjoyed  its  benefits. 

I  doubt  not,  that  hereafter  a  remnant  of  the  Jews 
will  find  themselves  through  sovereign  grace  in  the 
same  position*  (before  the  glory  of  the  kingdom,  and 
of  the  house  of  God,  is  established)  under  shelter  of 
the  covenant  attached  to  the  city  of  David,  the  seat  of 

*  Consider  here  Eevelation  xiv.  1,  and  Hebrews  xii.  22. 


I  KINGS.  491 

royal  grace,  but  the  provisional  seat  in  anticipation  of 
the  full  and  entire  result  of  the  king's  power.  But 
we  confine  ourselves  here  to  recognising  the  principle 
of  the  bringing  in  of  the  Gentiles,  manifested  in 
the  reception  of  Pharaoh's  daughter  as  Solomon's, 
bride. 

It  is  well  to  remark,  that  the  passage  we  are  con- 
sidering does  not  introduce  the  light  and  intelligence 
of  the  heavenly  places,  but  only,  in  connection  with 
the  kingdom,  the  principle  through  which  the  position 
of  those  who  enjoy  that  grace  is  established.  And 
therefore,  while  admitting  the  Gentiles,  the  principle 
applies  to  this  Jewish  remnant  of  the  latter  days,  who 
are  intelligent  and  faithful  according  to  their  intelli- 
gence, a  remnant  which  will  be  admitted  according  to 
the  same  principles  of  grace. 

The  people  in  general  do  not  enter  into  this  thought. 
The  kingdom  itself  even,  and  the  blessing  of  the 
kingdom,  are  not  established  on  that  footing.  All 
doubtless  will  be  founded  on  the  new  covenant,  and 
that  by  the  presence  of  the  Mediator  of  this  coven- 
ant. Still,  even  then,  the  connection  of  the  people 
with  God,  as  an  earthly  people,  will  not  be  established 
on  the  efficacy  of  a  faith  which  enters  into  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  grace  of  the  covenant  while  the  mediator 
of  it  is  hidden,  and  which  anticipates  the  public  esta- 
blishment of  it  as  made  with  Judah  and  Israel,  but  on 
the  positive  enjoyment  of  its  results,  when  the  king 
shall  have  settled  everything  by  his  power.  The 
brazen  altar  was  not  in  the  sanctuary  but  in  the  court, 
marking  indeed  a  rejected  one  lifted  up  from  the  earth 
(and  on  this  the  future  blessings  of  Israel  depend), 
but  not  gone  into  heaven  and  hidden,  save  to  faith, 
there.  It  is  by  that  the  people  will  approach  God.  It 
is  the  earth  which  is  the  scene  of  the  development  of 
their  religious  affections,  and  the  knowledge  of  God 
manifested  on  the  earth.  The  efficacy  of  the  cross,  as 
IL,  III. 


492  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  means  of  approaching  God  on  the  earth,  will  be 
known  to  them.  Without  it  they  could  not  approach 
Him.  They  will  mourn  when  they  shall  see  Him  whom 
they  have  pierced,  but  see  Him  as  manifested,  down 
here  to  those  below.  Blessing,  pardon,  new  life,  will 
be  brought  them  down  here.  They  will  not  enter 
into  the  power  of  these  things  as  hidden  within  the 
veil.  Being  established  on  the  earth,  it  would  not  even 
be  suitable  for  them  to  do  so. 

To  return  to  our  history:  if  the  ark  is  on  Mount 
Zion,  there  are  two  ways  of  approaching  God — before 
the  ark,  and  at  the  altar  which  in  fact  is  confounded 
with  the  high  places.  Until  the  temple  is  built,  the 
people  are  on  the  high  places,  earthly  and  carnal  even 
when  approaching  the  true  God.*  God  bears  with  it. 
Solomon  himself  goes  thither,  and  God  hears  him 
there.  The  temple  is  not  built.  If  it  had  been,  it 
ought  to  have  been  the  only  centre  of  service  and 
worship.  That  God  bears  with  a  thing,  until  power 
shall  act,  is  quite  another  thing  from  sanctioning  it 
after  power  has  acted.  We  must  remember  that,  if 
Solomon  went  to  Gibeon,  it  is  because  the  tabernacle 
and  the  brazen  altar  were  there ;  and  it  was  there 
that,  according  to  the  law,  the  priests  performed  their 
functions.  (1  Chron.  xvi.  36-40.)  The  ark  of  the 
covenant  was  not  there.  David  had  placed  it  in  a 
tent  in  the  city  of  David.  These  latter  points  are 
more  developed  in  the  Chronicles  (and  I  refer  the 

*  The  position  of  Solomon  is  morally  worthy  of  attention. 
He  loves  Jehovah ;  he  walks  in  the  statutes  of  David ;  but  he 
does  not  cleave  to  the  ark  which  David  had  placed  in  Zion ;  he 
offers  sacrifices  in  the  high  places.  How  often  Christians,  who 
do  not  walk  outwardly  in  sin,  do  not  seek  in  Christ  the  secret  of 
His  will  according  to  the  revelation  He  has  made  of  Himself 
while  hidden !  For  us  the  temple  is  not  built.  We  may  draw 
nigh  to  the  ark — Christ  rejected  and  gone  up  on  high  ;  or  to  the 
brazen  altar  and  the  high  places,  for  this  altar  is  confounded 
with  them. 


I  KINGS.  493 

reader  to  that  which  will  be  said  in  the  examination 
of  that  book) ;  but  the  passage  we  are  considering 
would  hardly  have  been  understood  without  some 
anticipation  of  what  is  found  there. 

As  to  the  responsibility  of  the  moment,  the  state  of 
the  people  in  this  respect  appears  to  me  to  be  set  be- 
fore us  as  a  sorrowful  state  ;  and  Solomon  himself  is 
but  on  a  level  with  the  existing  state  of  things — a 
state  borne  with  indeed  by  God  in  grace,  but  not  after 
His  heart.  The  king  thought  neither  of  the  ark  nor 
of  the  hidden  blessing  of  the  covenant,  as  that  from 
which  all  his  thoughts  and  actions  should  spring,*  and 
as  the  only  means  of  his  connection  with  Jehovah. 
He  loved  Jehovah.  It  was  given  him  to  accomplish 
all  that  was  requisite  for  the  manifestation  of  His 
glory;  but  his  heart  rose  not  to  the  height  of  that 
faith  which  reckoned  upon  the  secret  of  God's  love, 
when  the  glory  was  not  manifested,  and  which  dis- 
cerned it  through  all  the  existing  things,  even  while 
God  still  bore  with  them.  It  was  this  which  formed 
the  strength  of  David  personally.  The  ark  of  the 
covenant  in  the  city  of  David  was  the  symbol  of  this, 
and  for  the  time  its  expression. 

Solomon  walked  no  doubt  in  the  statutes  of  David, 
and  he  loved  Jehovah ;  but  he  approached  Him  with- 
out rising  above  the  level  of  the  people.  Only  our 
chapter  says  that  he  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  in 
high  places.  This  continued  until  Hezekiah.  The 
lustre  of  a  great  blessing  often  keeps  out  of  sight 
something  which  God  bears  with,  as  we  have  said,  but 
which  produces  disastrous  effects  when  the  energy 
which  gave  rise  to  the  blessing  has  disappeared. 
Better  to  be  little  and  despised  at  the  ark,  than  to 
possess  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  and  to  worship  on 
riigh  places. 

*  He  drew  nigh  to  it,  under  the  influence  of  granted  blessings, 
to  render  thanks  to  God.  (Ver.  15.) 

III. 


494  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Moreover,  although  loving  Jehovah,  if  we  are  not 
by  faith  in  the  secret  of  the  covenant  at  the  ark,  we 
shall  always  let  in  something  which  is  not  according  to 
integrity  even  in  our  own  path.  Before  we  are  in  the 
glory,  we  are  never  on  a  level  with  the  position  we 
hold,  while  we  have  only  this  position  to  sustain  us. 
We  must  look  above  our  path  to  be  able  to  walk  in  it. 
A  Jew,  who  had  the  secret  of  Jehovah  and  who  waited 
for  the  Messiah,  was  pious  and  faithful  according  to 
the  law.  A  Jew,  who  had  only  the  law,  assuredly  did 
not  keep  it.  A  Christian,  who  has  heaven  before  him 
and  a  Saviour  in  glory  as  the  object  of  his  affections, 
will  walk  well  upon  the  earth ;  he  who  has  only  the 
earthly  path  for  his  rule  will  fail  in  the  intelligence 
and  motives  needed  to  walk  in  it ;  he  will  become  a 
prey  to  worldliness,  and  his  christian  walk  in  the 
world  will  be  more  or  less  on  a  level  with  the  world  in 
which  he  walks.  The  eyes  upward  on  Jesus  will  keep 
the  heart  and  the  steps  in  a  path  conformable  to  Jesus, 
and  which  consequently  will  glorify  Him  and  make 
Him  known  in  the  world.  Seeing  what  we  are,  we 
must  have  a  motive  above  our  path  to  be  able  to  walk 
in  it.  This  does  not  prevent  our  needing  also  for  our 
path  the  fear  of  the  Lord  to  pass  the  time  of  our 
sojourning  here  in  fear,  knowing  that  we  are  redeemed 
by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ. 

Solomon  goes  to  Gibeon  to  offer  burnt-offerings. 
Jehovah  appears  to  him  there  in  a  dream.  Solomon 
is  conscious  that  he  needs  the  help  of  Jehovah  to 
fulfil  the  duties  before  him ;  and,  through  the  grace  of 
God,  he  manifests  a  state  of  heart  with  respect  to  this, 
which  is  pleasing  to  Jehovah.  The  sense  of  the  difl&- 
<5ulty  of  performing  the  duties  of  his  position,  towards 
a  people  who  belong  to  Jehovah,  makes  him  feel  his 
own  littleness;  and  the  desire  of  not  failing  in  the 
task  entrusted  to  him  of  God  is  uppermost  in  his 
heart,  and  leads  him  to  ask  for  the  wisdom  requisite 


I  KINGS.  495 

to  accomplish  it.  The  genuineness  of  this  sentiment 
is  so  much  the  more  evident,  from  its  being  in  a  dream 
that  he  replies  to  God.  God  adds  glory  and  riches  to 
the  fulfilment  of  this  prayer.  The  sense  of  God's 
goodness  and  the  joy  of  his  heart,  bring  him  before  the 
ark  of  His  covenant  who  had  thus  revealed  Himself  to 
him  beyond  his  expectation.  God's  answer  places  the 
king  immediately  under  the  condition  of  obedience. 
The  wisdom  he  had  asked  for  is  manifested  in  the 
judgment  he  gives,  and  the  people  acknowledge  that 
it  comes  from  God. 

Strict  justice  in  vengeance  had  cut  off  the  wicked  at 
the  beginning ;  now  it  is  the  justice  which  maintains 
order  and  blessing  among  the  people  of  Jehovah.  Thus 
will  it  be  also  with  Jesus. 

Chapter  iv.  contains  an  enumeration  of  the  officers 
who  served  Solomon,  and  upheld  the  glory  of  his 
throne ;  and  then,  the  manner  in  which  the  whole 
country  provided  for  the  maintenance  of  his  house- 
hold, Judah  and  Israel  being  multiplied  and  full  of 
joy.  The  king's  authority  extends  as  far  as  the 
Euphrates.  Peace  reigns  all  around.  The  wisdom 
and  understanding  which  God  had  given  him  sur- 
passed all  that  was  known  in  the  world ;  so  that  from 
the  ends  of  the  earth  they  came  to  hear  the  wisdom 
of  his  lips. 

His  proverbs,  his  songs,  and  his  knowledge,  bore 
testimony  to  the  excellent  spirit  with  which  God  had 
endowed  the  king.  His  throne  is  established,  and  the 
glory  of  the  son  of  David  abounds.  The  Gentiles 
now — the  king  of  Tyre,  emblematic  of  the  world  and 
its  desirable  things — are  at  Solomon's  disposal,  and 
apply  themselves  joyfully  to  the  fulfilment  of  the 
long  of  Israel's  projects,  and  to  his  service  in  building 
the  house  of  Jehovah. 

The  house  may  be  looked  at  in  two  ways — as  a  type 
of  the  Father's  house,  and  as  in  fact  the  habitation  of 

III.,  IV. 


496  THE  B00K3    ^F  THE  BIBLE, 

God  on  the  earth  when  Jesus  reigns.  In  the  latter 
aspect  I  only  look  for  the  grand  thoughts  and  cha- 
racter of  the  government  revealed  in  it.  In  the 
former,  as  a  typical  house,  two  circumstances  give  it 
its  character.  It  is,  first  of  all,  God's  house,  His 
dwelling  ;  and  then  there  are  chambers  all  around  it.* 
God  surrounded  Himself  with  dwellings,  in  the  very- 
place  where  He  had  fixed  His  habitation. 

As  the  dwelling-place  of  God  at  that  time  in  the 
midst  of  His  people,  the  presence  of  God  in  the  temple 
depended  on  the  faithfulness  of  Solomon. 

That  which  characterised  the  house  in  general  is 
that  nothing  except  gold  was  to  be  seen  in  it.  All 
was  bright  with  the  glory  of  divine  righteousness 
that  distinguished  the  throne  of  God  which  was 
placed  there.  But  it  is  not  transparent  as  glass. 
Beauty  and  holiness  are  not  what  characterise  the 
earthly  throne,  but  righteousness  and  judgment.  Nor 
are  there  seraphim. 

In  the  Revelation  we  have  the  seraphic  character 
added  to  the  cherubim,  and  the  gold  is  transparent  as 
glass.  Emblems,  as  we  have  seen,  of  judicial  power, 
the  cherubim  had  a  new  position  (those  belonging  to 
the  ark  remained  the  same) ;  the  wing  of  one  of  these 
new  cherubim  touched  the  wall  of  the  house  on  one 
side,  and  on  the  other  the  wing  of  the  other  cherub. 
Their  wings  extended  from  one  side  of  the  house  to 
the  other.  They  looked  not  towards  the  ark,  but  out- 
wards, f      At   this   time,  righteousness   reigning   and 

*  It  is  to  this,  I  doubt  not,  that  the  Lord  alludes,  when  He 
says,  "  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  dwellings  " — at  any 
rate,  to  the  fact  that  other  priests  besides  the  high  priest  dweU 
there. 

t  The  word  in  Hebrew  is  '  towards  the  house,'  which  is  used 
as  a  preposition  for  inwards ;  but  here,  being  at  the  bottom  of 
the  most  holy  place,  '  towards  the  house  '  was  outwards. 

I  anticipate  the  Chronicles  here  a  little.  This  circumstance 
their  looking  outwards,  which  is  not  brought  in  here  by  the 


I  KINGS.  497 

being  established,  these  symbols  of  God's  power  can 
look  outwards  in  blessing,  instead  of  having  their  eyes 
fixed  on  the  covenant  alone.  During  the  time  that 
there  was  nothing  but  the  covenant,  they  gazed  upon 
it ;  but  when  God  has  established  His  throne  in  right- 
Holy  Ghost,  refers  to  the  aspect  of  this  history  given  in  the 
Chronicles,  that  is,  to  the  glorious  reij^n  of  the  Son  of  David. 
Here,  the  typical  character  of  the  heavenly  house  and  glory 
being  the  object,  the  veil  is  not  seen,  nor  the  circumstance  as  to 
the  cherubim  which  gave  its  character  to  the  governmental 
blessing  of  the  earth.  Both  are  in  Chronicles.  Here,  while  the 
veil  is  not  mentioned,  in  its  place  are  folding  doors.  I  make 
this  allusion  to  that  which  is  written  in  the  Chronicles,  in  order 
to  give  a  general  idea  of  the  whole,  and  to  link  the  two  accounts 
together. 

I  will  give  here  something  more  definite,  as  to  the  contents  of 
chapters  vi.  and  vii.  of  the  book  that  occupies  us. 

There  are  three  parts  in  this  description  :  the  temple  itself; 
the  different  houses  of  cedar ;  and,  lastly,  the  brazen  vessels. 

1.  The  temple.  The  idea  which  it  presents  has  been  already 
pointed  out.  It  is  the  dwelling-place,  the  house  of  God  :  there 
are  chambers  all  around ;  but  it  is  the  house  of  God.  Within, 
all  is  gold.  Nothing  is  said  about  the  veil.  DweUing,  not 
drawing  near,  is  the  idea.  But  there  are  folding  doors  which 
open. 

2.  After  this  comes  the  royal  connection  of  Solomon  and 
Pharaoh's  daughter  with  the  world  without,  but  with  a  view  to 
the  glory  and  elevation  of  this  position.  It  is  not  the  dwelling- 
place  of  God,  but  the  royal  position  of  the  king,  the  judge,  and 
of  his  bride.  It  is  Christ  in  His  glorious  administration.  All  is 
solidity,  magnificence,  and  grandeur,  within  and  without. 

3.  Then  comes  the  manifestation,  according  to  the  power  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  in  a  glorious  manner,  of  all  that  belonged 
to  His  reign  here  below.  All  was  of  brass,  the  pillars  and  the 
sea.  Nothing  is  said  of  the  altar,  because  drawing  near  to 
God  is  not  the  question  ;  but  the  manifestation  of  God  in 
Christ  who  reigns  in  sight  of  the  world — divine  righteousness 
in  respect  of  man's  responsibility,  not  of  approach  to  God 
Himself. 

Thus  we  behold  the  dwelling-place  of  God  where  all  is  gold, 

the  glory  of  divine  righteousness ;  the  house  as  the  dwelhng  of 

the  king,  and  the  porch  of  judgment :  the  house  of  his  bride.    It 

is  the  sovereign  glory  of  Christ  in  manifestation  according  to  the 

VOL.   I.  v.,  VI.  K  K 


498  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBL1B 

eousness,  He  can  turn  towards  the  world  to  bless  it 
according  to  that  righteousness. 

It  is  rather,  to  my  mind,  the  house  of  Solomon  that 
prefigures  the  church,  as  such,  in  connection  with 
Christ ;  the  temple,  the  Father's  house  on  high,  where 
we  are  brought  to  dwell.  "  We  are  his  house  ;"  as  the 
house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  prefigures  His  glory 
among  the  Gentiles.  The  porch  of  judgment  cha- 
racterises this  glorious  reign.  The  glory  was  not  all 
on  the  outside.  The  inner  court  was  equally  beauti- 
ful. The  glory  was  not  hidden  either.  The  outer 
court,  as  well  as  the  inner,  exhibited  His  royal  glory 
who  built  the  whole. 

It  was  the  same  thing  also  towards  the  great  outer 
court.  Thus  even  the  great  court,  as  well  as  the  inner 
court  of  the  house  of  Jehovah,  was  built  with  costly 
stones  and  with  cedar.  The  house  itself  had  its  pecu- 
liar glory.  Everything  manifested  the  glory,  the 
riches,  and  the  power  of  the  great  king.  With  re- 
spect to  this  outward  glory,  Pharaoh's  daughter  had  a 
house  similar  to  the  king's.  This  outward  glory  of 
the  walls,  of  the  courts  of  Jehovah,  of  the  king's 
house,  and  of  all  the  others,  exhibits  the  connection 
between  these  things  in  Christ  in  the  day  of  His 
manifested  glory. 

dispensation  of  glory  ;  and  then  the  development,  in  this  world, 
by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  of  what  Christ  is,  of  what  God  Him- 
self is.  There  is  no  mention  of  silver — the  type  of  the  im- 
mutable stedfastness  of  God's  purposes  and  ways  in  the 
wilderness.     It  is  gold ;  the  house  of  cedar ;  brass. 

In  the  description  given  by  the  Book  of  Chronicles  there  are  an 
altar  and  a  veil,  because  there  the  positive  administration  of  the 
things  and  circumstances  of  the  true  Solomon's  reign  is  much 
more  the  question ;  the  state  of  things  which  will  in  fact  exist 
upon  earth,  rather  than  the  abstract  idea,  and  the  type  of  that 
which  is  manifested  of  God  Himself,  as  well  as  of  the  king's 
glory ;  and  this,  whether  In  the  dwelling-place  of  God,  or  on 
the  earth,  as  the  sphere  where  He  will  unfold  that  which  He  is 
;aooordiug  to  the  Spirit. 


I   KINGS.  499 

The  vessels  of  Jehovah's  house  were  made  on  a  much 
larger  scale  than  those  of  the  tabernacle ;  but  they 
were  the  same,  although  greater  in  number.  The  only 
new  things  were  the  pillars,  Jachin  and  Boaz ;  that  is 
to  say,  "  He  will  establish,"  and,  "  in  Him  is  strength  " 
(names  which  make  the  meaning  of  these  pillars 
evident).  I  doubt  not  that  the  passage  in  Revelation 
iii.  12  alludes  to  these  pillars. 

We  find  here  also  the  union  of  Jews  and  Gentiles 
recognised ;  and  the  latter  employed  in  the  work  for 
the  temple  of  Jehovah. 

The  ark  is  not  altered.  It  was  put  in  the  temple, 
which  was  but  a  house  for  its  reception,  as  the  seat  of 
His  presence  who  dwelt  between  the  cherubim.  As  to 
the  token  of  God's  presence,  and  of  the  establishment 
of  His  throne  on  the  earth,  the  ark  had  entered  into 
its  rest,  as  well  as  Jehovah  whose  seat  it  was.  (Com- 
pare Psalm  cxxxii.  8.) 

The  circumstances  which  revealed  the  character  of 
this  rest  were  remarkable.  The  staves,  with  which 
the  priests  had  borne  the  ark,  were  now  the  memorial 
of  their  journeys  with  God,  who,  in  His  faithfulness, 
had  led  and  preserved  them,  and  brought  them  into 
the  rest  which  He  had  prepared  for  them.  But  that 
which,  in  the  passage  through  the  wilderness,  had  been 
the  token  of  their  means  of  grace,  was  no  longer  in  it : 
nothing  but  the  law  remained  there.  Aaron's  rod  and 
the  pot  of  manna  would  not  have  been  in  harmony 
with  the  glorious  reign  and  the  rest  of  Canaan.  The 
law  was  there ;  it  was  the  basis  of  the  administration 
of  the  kingdom,  and  the  rule  of  that  righteousness 
which  was  to  be  exercised  in  it. 

The  ark  of  the  covenant  once  set  in  its  place  of  rest, 
Jehovah  comes  and  seals  it  with  His  presence,  and  fills 
the  house  with  His  glory.  As  the  rod,  the  emblem  of 
the  priestly  grace  which  had  led  the  people,  and  the 
manna,  which  had  fed  them  in  the  wilderness,  were  no 

vn. 


500  THE   BOOKS    OF   THE   BIBLE. 

longer  there,  so  did  the  priesthood  no  longer  exercise 
its  ministry  on  account  of  the  presence  of  the  glory. 
For  the  moment  Solomon  fully  assumes  the  character 
of  priest.  It  is  he  who  stands  before  Jehovah,  as  well 
as  between  Jehovah  and  the  people — a  remarkable 
type,  as  to  his  position,  of  what  Christ  as  King  will  be 
for  Israel  in  the  day  of  His  glory.  He  has  built  a 
house  for  Jehovah  to  dwell  in — a  fixed  habitation — 
that  He  may  dwell  in  it  for  ever. 

Remark  here  also  that  all  refers  to  the  deliverance 
out  of  Egypt,  to  Horeb,  to  the  law,  and  not  to  Abra- 
ham, to  Isaac,  and  to  Jacob.  It  was  doubtless,  up  to  a 
certain  point  (and  fully  so,  typically),  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promises  made  to  them ;  but  Solomon  does  not 
refer  to  them  as  to  his  present  position.  This  is  seen 
in  verse  56. 

In  examining  the  blessing  pronounced  by  the  king 
(which,  like  almost  all  that  is  termed  blessing,  con- 
sisted of  thanksgiving),  and  his  prayer,  we  shall  again 
find  the  same  principles  that  we  pointed  out  at  first — 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  made  to  David  as 
present  blessing  (vers.  20-24);  but  the  enjoyment  of 
this  blessing  granted  under  condition  of  obedience. 
(Vers.  23-25.)  The  prayer  sets  the  people  under  the 
terms  of  a  righteous  government,  abounding  indeed  in 
kindness  and  forgiveness,  yet  one  which  will  not  hold 
the  guilty  to  be  innocent ;  and  it  presents  God  as  the 
people's  resource,  when  the  consequences  of  their  sin 
fall  upon  them  according  to  the  principles  laid  down 
by  Moses  in  Deuteronomy  and  elsewhere.  Moreover, 
while  confessing  that  the  heaven  of  heavens  could  not 
contain  Jehovah,  the  king  entreats  Him  to  grant  every 
prayer  that  should  be  addressed  to  Him  in  this  house 
— a  petition  which  was  granted  (chap.  ix.  3),  so  that 
the  house  was  established  as  the  throne  of  the  God  of 
heaven  upon  earth — the  place  in  which  He  revealed 
Himself,  and  in  which  He  had  put  His  name. 


I  KINGS.  501 

This  fact  has  a  very  wide  bearing.  It  was  the  esta- 
blishment of  Jehovah's  government  upon  the  earth  in 
the  midst  of  His  people — a  government  entrusted  to  a 
man,  the  son  of  David ;  so  that  it  is  said  that  Solomon 
sat  upon  the  throne  of  Jehovah. 

This  enables  us  to  understand  the  importance  of  the 
events  which  took  place  under  Nebuchadnezzar,  by 
whom  this  throne  was  cast  down,  according  to  the 
judgment  pronounced  by  God  Himself.  The  house 
was  not  elect ;  but,  built  under  God's  own  direction,  it 
was  hallowed  by  Himself,  that  His  name  might  dwell 
there  for  ever.  The  close  of  chapter  viii.  gives  a  very 
lively  figure  of  Israel's  millennial  blessing. 

The  answer  which  God  gives  establishes  the  house 
as  the  place  in  which  He  has  set  His  name  for  ever. 
His  eyes  and  His  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually ; 
but,  at  the  same  time,  for  the  enjoyment  of  the 
granted  blessing,  the  dynasty  of  Solomon,  the  people 
of  Israel,  and  even  the  house  itself,  are  subjected  to 
the  condition  of  faithfulness  to  Jehovah  on  the  part 
of  Solomon  and  his  children.  If  he,  or  his  posterity, 
should  turn  away  to  serve  other  gods,  Israel  should  be 
cut  off;  and  the  house  should  become  a  testimony  of 
the  judgment  of  God  to  every  one  that  passed  by.  We 
see  here  to  what  an  extent  the  fate  of  Israel  hung 
upon  their  king. 

The  king  of  Tyre  also  was  dependent  on  the  king  of 
Israel ;  and  the  queen  of  Sheba  comes  from  the  far 
south  to  delight  herself  in  the  wisdom  of  the  head  of 
God's  people,  and  to  be  filled  with  wonder  at  the  sight 
of  his  glory,  and  to  praise  Jehovah  who  had  raised  him 
so  high,  and  who  had  blessed  the  people  in  giving  him 
to  be  their  king.  She  also  came  with  gifts ;  for  the 
king's  renown  had  spread  into  distant  lands.  Never- 
theless, although  it  was  a  true  report  that  she  had 
heard,  the  sight  of  his  glory  went  far  beyond  all  that 
had  been  said  of  it. 

VIII.,   IX. 


602  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

Till  now  we  have  had  the  beautiful  picture  of  God's 
blessing  resting  upon  the  son  of  David,  whose  only 
desire  it  had  been  to  possess  wisdom  from  God,  that  he 
might  know  how  to  govern  His  people.  Jehovah  had 
in  addition  given  him  riches,  magnificence,  and  glory. 
The  reverse  of  this  picture,  painful  t  >  the  heart,  serves 
nevertheless  to  instruct  us  in  the  righteous  dealings 
of  God. 

In  the  event,  foreseen  by  God,  of  Israel's  having  a 
king,  he  was  forbidden  to  multiply  his  wives  or  his 
riches,  and  to  go  down  into  Egypt  to  multiply  horses. 
(Deut.  xvii.  16, 17.)  Now  with  whatever  blessings  we 
may  be  surrounded,  we  can  never  forsake  the  law  of 
God  with  impunity,  nor  the  walk  appointed  in  the 
word  for  His  children.  God  had  bestowed  the  abun- 
dance of  riches  and  honour  on  Solomon,  who  had  only 
asked  for  wisdom  ;  but  the  study  of  the  law,  which 
was  prescribed  to  the  king  (Deut.  xvii.  19,  20),  should 
have  prevented  his  using  the  means  he  did  in  acquir- 
ing his  riches.  These  chapters  teach  us  that  he  did 
precisely  that  which  the  law  forbade  his  doing.  He 
multiplied  silver  and  gold,  he  multiplied  the  number 
of  his  wives,  and  had  a  great  number  of  horses  brought 
from  Egypt. 

God's  promise  was  fulfilled.  Solomon  was  rich  and 
glorious  above  all  the  kings  of  his  day ;  but  the  means 
he  used  to  enrich  himself  shewed  a  heart  at  a  distance 
from  God,  and  led  to  his  ruin  according  to  the  just 
judgment  and  sure  word  of  God. 

How  perfect  His  ways,  how  sure  His  testimony ! 
Holiness  becometh  His  house.  His  judgments  are 
unchangeable. 

Solomon  enjoys  the  sure  promises  of  God.  He  sins 
in  the  means  by  which  he  "seeks  to  satisfy  his  own 
lusts;  and  although  the  result  was  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  promise,  yet  he  bears  the  consequences  of 
so  doing.     Outwardly  only  the  fulfilment  of  the  pro- 


I  KINGS.  503 

mise  was  seen;  in  fact  there  was  something  els(\ 
Without  sending  for  horses  from  Egypt,  and  gold 
from  Ophir,  Solomon  would  have  been  rich  and  glori- 
ous, for  God  had  promised  it.  By  doing  this  he  en- 
riched himself,  but  he  departs  from  God  and  from  His 
word.  Having  given  himself  up  to  his  desires  after 
riches  and  glory,  he  had  multiplied  the  number  of  his 
wives,  and  in  his  old  age  they  turned  away  his  heart. 
This  neglect  of  the  word,  which  at  first  appeared  to 
have  no  bad  effect  (for  he  grew  rich,  as  though  it  had 
been  but  the  fulfilment  of  God's  promise),  soon  led  to 
a  departure  more  serious  in  its  nature  and  in  its  con- 
sequences, to  influence  more  powerful  and  more  im- 
mediately opposed  to  the  commands  of  God's  word, 
and  at  last  to  flagrant  disobedience  of  its  most  positive 
and  essential  requirements.  The  slippery  path  of  sin 
is  always  trodden  with  accelerated  steps,  because  the 
first  sin  tends  to  weaken  in  the  soul  the  authority  and 
power  of  that  which  alone  can  prevent  our  commit- 
ting still  greater  sins — that  is,  the  word  of  God,  as 
well  as  the  consciousness  of  His  presence,  which  im- 
parts to  the  word  all  its  practical  power  over  us. 

God  brings  chastening  and  trouble  upon  Solomon 
during  his  life,  and  takes  from  his  family  the  rule 
over  the  greater  part  of  the  tribes,  declaring  that  Hd 
will  afflict  the  posterity  of  David,  but  not  for  ever. 

According  to  the  king's  lamentation  (Eccles.  ii.  19), 
he  to  whom  Solomon  left  all  the  fruit  of  his  labour 
was  not  wise.  His  folly  brought  the  consequences 
upon  him  which,  in  God's  counsels,  were  attached  to 
his  father's  sin.  Under  the  guidance  of  Jeroboam  ten 
tribes  shook  off  the  authority  of  the  house  of  David. 
Looked  at  with  an  eye  to  its  responsibility,  the  house 
of  David  has  entirely  and  for  ever  lost  its  glory. 

We  have  to  follow  the  history  of  the  two  kingdoms, 
and  yet  more  particularly  that  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
ten  tribes,  which  retained  the  name  of  Israel,  although 

X.,    XI. 


604  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

God  still  caused  the  lamp  of  David  to  shine  at  Jeru- 
salem. 

Now,  the  moral  fall  of  the  new  king — of  Jeroboam 
— was  not  long  delayed.  Judging  by  human  wisdom 
and  forgetting  the  fear  of  Jehovah,  he  made  two 
golden  calves,  in  order  that  the  powerful  links  of  a 
worship  in  common  might  be  broken,  and  no  longer 
attach  his  subjects  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  A  new 
priesthood  had  to  be  set  up  ;  everything,  with  respect 
to  worship,  was  devised  of  his  own  heart.  Israel's  sin 
was  an  established  rule,  and  the  phrase,  "  Jeroboam, 
tlie  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin,"  became  the 
sad  designation  of  their  first  king. 

But  the  testimony  and  the  judgment  of  God  tarried 
not  according  to  the  mercy  of  God  towards  His  people. 
Prophecy  immediately  re-appears ;  for  the  faithful 
love  of  God  to  His  people  never  grows  weary.  His 
mercy  endureth  for  ever.  The  testimony  of  His  word 
— prophecy — that  is  to  say,  the  intervention  of  God  in 
testimony,  when  the  people  go  astray  and  the  ordinary 
connections  between  God  and  His  people  are  broken, 
does  not  fail.  Rehoboam  himself  is  forbidden,  by 
prophecy,  to  carry  out  his  intention  of  fighting  against 
Israel,  to  bring  them  again  under  his  dominion ;  but, 
in  the  case  of  Jeroboam,  Jehovah  vindicates  the  rights 
of  His  glory  against  the  king  himself  and  against  his 
altar.  The  altar  is  rent,  the  ashes  poured  out,  the 
king's  arm — put  forth  against  the  prophet — is  dried 
up,  and  only  restored  through  the  prophet's  inter- 
cession. 

Here  too  Jehovah  makes  known  that  He  has  not 
forgotten  the  house  of  David  in  the  midst  of  all  this 
evil.  From  his  house  shall  proceed  the  repairer  of 
the  breach,  and  the  judge  of  that  iniquity  which  caused 
the  breach ;  for  Judah  is  still  recognised  as  the  place  of 
His  throne. 

The  prophet,  charged  with  such  a  testimony  as  this, 


I  laNOS.  506 

is  forbidden  even  to  drink  water  among  a  people  who 
call  themselves  Israel,  but  who  are  rebellious  and 
defiled.  No  participation  in  such  guilty  confusion  is 
allowed;  and  the  prophet  himself  suffers  the  conse- 
quences of  God's  just  judgment  upon  his  disobedience. 
Such  was  the  severity  of  God  with  resrect  to  an 
action  that  countenanced  a  state  of  unfaithfulness, 
which  the  light  He  had  given  was  sufficient  to  judge. 

The  details  of  this  case  deserve  some  notice. 

By  the  word  of  God  the  prophet  had  knowledge  of 
the  judgment  of  God.  His  heart  should  have  recog- 
nised, morally  as  well  as  prophetically,  the  dreadful 
evil  of  Israel's  position  ;  and  the  moral  sense  of  this 
evil  should  have  given  the  prophetic  testimony  its  full 
power  over  his  own  heart.  At  any  rate  the  word  of 
God  was  imperative  :  he  was  neither  to  eat  nor  to  drink 
there.  He  knew  it,  and  he  remembered  it ;  but  there 
was  in  appearance  another  testimony,  a  motive  for 
neglecting  the  Lord's  command.  The  old  prophet  (and 
he  was  a  prophet)  told  him  that  Jehovah  had  said  unto 
him,  "  Bring  him  back  into  thine  house  that  he  may 
eat  bread ;"  so  the  prophet  from  Judah  went  back  with 
him.  It  was  very  desirable  for  the  unfaithful  old 
prophet,  that  a  man  whom  God  was  using  for  testi- 
mony (and  whose  testimony  he  himself  also  believed) 
should  sanction  his  unfaithfulness  by  association  with 
it.  Outwardly  he  appeared  to  honour  the  testimony 
of  God,  and  the  man  who  bore  it.  In  fact  the  prophet 
from  Judah,  by  returning  with  the  old  prophet,  de- 
stroyed the  power  of  his  own  testimony.  The  old 
prophet — although  truly  such — bore  with  the  evil 
around  him.  The  testimony  of  God,  on  the  contrary, 
declared  that  the  evil  was  not  to  be  borne  with.  It 
was  with  this  testimony  that  the  other  prophet  was 
charged ;  and  the  refusal  to  eat  or  drink  in  the  place 
was  the  moral  and  personal  testimony  of  his  own 
faithfulness,  of   his  conviction,  and  of  his  obedience. 

XII.,   XIII. 


506  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

This  refusal  was  the  testimony  that,  in  this  matter,  he 
took  GodJa  part.  But,  by  returning  with  the  old 
prophet,  he  nullified  his  testimony,  and  countenanced 
the  old  prophet  in  his  unfaithfulness.  God  did  not  re- 
verse His  word,  if  the  prophet  was  disobedient  to  it. 
The  old  prophet  was  punished,  in  that  God  made  use 
of  his  mouth  to  announce  the  consequences  of  his 
fault  to  the  prophet  from  Judah.  It  is  also  a  lesson 
which  teaches  us,  that,  whenever  God  has  made  His 
will  known  to  us,  we  are  not  to  allow  any  after- 
influence  whatever  to  call  it  in  question,  even  although 
the  latter  may  take  the  form  of  the  word  of  God.  If 
we  were  morally  nearer  to  the  Lord,  we  should  feel 
that  the  only  true  and  right  position  is  to  follow  that 
which  He  told  us  at  first. 

In  every  case  our  part  is  to  obey  what  He  has  said. 
His  word  will  put  us  in  a  true  position — in  position 
apart  from  evil,  and  from  the  power  of  evil,  even  when 
we  have  not  spiritual  intelligence  to  appreciate  it.  If 
we  fail  in  this  obedience,  we  lose  our  sense  of  the  false- 
ness of  our  position,  because  the  moral  sentiment  is 
weakened.  At  best  there  is  uneasiness,  but  no  liberty. 
Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty.  Un- 
faithfulness to  the  simple  and  primary  testimony  of 
God's  word  never  sets  us  at  liberty,  whatever  may  be 
the  reasons  which  apparently  justify  our  putting  it 
aside. 

In  spite  of  this  testimony,  Jeroboam  perseveres  in 
his  sin.  The  only  one  of  his  sons  in  whom  any  piety 
is  seen  dies  ;  and  the  judgment  of  God  is  pronounced 
upon  his  house. 

Judah  having  walked  in  all  sorts  of  iniquity  also, 
during  the  reign  of  Rehoboam,  Jerusalem  is  taken, 
and  all  the  riches  which  Solomon  had  amassed  became 
the  prey  of  the  Egyptians.  Abijam,  his  son,  follows 
no  better  course.  There  was  constant  war  between 
the  two  kingdoms — the  sad  story,  so  often  renewed,  of 


X  KINGS.  507 

man  placed  in  the  enjoyment  of  God's  blessing,  and 
the  effect  of  his  fall.  In  what  a  condition  do  we  see 
the  kingdom  of  God's  people,  and  the  house  of  David 
itself,  recently  so  glorious  ! 

Asa,  pious  himself  and  faithful  to  Jehovah,  pressed 
by  the  power  of  Baasha,  king  of  Israel,  who  had  de- 
throned the  house  of  Jeroboam,  seeks  that  help  from 
the  Syrians  which  he  did  not  know  how  to  find  in 
God.  The  family  of  Baasha  falls,  as  that  of  Jeroboam 
had  done,  and  the  chief  captains  contend  together  for 
the  throne,  which  remains  at  last  in  the  hands  of 
Ahab's  father.  Ahab  added  to  the  sin  of  his  prede- 
cessors the  worship  of  Baal,  the  god  of  his  idolatrous 
wife ;  and,  in  the  enormity  of  his  transgressions 
against  Jehovah,  he  went  beyond  all  the  kings  of 
Israel  that  were  before  him. 

But  in  the  midst  of  all  this  moral  ruin,  the  word  of 
God  reaches  those  who  violate  it ;  and  Joshua's  pro- 
phetic judgment  upon  whosoever  should  rebuild  Jeri- 
cho is  fulfilled  in  the  family  of  Hiel,  the  Bethelite. 
Not  only  are  the  ways  and  government  of  God  mani- 
fested in  full  vigour,  however  great  His  patience  with 
a  rebellious  people,  but  the  energy  of  the  king's  in- 
iquity, in  the  presence  of  God's  long-suffering,  gives 
occasion  for  a  testimony  remarkable  in  proportion  to 
the  evil  which  made  it  necessary. 

The  reign  of  Ahab  was  the  occasion  of  the  testi- 
mony of  the  prophet  Elijah.  Israel,  at  that  time,  was 
hastening  to  its  doom.  But,  whatever  their  iniquity 
may  be,  God  does  not  smite  a  people  who  have  for- 
saken His  ways,  until  He  has  sent  them  a  testimony. 
He  may  chastise  them  previously,  but  will  not  defini- 
tively execute  His  judgment  upon  them. 

The  character  of  the  testimony  deserves  particular 
attention  here. 

In  Judah  the  prophets,  who  bore  testimony  in  the 
midst  of  an  order  of  things  which  God  Himself  had 

XIV.-XVI. 


508  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

established,  performed  no  miracles.  They  dwell  upon 
the  people's  sin,  and  put  them  in  mind  of  the  law  of 
Jehovah,  His  ordinances,  and  the  obedience  due  to 
Him.  They  proclaim  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,  and 
the  future  blessing  of  Israel;  but,  the  system  in  the 
midst  of  which  they  give  this  testimony  being  still 
owned  of  God,  they  perform  no  miracles. 

Elijah  and  Elisha,  on  the  contrary  (witnesses  for 
God  in  the  midst  of  a  people  that  according  to  grace 
God  still  recognised  as  His  own,  but  who  had  openly 
forsaken  God  and  worshipped  golden  calves),  perform 
striking  miracles  in  proof  of  their  divine  mission. 

They  maintain  the  power  and  the  rights  of  Jehovah 
in  the  midst  of  a  people  who  disavow  His  title ;  while 
the  prophets  of  Judah,  standing  amid  those  who  pub- 
licly profess  to  own  Jehovah's  authority,  insist  upon 
the  consequences  of  this  position.  God  sent  indeed  to 
Israel  by  the  mouth  of  His  prophets — such  as  Hosea 
and  Amos — threatenings  similar  to  those  addressed  to 
Judah  ;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  miracles  were 
wrought  in  Judah  by  the  prophets  who  bore  witness 
there. 

Elisha's  miracles,  of  which  we  will  speak  farther  on, 
have  a  different  character  from  those  of  Elijah.  The 
latter  have  a  character  which  none  but  the  miracles  of 
Moses  share  with  them.  They  are  judicial  miracles 
with  respect  to  the  people  among  whom  the  prophet 
dwelt.  Accordingly  God  preserved  His  servant  in  a 
miraculous  manner.  I  only  speak  now  of  what 
Elijah  did  in  testimony  in  the  very  midst  of  the 
people. 

Elijah's  miracles  are  few  in  number,  and  of  striking 
character.    He  shuts  up  the  heavens*  over  a  rebellious 

*  Let  us  remark  here  that  this  book  gives  us,  as  a  solemn  and 
positive  declaration  of  the  prophet's,  that  which  we  know  from 
James's  testimony  to  have  been  an  answer  to  the  prayer  of  a 
man  like  ourselves.      This  is  the  history  of  all  true  spiritual 


I  KINGS.  509 

and  apostate  people,  so  that  there  should  be  no  rain. 
He  brings  down  fire  from  heaven  upon  the  captains 
sent  by  the  king  to  take  him  prisoner.  At  length  he 
proves  that  Jehovah  is  God,  and  (in  spite  of  all  that 
had  happened)  the  God  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  ac- 
cording to  immutable  rights  which  depend  upon  His 
counsels,  and  upon  what  He  is  in  Himself.  When 
the  people  confess  this,  by  executing  judgment  them- 
selves upon  the  priests  of  Baal,  Jehovah  grants  His 
blessing  anew,  and  the  heavens  give  rain.*  The  import 
of  these  signs  is  evident. 

Moses  was  in  a  different  position.  The  people  of 
God  were  in  captivity,  not  in  rebellion,  and  the  judg- 
ment falls  on  their  oppressors.  It  is  neither  the 
heaven  become  brass  closed  over  the  people,  nor 
heaven   the   source   of   judgment   which    falls    from 

energy.  It  appears  to  man  as  a  simple  action,  accompanied 
with  more  or  less  demonstration  on  God's  part,  and  as  a  proof 
of  the  authority  and  spiritual  power  of  the  man  who  performs 
it ;  and  so  it  is.  But  at  the  same  time,  in  fact,  all  these  things 
flow  from  the  energy  of  divine  Hfe,  and  from  communion  with 
God ;  they  are  its  expression  and  its  fruit,  but  in  power  exer- 
cised on  God's  part.  Compare  Christ's  words  at  the  tomb  of 
Lazarus. 

It  is  profitable  to  examine  such  cases  when  presented  to  us  in 
the  word. 

There  are  others  also  which  have  two  aspects.  Historically 
the  mission  of  the  spies  was  according  to  the  will  of  God ;  it 
was  nevertheless,  as  to  its  origin,  the  fruit  of  the  people's  un- 
behef,  an  unbehef  which  soon  manifested  its  effects.  Paul's 
jom-ney  to  Jerusalem,  related  in  Acts  xv.,  is  apparently  the 
same  which  he  mentions  in  Galatians  ii.,  but  we  find  in  the 
latter  elements  and  motives  which  are  not  spoken  of  at  all  in 
the  Acts. 

*  Ehjah  had  said  "  but  at  my  word,"  yet  the  rain  is  given 
when  God  is  glorified ;  for  Elijah  was,  as  a  witness,  the  witness 
of  the  government  of  Jehovah,  of  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel, 
despised  by  Israel.  Hence  the  truth  and  reaHty  of  Jehovah's 
authority  and  the  principles  of  His  government  were  both 
displayed. 

XVII. 


510  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

thence.  The  earth,  given  to  the  children  of  men,  and 
possessed  by  those  who  will  not  acknowledge  that 
Jehovah  is  its  God,  or  that  He  has  any  rights  over  its 
inhabitants,  is  smitten  with  all  kinds  of  plagues.  The 
earth,  the  water,  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  the  cattle, 
the  air,  and,  finally,  man  himself  in  his  firstborn,  all  is 
smitten  by  the  rod  of  God,  according  to  the  powerful 
word  of  God's  witness.  The  Egyptians,  enjoying  the 
providential  bounties  of  the  gracious  Creator,  have 
not  judgment  inflicted  upon  them  until  they  have 
refused  to  let  go  the  people  of  God  and  to  recognise 
His  rights,  who  claims  them  for  His  own.  After 
having  refused  to  hear,  they  are  first  of  all  smitten  in 
the  enjoyment  of  the  earthly  blessings  which  they 
hold  from  Him,  and  afterwards  the  people  themselves 
are  smitten  in  the  persons  of  their  &*stborn. 

We  may  remark  here,  that  the  power  of  the  two 
witnesses  in  the  Apocalypse  manifests  itself  in  these 
two  kinds  of  signs.  They  shut  heaven  that  it  rain 
not,  they  bring  down  fire  from  heaven :  and  if  any 
man  will  hurt  them,  he  must  in  this  manner  be  killed. 
That  is  Elijah.  They  smite  the  earth  with  a^  plagues 
as  often  as  they  will.  That  is  Moses.  Their  testimony 
also  will,  no  doubt,  be  given  in  the  midst  of  a  people 
who  bear  the  double  character  of  a  rebellious  people, 
and  of  a  people  in  captivity,  oppressed  by  the  world 
who  will  not  hear  the  God  of  the  earth  whose  rights 
their  testimony  proclaims. 

If,  in  the  case  of  Elijah,  God  shut  heaven  over  His 
rebellious  people,  He  takes  care  of  the  remnant  ac- 
cording to  grace,  overstepping  even  in  this  grace  the 
limits  of  the  covenant  of  law.  There  were  many 
widows  in  Israel  in  the  days  of  Elijah  the  prophet, 
but  unto  none  of  them  was  he  sent,  save  unto  a  widow 
of  Sarepta  in  Sidon,  a  widow  who  hearkened  to  the 
voice  of  God's  testimony,  and  by  faith  acted  on  that 
testimony  in  a  case  that  required  self-denial ;  and  her 


I   KINGS.  511 

life  is  preserved.  The  grace — a  hard  thrag  to  the 
hearts  of  Jews — which  is  a  revelation  of  His  heart, 
whom  they  knew  not,  reveals  itself  in  power  equal  to 
the  need ;  and  the  dead  is  restored  to  life.  The  poor 
widow  receives  her  son  by  a  power  which  is  that  of 
resurrection,  and  her  faith  is  fully  established  in  the 
word  of  God.* 

Afterwards  God  blesses  Israel  again,  when  they  are 
brought  back  to  the  confession  of  His  name  by  a  strik- 
ing manifestation  of  His  power  which  confounds  the 
priests  of  Baal.  These  are  all  slain  by  the  people,  now 
convinced  of  the  folly  of  idolatry  and  made  the  instru- 
ment of  God's  judgment.  It  is  here  that — looked  upon 
as  the  general  expression  of  the  mind  of  God — Elijah's 
mission  closes,  although  his  ministry  was  prolonged  for 
some  time. 

Until  now  the  prophet  had  stood  before  Jehovah 
(chap.  xvii.  1  ;  xviii.  15)  and  had  spoken  in  His  name ; 
but  now,  terrified  by  the  threats  of  Jezebel,  he  flees 
from  the  dangers  of  the  place  into  which  his  testimony 
had  brought  him. 

Just  as  we  have  seen  in  Moses  at  Meribah,  Elijah's 
faith-|*  does  not  rise  to  the  height  of  Jehovah's  grace 

*  This  reference  to  the  sovereign  rights  and  exercise  of  power 
of  God  in  grace,  out  of  the  limits  of  Israel,  is  frequent  and  full 
of  interest ;  and  here,  as  followed  by  the  renewed  blessing  of 
Israel,  looked  at  as  composed  of  the  whole  twelve  tribes,  is  very 
striking.  It  will  be  remembered  that  Jesus  refers  to  it  in  the 
Gospel  of  Luke,  which  is  the  witness  of  this  great  principle, 
and  causes  thereby  the  anger  of  the  Jews.  Pride  sinks  the 
lowest  and  worst  when  it  clothes  itself  with  a  religious  form. 

t  We  see  here  how  far  the  energy  of  the  outward  life  of  faith 
may  continue  to  exist,  while  the  inward  Hfe  grows  weak.  It 
was  at  the  moment  of  the  most  striking  testimony  to  the 
presence  of  God  in  the  midst  of  the  rebellious  people,  and  when 
Elijah  had  just  caused  all  the  prophets  of  Baal  amongst  them  to 
be  slain  by  the  people's  own  hands,  that  his  faith  entirely  ffdls 
at  a  mere  threat  from  Jezebel.  His  life  was  not  inwardly  sus- 
tained by  this  fiaith  in  proportion  to  the  outward  testimony.  BEia 
XVIII. 


612  TUE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

and  patience,  who  is  full  of  goodness  and  mercy  to 
His  people.  It  is  this  failure  which  puts  an  end  to 
Elijah's  testimony,  as  it  had  shut  Moses  out  of  Canaan; 
for  who  can  equal  Jehovah  in  goodness  ?  Elijah  does 
not  look  to  God ;  he  thinks  of  himself,  and  takes 
flight ;  but  God  has  His  eye  upon  him.  He  who  had 
not  God's  strength  amid  the  evil  had  no  refuge  but  the 
wilderness.  There  was  a  heart  true  to  God,  but  not 
faith  equal  to  meet  Satan's  hostile  power  in  the  place 
of  testimony  to  the  end.  He  must  either  be  a  witness 
for  God  amongst  His  rebellious  people,  or  be  entirely 
apart  from  them. 

The  heart  of  Elijah  and  the  hand  of  God  led  the 
prophet  into  the  wilderness,  where,  overwhelmed  per- 
haps, yet  precious  in.  Jehovah's  sight,  he  will  be  alone 
with  God.  Elijah's  forty  days'  journey  in  the  wilder- 
ness has  only  a  partial  resemblance  to  the  forty  days 
which  Moses  spent  with  God,  in  the  same  Horeb  to 
which  the  prophet  was  going,  or  to  those  which  Jesus 
spent  in  the  wilderness  for  conflict  with  the  enemy  of 
God  and  man.  In  the  two  latter  cases  nature  was  set 
aside.  Neither  Moses  nor  the  Lord  ate  or  drank.  As 
for  Elijah,  the  goodness  of  God  sustains  the  weakness 
of  tried  nature,  makes  manifest  that  He  considers  it 


testimony  excites  the  enemy  in  a  way  for  which  his  personal 
faith  was  not  prepared.  This  is  a  solemn  lesson.  The  still 
small  voice  (which,  miknown  to  him,  was  still  heard  among  the 
people)  had  not  perhaps  its  due  influence  upon  his  own  heart, 
where  the  fire  and  manifestations  had  held  too  much  place. 
Thus  he  did  not  know  himself  the  grace  which  was  still  in  exer- 
cise towards  the  people ;  he  could  not  love  them  for  the  sake  of 
the  seven  thousand  faithful  ones  as  God  loved  them,  nor  hope  as 
charity  hopes.  Alas  !  what  are  we,  even  when  so  near  God  ! 
And  his  complaint  when  he  came  to  God,  for  a  person  so  blessed, 
has  a  sad  deal  of  self  in  it.  I  have  been  zealous,  he  says,  and 
they  have  cast  down  thine  altars  and  killed  thy  prophets ;  just 
when  he  had  cast  down  Baal's  and  killed  all  his  prophets ;  and 
then,  I  am  left  alone.     It  is  a  humbling  testimony. 


I   KINGS.  613 

with  all  tenderness  and  thoughtfulness,  and  gives  the 
strength  needed  for  such  a  journey.  This  should  have 
touched  him,  and  made  him  feel  what  he  ought  to  be 
in  the  midst  of  the  people,  since  he  had  to  do  with 
such  a  God.  His  heart  was  far  from  such  a  state. 
Impossible,  when  we  think  of  ourselves,  to  be  wit- 
nesses to  others  of  what  God  is  I  Our  poor  hearts  are 
too  far  from  such  a  position. 

Elijah  goes  on  till  he  reaches  Horeb.  But  coming 
before  God  to  speak  well  of  himself  and  ill  of  Israel 
is  a  very  different  thing  from  forgetting  self  through 
the  power  of  the  Lord's  presence,  and  setting  Him  be- 
fore the  people  in  His  power  which  is  patient  in  mercy 
in  spite  of  all  their  evil.*  People  sometimes  come 
before  God  because  they  have  forgotten  Him  in  the 
place  where  they  ought  to  have  stood  and  borne  testi- 
mony for  Him.  And  thus  God  asks  Elijah,  "  What 
doest  thou  here,  Elijah  ?"  Terrible  question  !  like 
those  addressed  to  Adam,  to  Cain,  and  now  to  the 
world  with  respect  to  Jesus.  The  answer  does  but 
betray  (as  is  always  the  case)  the  sad  and  fatal  posi- 
tion of  one  who  has  forgotten  God.  The  voice  was 
not  a  voice  of  thunder,  but  one  that  made  Elijah  feel 
it  was  the  voice  which  he  had  forgotten.  Wind,  fire, 
earthquake,  these  heralds  to  man  of  the  power  of  God, 
would  have  suited  the  angry  heart  of  Elijah  as  instru- 
ments of  divine  power  against  Israel ;  but  these  Diani- 
festations  of  His  power  were  not  God  Himself.  The 
still  small  voice  reveals  His  presence  to  Elijah.  That 
which  would  have  satisfied  his  will,  and  that  which 
would  perhaps  have  been  just  towards  others,  did  not 
awaken  his  own  conscience.  But  the  still  small  voice 
by  which  God  reveals  Himself  penetrates  Elijah's 
heart,  and  he  hides  his  face  before  the  presence  of 

*  It  was  different  too  from  Moses  who,  with  God,  interceded 
for  the  people,  setting  himself  aside. 

VOL.    I.  XIX.  LL 


514  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

Jehovah.  Nevertheless  the  pride  of  his  embittered 
heart  is  not  yet  subdued.  He  repeats  his  complaints, 
unsuitable  as  they  were  at  the  time  when  he  had  him- 
self just  destroyed  all  the  prophets  of  Baal,  and  prov- 
ing that  his  faith  had  not  been  able  to  find,  by  the 
light  of  his  testimony,  all  that  God  saw  of  good  in 
Israel. 

God's  answer,  although  just,  is  sorrowful  to  the 
heart.  Vengeance  shall  be  executed,  and  Elijah  is 
commissioned  to  prepare  its  instruments — a  sad  mis- 
sion for  the  prophet,  if  he  loved  the  people.  As  to 
Elijah,  he  should  be  succeeded  by  Elisha  in  his  pro- 
phetic office.  But  if  the  deserved  vengeance  was  to  be 
executed  in  his  time,  and  if  the  saddened  prophet  was 
to  announce  it,  God  has  still  seven  thousand  souls  who 
had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal,  although  Elijah  had 
not  been  able  to  discover  them.  Oh  !  when  will  the 
heart  of  man,  even  in  thought,  rise  to  the  height  of 
God's  grace  and  patience  ?  If  Elijah  had  leant  more 
upon  God,  he  would  have  known  some  of  these  seven 
thousand.  He  would  at  any  rate  have  known  Him 
who  knew  them,  and  who  raised  up  his  testimony  to 
strengthen  and  comfort  them. 

But  the  time  was  not  ripe  for  the  fulfilment  of  God's 
purposes ;  and  God  will  not  give  up  the  patience  of 
His  grace  towards  His  people  to  satisfy  the  prophet's 
impatience.  Elisha  is  anointed ;  but,  Ahab  having 
humbled  himself  when  God  threatened  him  on  account 
of  his  iniquity,  the  judgments  are  withheld  even 
during  the  life-time  of  Ahab  and  of  his  son.  This 
displays  another  feature  in  God's  government,  namely, 
that  judgment  upon  the  evil-doer  may  not  only  have 
been  pronounced  in  the  counsels  of  God,  but  may  be 
already  marked  out  in  His  dealings,  and  be  even  ready 
to  be  executed  a  long  time  before  it  is  really  poured 
out.  The  prophet,  or  the  spiritual  man,  will  know  or 
will  understand  in  spirit  that  it  is  so,  and  will  have  to 


I   KINGS.  515 

wait  for  the  moment  that  suits  this  perfect  patience, 
which  itself  waits  upon  the  slowness  of  our  hearts  and 
the  filling  up  of  the  iniquity  of  the  wicked,  or  at  least 
for  their  refusal  to  repent. 

According  to  the  outwjird  history  of  Israel,  that 
which  follows  the  revelations  made  to  Elijah  in  Horeb 
looks  like  a  time  of  restoration  and  blessing ;  and  out- 
wardly it  was  so.  Benhadad  is  overcome  and  Israel 
delivered  from  his  power  ;  but  Ahab  has  no  knowledge 
at  all  of  the  mind  of  God,  and  he  lets  the  man  whom 
God  had  condemned  escape.  There  are  cases  in  which 
lenity  only  proves  that  the  honour  of  God  and  His 
thoughts  have  no  influence  over  the  heart.  It  was  not 
for  Ahab  to  be  on  brotherly  terms  with  a  king  whose 
constant  aim  was  the  oppression  of  God's  people.  It 
was  putting  himself  on  a  level  with  a  Gentile  king, 
forgetting  the  position  both  of  Israel  and  of  Israel's 
king,  with  respect  to  God.  In  such  a  case  as  this, 
severity  of  conduct  is  the  suitable  accompaniment  of 
the  sense  of  God's  perfect  grace  towards  His  people. 
He  who,  from  love  to  God's  people,  desired  in  Mount 
Horeb  to  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  Jehovah,  is 
also  he  who  said,  in  the  presence  of  evil,  "  Consecrate 
yourselves  to-day  unto  Jehovah,  every  man  upon  his 
brother,  his  companion,  and  his  neighbour ;"  but  the 
weakness,  which  despisal  of  God  produces  in  one  who 
holds  the  place  of  God's  servant,  assumes  the  character 
of  kindness  towards  men. 

At  Jezebel's  instigation,  Ahab  adds  sin  to  sin,  and  a 
piece  of  flagrant  injustice  fills  up  the  apostasy  of  the 
king  of  Israel.  He  enjoys  the  fruit  of  a  crime  which 
he  had  not  courage  to  commit  himself.  His  enjoyment 
was  short-lived.  Sent  by  God  to  meet  the  king,  Elijah 
goes  before  him  into  the  vineyard,  which  Ahab  went 
down  to  possess.  The  king's  heart  bows  before  the 
word  of  Jehovah,  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  judgment 
is  put  off  until  the  days  of  his  son  :  a  new  proof  of 

XX.,  XXI. 


616  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

the  longsufFering  of  a  God  ever  ready  to  accept  and 
respond  to  any  movement  of  man's  heart  towards 
Himself. 

The  reign  of  Ahab,  looked  at  historically,  was  in 
general  prosperous  and  glorious.  Moab  was  tributary, 
Syria  subject  and  quiet.  The  king  had  an  ivory 
palace,  and  built  fresh  cities :  a  new  motive  to  own 
Jehovah,  a  snare  to  one  who  worshipped  Baal.  God 
did  not  regard  all  this  prosperity.  In  a  moral  point 
of  view,  this  reign  stamps  its  character  upon  the 
kingdom  of  Israel.  It  is  apostasy  and  iniquity,  but 
at  the  same  time  the  testimony  of  a  faithful  and 
patient  God. 

The  last  chapter  presents  another  element  of  this 
histor}^,  namely,  the  guilty  alliances  which  were  formed 
between  the  royal  families  of  Israel  and  Judah.  Both 
of  them  prosperous  at  this  period,  they  seek  the  esta- 
blishment and  increase  of  their  power  by  peace  and 
mutual  alliances.  On  Jehoshaphat's  side  it  was 
nothing  but  unfaithfulness  and  forgetfulness  of  God. 
And,  if  God  did  not  forsake  him,  Jehoshaphat  saw  the 
commencement  of  chastisements,  the  results  of  which 
were  deeply  disastrous  to  his  house. 

We  see  also  the  false  prophets  in  power :  Ahab  had 
four  hundred  of  them.  We  may  remark  also,  that 
they  made  use  of  Jehovah's  name,  and  no  longer,  as  it 
appears,  of  Baal's.*  Nor  was  Elijah,  as  we  see,  the 
only  prophet  of  Jehovah.  The  intermixture  con- 
tinues. Outwardly  the  state  of  things  is  less  offen- 
sive ;  but  the  heart  of  Ahab  is  unchanged.  At  the 
request  of  Jehoshaphat,  who  is  uneasy  in  this  false 
position,  Ahab  sends  for  the  prophet  of  Jehovah  ;  but 
he  does  not  hearken  to  him  and  has  to  meet  the  con- 
sequences. 

We  learn  also  here  in  what  manner  a  lying  spirit 

*  Nevertheless  the  worship  of  Baal  had  not  ceased. 


I  KINGS.  517 

deceives  and  leads  the  wicked  to  ruin,  fulfilling  the 
purposes  and  judgments  of  Jehovah. 

During  all  this  time  Elisha  constantly  accompanies 
Elijah ;  and,  led  to  this  intimacy  by  grace,  he  is 
morally  imbued  with  his  spirit  before  he  is  clothed 
with  it  in  power.     He  seems  identified  with  him. 

JBefore  passing  on  to  the  Second  Book  of  Kings, 
I  will  add  some  general  remarks,  which  apply  equally 
to  the  two  books. 

That  which  is  here  in  question  is  the  government  of 
God.  Now  the  principles  of  this  government  are  laid 
open  to  us  in  the  revelation  made  to  Moses,  when  he 
went  up  the  second  time  to  Mount  Sinai.  (Ex.  xxxiii.) 
There  was,  first  of  all,  goodness  and  mercy ;  then  the 
declaration  that  the  guilty  shall  not  be  held  innocent ; 
and,  thirdly,  a  principle  of  public  government,  which 
caused  the  effects  of  misconduct  to  be  felt,  namely, 
that  their  children  should  bear  its  consequences  (a 
principle  which  could  not  be  applied  where  the  soul  is 
in  question) ;  but  this  principle,  important  and  salutary 
in  the  outward  government  of  the  world,  is  verified 
daily  in  that  of  providence.  This  government  of  God 
was  in  exercise  in  the  case  of  the  kings ;  but  the  con- 
dition of  Israel  depended  on  the  conduct  of  the  kings. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  fall  of  the  priesthood 
and  the  demand  for  a  king  had  placed  the  people  in 
this  position — a  position  which  will  be  one  of  blessing 
when  Christ  shall  be  their  King ;  but,  meantime,  God 
had  set  up  prophecy,  a  more  intimate  and  real  connec- 
tion between  the  counsels  of  God  and  His  people.  The 
existence  of  a  king  placed  the  people  under  the  effect 
of  their  governor's  responsibility. 

The  prophet  was  there  on  the  part  of  God  Himself 
in  testimony  and  in  grace.  He  recalled  to  the  people 
the  duties  attached  to  this  responsibility ;  but  he  was 
himself  a  proof  of  those  counsels  which  assured  them 
of  future  blessing,  and  of  the  interest  which  God  took 

XXII. 


518  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

in  their  enjoying  it  both  then  and  at  all  times.  He 
supplied  the  key  also  to  God's  dealings,  which  were 
difficult  to  be  understood  without  this. 

We,  Christians,  have  both  these  things.  God  will 
have  us  act  by  faith  upon  our  own  responsibility ;  but 
close  communion  with  Him  reveals  to  us  the  cause  of 
many  things,  as  also  the  perfection  of  His  ways.  Thus, 
in  His  public  government,  God  could  well  bless  Israel 
after  the  events  related  in  chapter  xviii.  They 
strengthened  the  faith  of  His  own  people.  Chapter 
xix.  shews  us  the  secret  judgment  of  God  upon  the 
real  state  of  things ;  and  it  was  speedily  manifested. 
Ahab  knows  not  how  to  profit  by  the  blessing ;  he 
spares  Benhadad ;  and  the  affair  of  Naboth  shews  that 
Jezebel's  influence  is  as  strong  as  ever. 

But  to  what  a  degree  are  the  patience  and  mercy  of 
God  manifested  in  all  this,  according  to  Exodus  xxxiii. ! 
Ahab,  rebuked  by  Elijah,  humbles  himself,  and  the 
evil  comes  to  pass  neither  in  the  days  of  Ahab,  nor  in 
those  of  Ahaziah,  but  in  the  days  of  Jehoram,  who 
was  also  his  son,  and  that  according  to  the  principle 
already  laid  down.  Personally  Jehoram  was  less 
wicked  than  his  father  and  his  brother.  He  did  not 
worship  Baal.  Israel,  however,  who  had  been  led  into 
the  worship  of  this  idol,  still  bows  down  to  it. 

Observe  the  difference  between  the  judgment  of 
God  and  the  appearance  of  things.  The  judgment  of 
God  was  pronounced  against  the  king  and  against 
Israel  (chap,  xix.) ;  yet  prosperity  and  peace  generally 
marked  this  reign,  as  we  have  seen.  Syria  is  subdued, 
Moab  tributary;  and  Judah  in  unaccustomed  prosperity 
leagues  itself  with  Israel.  The  king  of  Judah  was  as 
Ahab,  his  people  as  Ahab's  people,  and  his  horses  as 
Ahab's.  It  was  even  proposed  to  send  to  Ophir  for 
gold,  as  in  the  days  of  Solomon.  Nevertheless  judg- 
ment was  only  suspended,  and  its  suspension  was 
revealed  to  none  but  Elijah. 


I  KINGS.  519 

But  what  was  morally  the  character  of  this  alliance? 
It  is  Jehoshaphat  who  comes  to  Ahab,  and  not  Ahab  to 
Jehoshaphat.  The  latter  asks,  as  a  favour,  that  Jeho- 
vah may  be  consulted.  After  this  request  the  false 
prophets  make  use  of  Jehovah's  name  to  announce  the 
success  of  the  enterprise.  This  was  natural  enough ; 
for  the  Syrians  having  been  overcome,  and  having 
failed  in  performing  the  conditions  of  peace  laid  upon 
them,  Ahab  was  going  to  assert  his  rights  with  the 
help  of  the  king  of  Judah. 

In  short  Jehovah's  name  is  in  the  mouth  of  the  false 
prophets.  Micaiah  (for  the  king  of  Judah  was  uneasy) 
— Micaiah,  being  come,  announces  misfortune.  But 
Ahab's  mind  was  made  up ;  and  the  king  of  Judah 
was  bound  by  his  engagement.  It  was  no  longer  time 
to  consult  Jehovah  :  to  inquire  after  the  truth,  in  such 
a  position  as  this,  was  but  to  learn  a  judgment  which 
they  had  resolved  to  contemn.  Ahab  was  more  con- 
sistent than  Jehoshaphat.  The  conscience  of  the  latter 
only  made  every  one  uncomfortable,  and  proved  his 
own  folly.  To  please  Jehoshaphat  by  speaking  to  him 
of  Jehovah  was  no  more  than  decency  required ;  but  it 
was  all  that  Ahab  did  for  Jehoshaphat,  except  that  he 
unwillingly  sent  for  Micaiah.  Jehoshaphat  helped 
Ahab  against  Syria ;  he  helped  Jehoram  against 
Moab ;  but  neither  Ahab  nor  his  son  helped  Jehosha- 
phat in  any  one  thing,  except  to  be  unfaithful  to 
Jehovah.  Ahaziah  was  willing  indeed  to  go  with  him, 
but  it  was  in  order  to  obtain  gold  from  Ophir.  It 
would  rather  appear  that  this  alliance  was  the  cause 
of  that  between  Moab,  Ammon,  and  Seir  against 
Jehoshaphat.  Happily  it  was  no  question  then  of 
succouring  Israel. 

Such  is  the  history  of  the  alliances  o£  believers,  not 
only  with  unbelievers,  but  with  the  unfaithful.  The 
latter  are  very  willing  that  we  should  go  with  them ; 
but  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  truth  is  another  thin^. 

XXII. 


THE  BOOKS    OF  THE  BIBLE. 

ihis  is  not  the  question  with  them  ;  if  they  so  walked, 
they  would  cease  to  be  unfaithful.  A  true  union 
would  necessarily  have  made  Jerusalem  the  centre 
and  capital  of  the  land :  for  Jehovah  and  His  temple 
\^^ere  there.  The  alliance  took  it  for  granted  that 
Jehoshaphat  had  given  up  all  such  idea,  since  it 
shewed  that  he  recognised  Ahab  in  his  position. 
There  is  no  equality  in  an  alliance  between  truth 
and  error ;  since,  by  this  very  alliance,  truth  ceases 
to  be  truth,  and  error  does  not  thereby  become  truth. 
The  only  thing  lost  is  the  authority  and  obligation  of 
the  truth. 

I  have  anticipated  some  of  the  events  related  in  the 
Second  Book  of  Kings,  in  which  we  find  the  greater 
part  of  Jehoshaphat 's  history.  Let  us  now  proceed  to 
examine  the  contents  of  this  Second  Book. 


II  KiN(ia 

If  God  has  shewn  that  He  took  notice  of  H"is  servant's 
fault,  and  did  not  pass  it  lightly  over,  He  did  not  fail 
towards  him  in  either  tenderness  or  faithfulness.  He 
acted  towards  him  as  towards  a  beloved  and  faithful 
servant,  even  at  the  moment  in  which  He  made  him 
sensible  of  his  failure  in  the  energy  of  faith ;  for  He 
did  not  make  others  aware  of  it,  although  He  has 
communicated  it  to  us  for  our  instruction. 

I  said  failure  in  the  energy  of  faith ;  for,  with  re- 
spect to  the  mass  of  the  people,  Elijah's  judgment  was 
just.  God  reveals  His  thoughts  and  His  intentions  to 
him,  and  even  points  out  to  him  the  agents  He  will 
employ ;  and,  while  definitely  replacing  the  prophet  by 
Elisha,  God  nevertheless  makes  him  publicly  re-enter 
His  service,  by  commanding  him  to  call  Elisha  to  ac- 
company him  in  his  work.  Thus  Elijah  resumes  his 
ministry  in  the  midst  of  Israel. 

Now  Ahaziah  walked  in  the  way  of  his  father,  and 
openly  confessed  Baal  to  be  his  god  by  sending  to  con- 
sult Baal-zebub  at  Ekron.  Sent  to  meet  the  king's 
messengers,  Elijah  pronounces  his  sentence  from  the 
Lord.  Incensed  at  being  opposed  in  his  iniquity, 
Ahaziah  sends  men  of  his  army  to  take  him. 

We  find  again  here  the  same  judicial  character  in 
Elijah's  miracles  which  was  spoken  of  before — a  cha- 
racter pointed  out  by  Jehovah  Himself.  He  calls 
down  fire  from  heaven  to  consume  these  men.  The 
last  of  those  sent  by  the  king,  owning  the  authority 
and  power  of  Elijah,  has  his  life  spared.  Elijah  goes 
down  with  him  to  the  king,  to  declare  again  to  him  in 
person  Jehovah's  judgment  which  awaited  him. 

I. 


522  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

And  now  we  reach  the  end  of  the  troubles  and 
afflictions  of  this  precious  and  faithful  servant  of  God. 
And,  if  we  do  not  find  in  his  case  the  calmness  of  the 
ascension  of  Jesus,  who,  while  blessing  His  disciples, 
ascends  to  His  eternal  and  familiar  home;  if  this 
peculiar  characteristic  became  His  departure  alone, 
who — perfect  in  Himself  and  in  His  human  life,  in 
which  nothing  had  been  found  out  of  harmony  with 
the  heaven  He  was  re-entering — went  back  to  His 
Father,  from  whom  He  came ;  if  in  Elijah's  rapture 
we  find  not  the  elevation  of  One  who,  having  come 
forth  from  the  Father  and  come  into  the  world,  again 
left  the  world  and  returned  to  His  Father,  without 
having  for  one  moment  departed  from  this  word — 
"  The  Son  of  man  which  is  in  heaven,"  and  who  had 
so  much  the  more  right  and  title  to  be  there,  that  He 
had  perfectly  glorified  the  Father  here  below ;  if,  in  a 
word,  he  who  goes  up  is  not  the  God-man  ascending- 
after  having  finished  the  work  committed  to  Him,  at 
least  the  presence  of  God  is  felt  throughout  the  whole 
scene  in  the  most  solemn  manner — a  God  whose  pre- 
sence alone  can  abrogate  the  laws  of  His  government, 
and  set  aside,  in  His  servant's  behalf,  that  which  is 
appointed  unto  men. 

Moreover  it  is  not  surprising  that  such  an  event 
should  have  been  accompanied  with  the  mysterious 
solemnity  which  in  fact  surrounds  it,  and  that  those 
who  were  present  should  feel  that  something  was  about 
to  happen  which  was  beyond  the  common  track  of 
human  joy  and  sorrow. 

Elijah,  taken  away  by  the  power  of  God,  quits  the 
earth  without  passing  through  death.  We  find  in  the 
fact  itself  a  marvellous  testimony  to  the  sovereign 
goodness  of  God,  and  to  the  approbation  He  bestowed 
upon  His  faithful  servant. 

The  details  are  worthy  of  all  attention. 

If  the  prophet's  translation  to  heaven  is  the  great 


II  KINGS.  523 

object  presented  to  faith,  we  find  also  that  he  goes  to 
every  place  that  had  a  voice  with  respect  to  God's  re- 
lationship to  Israel.  Elijah  maintained,  in  spite  of  the 
king,  the  relationship  between  God  and  Israel,  accord- 
ing to  God's  faithfulness,  and  as  a  prophet  upon  the 
earth.*  He  did  not  maintain  it  by  the  king,  which, 
since  David,  was  the  normal  state  of  the  people.  This 
earthly  relationship  was  impossible,  and  was  to  close 
by  an  act  of  judgment.  It  is  this  which  took 
place,  with  respect  even  to  Judah,  in  the  rejection  of 
Christ. 

Nevertheless  the  counsels  of  God  change  not ;  they 
will  be  fulfilled  in  heavenly  power. 

Elisha  is,  so  to  say,  the  link  between  these  two 
things  as  to  prophecy.  He  does  not  return  to  Horeb, 
to  announce  the  uselessness  of  an  earthly  ministry, 
and,  in  some  sort,  to  place  the  broken  law  again  in  His 
hands  who  gave  it,  but  who  was  really  acting  in  grace.'f' 
The  starting-point  of  his  ministry  is  the  ascended  man, 

*  This  consideration  makes  Elijah's  position  pretty  evident. 
We  have  seen  that  prophecy  was  the  means  of  maintaining 
God's  relationship  with  Israel,  in  a  sovereign  manner,  when 
the  ark  had  been  taken  and  the  priesthood  was  fallen.  Pro- 
phecy still  holds  this  place  in  the  presence  of  royalty  in  a  state 
of  failure,  which,  instead  of  maintaining  the  people  in  relation- 
ship with  God,  causes  them  to  depart  from  Him.  While  pre- 
senting then*  true  King  to  the  people  according  to  Zechariah's 
prophecy,  Christ  filled  also  this  prophetic  office  according  to  the 
word  of  Moses,  only  in  a  manner  quite  pecuhar.  It  must  be 
remembered  that,  in  comparing  Elijah  and  Elisha  with  the 
Lord,  Christ  is  looked  at  in  this  character.  This  gives  a  very 
important  position  to  the  function  of  prophecy.  (Compare  Hosea 
xii.  13.) 

t  It  is  this  grace,  which  Elijah  had  not  properly  understood, 
that  was  the  only  means  by  which  God  could  maintain  His  re- 
lationship with  the  people ;  so  that  a  return  to  Horeb  could 
only  put  an  end  to  the  relation  itself  as  standing  on  Sinai 
ground,  and  especially  to  the  ministry  of  Elijah  which  took 
no  higher  position.  Nevertheless  God  wrought  for  the  revela- 
tion of  all  this. 

IL 


524  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

evidently  quite  a  new  starting-point  in  God's  messages 
to  Israel.  Up  to  this  point  he  constantly  attached 
himself  to  Elijah.  The  latter  had  thrown  his  pro- 
phetic mantle  over  him  (1  Kings  xix.) ;  Elisha  thence- 
forth was  as  if  identified  with  him. 

At  the  present  moment,  when  Elijah  is  under  the 
extraordinary  power  which  is  to  snatch  him  away 
from  Elisha,  will  the  faith  of  Elisha  maintain  this 
position  ?  Yes  ;  the  power  of  God  upholds  him,  and  he 
accompanies  Elijah  until  the  chariots  of  God  Himself 
separate  them,  and  in  such  a  way  that  he  may  see 
Elijah  ascending  to  heaven  upon  them.  Through 
grace  the  whole  heart  of  Elisha  was  in  the  prophet's 
ministry,  and  by  faith  he  walked  in  the  height  of 
God's  thoughts  in  this  respect. 

Let  us  trace  their  path  upon  the  earth.  It  is  no 
longer  the  weakness  of  man,  as  when  he  went  to 
Horeb,  but  the  power  of  God;  and  Elijah  traverses 
all  that  in  type  had  to  do  with  God's  relationship 
with  Israel,  even  death  itself  (and  that  dry-shod),  up 
to  heaven.  Gilgal*  is  his  starting-point — the  conse- 
cration of  man  to  God  by  death  applied  to  the  flesh — 
the  place  where  Israel  was  cleansed  from  all  remem- 
brance of  Egypt,  where  the  people  were  set  apart  for 
God,  where  their  camp  was  fixed  for  their  victories 
under  Joshua ;  in  a  word,  it  was  the  place  where,  by 
circumcision,-|-  Israel  was  definitively  separated  unto 


*  Eeflection  will  shew  us  that  all  this  is  a  moral  history  of  the 
life  of  Christ,  save  that  Christ  is  what  He  makes  us  to  be.  But 
this  is  everywhere  true.  Still  it  was  experimentally  realised  in 
Him.  He  had  not  to  be  circumcised :  still  it  was  the  circum- 
cision of  Christ.  See  following  note.  So  the  high  priest  was 
washed  as  well  as  the  priests.  Though  absolutely  obedient  in 
nature  and  will,  He  learned  obedience. 

t  This,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  Book  of  Joshua,  was  in 
Canaan  after  the  passage  of  Jordan,  as  the  circumcision  of 
Christ  (that  is,  His  separation  from  evil  which,  always  true  in 


II  KINGS.  525 

God.  Elijah  repairs  thither,  and  acknowledges  it  thus 
according  to  God,  although  it  was  now  only  a  place  of 
sin  to  the  people.*  He  attains  the  mind  of  God  with 
respect  to  the  people,  as  separated  from  evil  and  con- 
secrated to  God.  He  sets  out  with  this.  He  thinks 
with  God  :  this  is  faith. 

Elisha  will  not  leave  him  ;  and  they  go  away  to 
Bethel ;  that  is  to  say,  Elijah  places  himself  in  the 
testimony  of  God's  unchangeable  faithfulness  to  His 
people.i*  He  acknowledges  it;  he  takes  his  place  in 
it ;  and  Elisha  is  with  him. 

These  were  the  two  main  branches  of  faith — of  the 
faith  of  God's  people :  the  setting  apart  of  the  people, 
of  man,  unto  God ;  and  the  unchangeable  and  per- 
petual faithfulness  of  God  to  His  people,  whatever 
their  circumstances  may  be. 

•  Israel  (what  a  triumph  to  Satan  !)  had  set  their  false 
gods,  their  golden  calf,  in  Bethel.  Elijah  (and  this  is 
faith)  links  himself  with  the  mind  of  God  there  in 
spite  of  this.  These  two  things  compose  the  life  of 
Jesus  on  earth  in  the  midst  of  Israel. 

Elijah  cannot  stay  there.  What  will  he  find  in 
going  farther  ?  The  scene  changes :  he  is  still  with 
God.  But  if  transgression  is  multiplied  at  Gilgal,  and 
if  false  gods  are  worshipped  at  Bethel,  as  "  the  king's 
chapel  and  the  king's  court,"  the  curse  will  meet  him 
(for  Israel  has  placed  itself  under  it).     He  goes  to 

His  Person,  was  externally  made  good  in  His  death)  has  a  true 
heavenly  character,  and  to  us  is  by  being  risen,  and  in  heavenly 
places. 

*  See  Amos  iv.  4,  Hosea  ix.  15,  and  many  other  passages  in 
the  prophets.  This  is  a  very  striking  fact,  just  as  the  cross  now 
is  a  matter  of  constant  idolatry.  The  memorial  of  good,  of  the 
denial  and  death  of  flesh  too,  is  to  flesh  the  power  of  evil.  Oh, 
what  is  man ! 

t  See  Genesis  xxviii.  13-15.  Here  too  one  of  the  calves  was 
set  up ;  the  place  of  special  blessing  again  made  the  place  of 
idolatry. 

II. 


526  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

Jericho.  It  was  there  that  formerly  the  power  of  the 
enemy  barred  the  whole  land  against  Israel,  and  God 
had  smitten  Jericho  and  pronounced  a  curse  against 
it.  Man  had  rebuilt  it  to  his  own  destruction.  (1 
Kings  xvi.  34.)  Pleasant  as  its  situation  was,  the 
curse  of  God  still  rested  on  it.  Elijah  goes  thither, 
and  Elisha  accompanies  him,  and  refuses  to  leave 
him. 

But  he  does  not  remain  there  either ;  he  is  still  under 
the  mighty  hand  of  God,  Elisha  following  him.  The 
sons  of  the  prophets  give  their  testimony  to  that 
which  shall  take  place  (but  they  only  look  on  from 
afar,  when  the  two  prophets  draw  nigh  to  Jordan) ; 
Slisha  knows  it  too,  and  puts  an  end  to  a  discourse 
which,  adding  nothing  to  his  knowledge  of  the  mind 
of  God,  and  disturbing  the  concentration  of  his 
thoughts,  tended  rather  to  weaken  the  union  of  his 
soul  with  Elijah. 

Elijah  comes  at  length  to  Jordan,  the  type  of  death, 
which  should  carry  him  out  of  the  land  of  earthly 
promise,  and  break  the  links  of  God  Himself  with 
Israel  on  that  footing.  He  crossed  it  indeed  dry-shod. 
We  know  that  he  ascended  without  having  tasted 
death,  but  typically  he  passed  through  it.  (It  is  not 
a  question  here  of  expiation,  but  of  passing  through 
death.)  And  now,  beyond  the  borders  of  Israel — the 
land  of  law,  forsaken  of  God — he  can  freely  propose 
blessing  to  Elisha  according  to  his  desire. 

As  Jesus  said,  "  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptised 
with,  and  how  am  I  straitened  until  it  be  accom- 
plished."   In  every  detail  death  is  the  path  of  liberty. 

Elisha,  attached  by  the  power  of  God  to  the  prophet 
— to  the  same  ministry  which  Elijah  had  just  left — asks 
for  a  double  portion  of  his  spirit ;  and,  although  now 
separated  from  him,  yet  associated  by  faith  with  Elijah, 
gone  up  on  high  (testified  by  his  having  seen  him  in 
his  heavenly  condition),  his  request  is  granted.     He 


n  KINGS.  527 

again  receives  Elijah's  mantle;  but  it  is  that  of  the 
ascended  Elijah. 

As  we  have  said,  the  starting-point  of  his  ministry 
is  not  Sinai.  It  is  heaven  beyond  the  borders  of 
Canaan,  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  which  is  the  type  of 
death.  For,  the  law  having  been  broken,  and  pro- 
phecy— which  set  before  the  people  their  relation  to 
God  on  earth,  and  His  blessing  on  that  earth — having 
been  proved  powerless  for  restoration,  the  faithful 
prophet,  forsaking  a  land  which  had  rejected  him, 
had  taken  his  place  outside  a  blind  and  ungrateful 
people,  and  had  been  taken  up  to  Him  who  had  sent 
him  (hidden,  so  to  speak,  in  God ;  although  that  expres- 
sion, in  its  fulness,  is  true  of  the  precious  Saviour  alone). 

Up  to  Jordan  Elijah  demanded,  by  his  ministry,  that 
the  righteous  claims  of  God  upon  His  people  should 
be  satisfied.  He  sets  these  claims  before  them.  He 
must  withdraw,  and  God  takes  him  away  from  a  people 
who  did  not  know  Himfi. 

At  Sinai  he  acted  in  human  weakness,  although  God 
had  revealed  Himself.  Why  retire  to  Horeb,  where 
the  law  dwelt  which  the  people  had  broken?  This 
could  be  only  to  demand  the  execution  of  justice. 
While  manifesting  that  He  could  in  His  own  time 
exercise  justice,  God  reserved  to  Himself  His  sovereign 
rights  of  grace.  But  in  effect  it  is  fitting  that  it 
should  be  exercised  in  a  sovereign  manner  beyond 
the  limits  of  man's  responsibility.  The  relationship 
of  Christ  with  Israel,  with  man,  clearly  explains  this. 
Therefore  God  first  shews  that  grace  has  reserved  the 
perfect  number  who  were  known  of  God  in  Israel ; 
then,  having  sent  Elijah  to  fill  up  the  long-suffering 
of  the  will  of  God  in  grace  towards  the  people,  instead 
of  cutting  Israel  off",  He  places  ministry  in  a  position 
with  respect  to  Israel,  in  which  He  can  act  sovereignly 
in  grace  towards  every  one  who  has  faith  to  avail 
himself  of  it. 

IL 


528  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBT.E. 

After  Elijah  had  passed  the  Jordan,  we  have  seen 
that  all  was  changed.  Until  then  Elisha  is  on  proba- 
tion; after  that,  grace  acts.  In  principle  it  is  the 
position  of  Christ  towards  the  assembly*  or  at  least 
towards  men  in  grace;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  sovereign 
grace,  to  the  actings  of  which  death  has  given  free 
course,  justice  having  nothing  more  to  say,  and  no 
longer  resting  on  the  responsibility  of  man  who  had 
undertaken  to  obey,  and  from  whom  obedience  was 
due.  Justice  now  consists  in  God's  having  His  rights, 
in  His  glorifying  Himself,  as  is  just,  by  being  consis- 
tent with  His  entire  being,  love,  justice,  sovereignty, 
majesty,  truth,  and  every  attribute  which  forms  a 
part  of  His  perfection.  He  does  so  according  to  His 
sovereignty;  and  He  does  it  by  the  Christ  who  has 
glorified  Him  on  the  earth  in  all  these  respects,  in 
every  part  of  His  being,  so  indeed  as  to  make  Him 
known.  The  testimony  of  it  is  that  He  has  exalted 
Christ  as  man  to  His  right  hand. 

It  must  be  remembered  here  that  the  application  of 
this  regards  Israel,  so  that  the  rejection  of  the  people 
is  considered  to  have  taken  place  by  the  very  fact  of 
Elijah's  rapture.  God  has  ceased  to  maintain  His  re- 
lationship with  them.  In  His  sovereign  counsels  God 
never  withdraws  His  love  from  Israel ;  but,  on  the 
ground  of  the  people's  responsibility,  God  has  judged 
them.  He  has  stretched  out  His  hands  all  the  day  to 
a  rebellious  and  gainsaying  people.  Therefore  Elisha 
says  to  the  king  of  Israel,  "  Get  thee  to  the  prophets 
of  thy  father,  and  to  the  prophets  of  thy  mother. 
Were  it  not  that  I  regard  the  presence  of  Jehosha- 
phat,  the  king  of  Judah,  I  would  not  look  toward  thee." 

Elisha  nevertheless  returns  to  Israel  in  grace.  His 
ministry  has  then  this  distinctive  character,  that  it  is 
a  testimony  to  the  rejection  of  all  that  belonged  to 

♦  And  of  course  towards  Israel  also. 


II  KINGS.  529 

the  condition  of  responsibility  in  which  the  people 
had  been  placed;  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  a  testi- 
mony to  grace  by  faith,  according  to  election  and  the 
sovereignty  of  God,  in  order  to  maintain  the  people  in 
blessing ;  and  that  through  the  righteous  execution 
of  the  judgment  which  their  sin  had  brought  upon 
them. 

This  is  what  the  return  of  Christ  will  be  for 
Israel,  rather  than  what  it  will  be  for  the  assembly, 
notwithstanding  that  fundamentally  the  principle  is 
the  same. 

Elisha,  in  the  power  of  resurrection,  re-enters  the 
scene  of  Elijah's  labours,  who  had  sought  in  vain — as 
He  also  had  done  who  was  more  excellent  than  Elijah 
— to  gather  Israel  unto  the  God  of  their  fathers  (that 
is  to  say,  to  bring  back  man  in  the  flesh  to  some  faith- 
fulness towards  God).  Jericho  (pleasant  in  itself  yet, 
as  we  have  seen,  an  accursed  place)  ceases  to  be  so  ;  the 
curse  is  removed,  and  the  spring  of  waters  permanently 
healed,  by  means  of  salt  brought  in  a  new  cruse :  a 
type,  I  doubt  not,  of  the  purifying  power  of  grace 
which  separates  man  from  evil,  and  which  removes 
evil,  as  contrary  to  the  relationship  of  man  with  God ; 
a  moral  power,  which  will  take  away  the  curse  from 
the  world,  and  especially  from  the  Jews,  who  are  the 
centre  of  rebellion  against  God.  Salt  represents  puri- 
fying power  in  the  eflScacy  and  the  permanency  that 
distinguish  the  work  of  God  which  heals  the  object 
of  blessing ;  and  it  characterises,  according  to  the 
faithfulness  of  God,  the  source  of  blessing  itself.  The 
new  vessel  is  an  image  of  the  renewed  condition  of  all 
things  through  resurrection. 

From  Jericho  Elisha  goes  up  to  Bethel,  which,  as  we 
have  seen,  is  a  place  commemorative  of  the  unchange- 
able faithfulness  of  God*  towards  Israel;  a  faithful - 

*  This  is  the  reason  why  Paul  (Acts  xiii.  3,  5)  quotes  these 
words,  "  I  will  give  you  the  sure  mercies  of  David,"  in  proof  of 
VOL.  L  II.  M  M 


530  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

ness  which  can  now  bring  forth  all  its  fruits  through 
death  and  resurrection. 

From  Bethel  he  proceeds  to  Carmel,*  that  is  to 
God's  fruitful  field,  the  place  where  judgment  had 
been  executed  upon  Baal,  the  prince  of  this  world ;  a 
place  typical  of  that  condition  of  Israel  which  will  be 
the  fruit  of  the  fulfilment  of  God's  faithful  promises. 
It  will  be  seen  that  all  this  answers  perfectly  to  the 
character  of  his  ministry,  as  we  have  considered  it, 
and  answers  to  it  in  so  much  the  more  interesting  a 
manner  from  being  in  contrast  with  Elijah's  ministry ; 
the  path  of  each  corresponding  with  the  ministry 
which  we  have  ascribed  to  them  respectively. 

From  Carmel  Elisha  returns  to  Samaria,  in  connec- 
tion with  which  his  ordinary  ministry  is  fulfilled. 

There  remains  another  circumstance  to  be  noticed  in 
this  history.  Elisha  curses  the  children  who  mock 
him.  This  action  not  only  shews  us  the  prophet's 
authority  upheld  by  God ;  it  characterises  his  position. 
For  although  sovereign  grace,  in  spite  of  Israel's  fall, 
is  in  exercise  towards  the  people,  yet,  together  with 
grace,  judgment  shall  be  manifested  with  respect  to 
those  who  despise  the  messenger  of  God.  It  will  be 
well  to  remark  that  the  judgment  happens  when  he 
re-enters  the  land  of  Israel,  before  he  takes  his  place 
in  the  unchangeable  promises  of  God  to  His  people. 
Thenceforth  it  is  the  Carmel  of  God  which  is  presented 
to  our  faith. 

We  may  observe  also,  in  this  chapter,  how  little  man 
realises  and  believes  what  he  knows,  if  in  spirit  he  is 

the  resurrection  of  Christ,  "no  more  to  return  to  corruption." 
Death  rendered  blessing  possible  with  respect  to  a  rebellious 
people,  and  resurrection  gave  complete  stability  to  the  conferred 
blessing;  this  was  secured.  Compare  Isaiah  Iv.  where  grace 
towards  Israel  and  the  nations,  through  a  risen  Saviour,  is 
gloriously  proclaimed. 
*  Compare  Isaiah  xxxii.  15-18. 


II  KINGS.  531 

not  identified  with  it.  The  sons  of  the  prophets  knew 
that  Elijah  was  to  be  taken  away.  Nevertheless  they 
propose  to  search  for  him. 

In  the  following  chapter  we  enter  into  the  historical 
part  of  Elisha's  ministry.  Jehoram  goes  to  war ;  and, 
although  less  wicked  than  his  father,  the  prophet  no 
longer  regards  him.  Jehoshaphat  is  still  something  to 
him  :  but  the  prophet  seeks  to  abstract  himself  from 
the  influence  of  the  whole  scene.  He  then  proclaims 
blessing,  and  directs  the  counsels  of  the  united  kings. 
He  is  a  saviour  of  Israel.  He  provides  (chajf.  iv.)  for 
the  need  of  the  poor  of  his  people,  and  delivers  them 
from  their  distress.  He  bestows  the  heart's  desire 
upon  faith,  which  recognises  and  receives  the  prophet; 
and  restores  life  to  the  dead,  thus  binding  up  the 
broken  heart.  He  feeds  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
during  the  famine,  and  multiplies  the  scant  measure 
of  bread.  Death  having  been  mingled  with  the  food, 
he  remedies  the  evil  so  that  they  eat  with  impunity. 

Elisha  goes  also  beyond  the  borders  of  Israel  in  dis- 
pensing the  blessing  of  which  he  is  the  instrument ; 
and,  when  the  king  of  Israel  is  troubled  at  Naaman's 
coming,  Elisha  heals  the  leprosy  of  this  Gentile,  who 
is  brought  to  acknowledge  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel, 
as  the  only  true  God.  The  Lord  Jesus  points  out  the 
sovereign  grace  of  God  on  this  occasion,  which,  over- 
stepping the  narrow  limits  of  Israel,  and,  owning  no 
longer  their  rio^hts,  acts  towards  the  Gentiles  in  the 
way  of  election. 

As  it  has  been  frequently  remarked,  the  means  used 
were  simple,  and  humbling  to  the  flesh  and  to  the 
pride  of  man,  having  their  efiicacy  in  full  apprehen- 
sion of,  and  full  submission  of  heart  and  faith  to, 
death,  which  is  become  life  unto  man,  and  that  which 
heals  him  and  cleanses  him  from  sin.  The  man  who 
was  the  most  closely  connected  with  Elisha,  a  prey  to 
covetousness,  suffers  the  painful   consequences  of  a 

II.-V. 


532  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

hardened  heart ;  and  that  from  which  the  Gentile  had 
been  freed  comes  irremediably  upon  him.  Such  is  the 
position  of  Israel,  outwardly  nearer  to  Jehovah,  but 
morally  afar  from  Him. 

The  sons  of  the  prophets  must  enlarge  their  dwell- 
ing-place, and  Elisha,  who  consents  to  go  with  them, 
secures  them  from  the  results  of  their  negligence  by 
reversing  the  laws  of  nature. 

I  know  not  if  we  should  seek  here  for  anything  be- 
yond the  general  character  of  the  miracle,  or  find  a 
type  in  the  fact  that  Jordan  is  in  question.  So  far  as 
Jordan  has  a  typical  meaning,  that  meaning  is  abiding. 
It  means  death.  The  house  built  with  that  which  was 
taken  thence,  and  the  power  of  the  stream  overcome 
and  destroyed  by  the  piece  of  wood  cast  into  it,  by 
means  of  which  that  which  was  beyond  hope  and  lost 
was  rescued  from  it,  easily  suggest  a  typical  meaning. 
I  dare  not  say  positively  that  it  is  the  mind  of  the 
Spirit ;  and  we  must  not  give  way  to  imagination. 

Elisha  preserves  Israel  after  this  from  the  attacks  of 
their  powerful  enemies.  The  king  of  Syria  seeking  to 
take  Elisha  prisoner,  it  is  Elisha,  on  the  contrary,  who 
captures  the  whole  host  that  came  to  seize  him,  thus 
teaching  his  blind  servant,  who  had  eyes  and  saw  not, 
the  unfailing  care  with  which  the  Almighty  constantly 
surrounds  His  own  people. 

After  having  taught  the  enemy  the  power  of  Israel's 
God,  and  the  folly  of  attacking  His  people  when  the 
messenger  of  His  covenant  is  with  them,  Elisha  lets 
the  Syrians  go  ;  and  these  men  come  no  more  into  the 
land  of  Israel. 

All  these  miracles  sufiiciently  characterise  Elisha's 
ministry.  The  poor  comforted,  the  Gentiles  healed, 
Israel  delivered  and  protected,  the  election  blessed, 
Israel  and  their  unfaithful  king  set  aside  as  regards 
the  prophet's  testimony — all  this  we  find  in  it.  These 
miracles  are  more  numerous  than  Elijah's.   The  burden 


6 

4 


n  KINGS.  535^ 

which  weighed  upon  Elijah's  heart  had  no  place  in 
Elisha's;  and  therefore  he  sought  relief  neither  in 
judgment  upon  the  evil,  nor  in  withdrawing  from  a 
useless  labour. 

The  iniquity  of  Israel  plunges  the  nation  again  into 
distress ;  and  Samaria  is  desolated  by  famine.  The 
judgment  produces  indignation  against  Jehovah's  testi- 
mony; for,  although  Jehoram  did  not  worship  Baal, 
his  heart  was  unchanged.  Then  comes  the  despair 
which  considers  it  useless  to  wait  any  longer  upon 
Jehovah.*  This  is  the  result  of  professing  Jeho- 
vah's name,  when  there  is  no  faith  in  Him.  It  was 
so  with  Israel  in  the  wilderness :  "  Wherefore  hath 
Jehovah  brought  us  up  hither  to  destroy  all  this 
people  ?" 

Elisha  appears  here  again  as  saviour,  or,  at  least,  as 
proclaiming  Jehovah's  salvation.  The  unbelief  of  the 
king's  attendant,  who  considered  this  deliverance  im- 
possible, is  punished  at  the  moment  when  he  sees  the 
abundance.  When  all  is  impossible  to  man,  Jeho- 
vah interposes ;  and  in  a  moment  the  whole  scene  is 
changed. 

The  history  of  the  woman,i-  whose  son  Elisha  had 

*  It  may  be  doubted  whether  what  is  said  in  verse  33  be  not 
the  words  of  EHsha. 

f  It  seems  to  me  that  Gehazi  stands  here  in  a  grievous  posi- 
tion. Smitten  by  the  hand  of  God,  because  his  heart  clung  to 
earth,  even  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah's  mighty  and  long- 
suffering  testimony,  he  is  now  a  parasite  in  the  king's  court,  re- 
lating the  wonderful  things  in  which  he  no  longer  took  part. 
This  poor  world  grows  weary  enough  of  itself  to  lead  it  to  take 
some  pleasure  in  hearing  anything  spoken  of  that  has  reality 
and  power.  Provided  that  it  does  not  reach  the  conscience,  they 
will  listen  to  it  for  their  amusement,  taking  credit  to  themselves 
perhaps  for  an  enlarged  and  a  liberal  mind,  which  is  not  en- 
slaved by  that  which  they  can  yet  recognise  philosophically  in 
its  place.  But  that  is  a  sad  position,  which  makes  it  evident 
that  formerly  we  were  connected  with  a  testimony,  whilst  now 
we  only  relate  its  marvels  at  court.  Nevertheless  God  makes 
VI.,  VII. 


534  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

raised  to  life  again,  gives  us  a  little  picture  of  all  God's 
dealings  with  Israel.  During  long  years,  as  determined 
by  Jehovah,  Israel  is  deprived  of  everything ;  but  God 
has  preserved  all  for  them,  and  in  the  day  of  blessing 
all  will  be  restored  to  them ;  and  they  shall  receive 
double  the  fruit  of  their  years  of  affliction.  It  is  the 
son  restored  to  life  that  brings  blessing. 

Nevertheless  the  judgments  of  God  are  being  accom- 
plished. Elisha  goes  to  Damascus,  and  Hazael,  the  rod 
of  Jehovah  to  chastise  His  people,  is  placed  on  the 
throne  of  Syria.  On  the  other  hand,  Elisha  is  acknow- 
ledged by  the  Gentiles  themselves. 

The  Spirit  of  God  takes  notice  of  the  consequences 
of  Judah's  alliance  with  Israel;  but  with  this  excep- 
tion, Judah  for  the  time  is  out  of  sight. 

In  chapter  ix.  the  judgment  on  Ahab's  house  com- 
mences. He  who  executes  it  does  not  remove,  in  so 
doing,  the  rod  which  God  had  lifted  up  against  Israel 
in  the  person  of  Hazael.  By  means  of  Jehu  God 
judges  the  house  of  Ahab;  but  Israel  was  oppressed 
by  the  Syrians,  and  their  land  overrun  by  them 
during  the  whole  of  Jehu's  reign.  Going  farther 
than  Jehoram,  Jehu  destroyed  Baal  and  his  worship 
at  the  same  time  as  the  house  of  Ahab :  but  he  did 
not  return  unto  Jehovah.  He  saw  the  folly  of  idolatry : 
energetic  and  ambitious,  his  interest  lay  on  the  other 
side.  When  the  prophet  of  the  Lord  announces  to  him 
the  near  possession  of  the  throne,  he  hearkens  unto 
him.  Sincere  perhaps  in  the  conviction  that  Jehovah 
was  God,  he  was  quite  ready  to  honour  Him  when  his 
interest  agreed  with  his  convictions.  He  displayed  all 
his  energies  in  accomplishing  a  work  to  which  he  had 
devoted  himself.  Ahab's  religion  had  no  charm  for 
him.      He  had  felt  in  his  conscience  the  power  of 

UBG  of  it ;  and  it  does  not  follow  that  there  was  no  truth  in 
Gehazi.  But  to  rise  in  the  world,  and  entertain  the  world  with 
the  mighty  works  of  God,  is  to  fall  very  deeply. 


n  KINGS.  535 

Elijah's  testimony;  and  he  understood  that  it  was 
madness  to  fight  against  Jehovah,  whose  part  he  had 
taken.  What  he  did  for  Jehovah,  he  did  well,  accord- 
ing to  his  wonted  energy.  Nevertheless  his  vengeance 
is  without  the  fear  of  Jehovah  ;  it  is  carnal.  (See 
Hosea  i.  4.)  At  the  same  time  the  golden  calves  still 
existed,  as  the  sanctuary  of  the  kingdom,  with  whose 
origin  they  were  connected,  and  of  which  they  were 
the  national  religion.  This  Jehu  did  not  care  to  touch. 
God  recognises  a  zeal  which  had  judged  evil  uprightly ; 
for  the  question  here  was  His  outward  government, 
and  not  His  judgment  of  the  secrets  of  the  heart ;  and 
in  fact  Jehu  acted  faithfully  in  destroying  Baal  root 
and  branch.  Thus  he  slays  the  king  of  Judah,  who 
was  confederate  with  the  evil,  and  the  royal  family  of 
Judah,  who  had  come  to  visit  that  of  Israel.  Every- 
thing falls  before  his  avenging  sword,  and  the  words 
of  Elijah,  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  are  fulfilled.  Thus 
it  is  Elisha  who  performs  the  function  of  Elijah*  in 
his  stead,  prophetically  anointing  Hazael  and  Jehu, 
although  not  with  his  own  hands. 

In  chapter  xi.  the  judgment  of  God  falls  upon  the 
family!  which  had  corrupted  Israel,  and  even  Judah 
also.  The  daughter  of  the  house  of  Ahab,  the  usurper 
of  the  throne  of  Judah,  Athaliah,  is  cut  off  through 

*  In  this  respect  Elijah  and  Elisha  form  but  one  prophet,  with 
the  difference  that  has  been  pointed  out.  Elisha  was  a  "  prophet 
in  his  room,''  an  expression  not  used  with  regard  to  prophets  in 
general.  In  fact  it  is  Clirist  risen  who  will  execute,  or  cause  to 
be  executed,  the  judgments  of  God  upon  apostate  Israel.  (See 
Psalms  XX.,  xxi.) 

f  During  the  time  that  Ahab,  stirred  up  by  Jezebel,  as  well  as 
his  family  and  sons,  are  the  instruments  of  Israel's  apostasy  and 
corruption,  God  sends  the  testimony  of  Elijah  and  Ehsha.  This 
is,  in  the  main  (after  Solomon),  the  subject  of  the  two  Books  of 
Kings.  The  fall  of  the  house  of  David,  brought  on  by  its 
alliance  with  Israel,  or  by  the  example  of  their  kings,  is  related 
in  the  end  of  the  book,  where  we  find  also  the  connections  of 
the  Assyrians  with  the  people  of  God. 
VUI.-XI. 


536  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

the  faithfulness  of  the  high  priest,  whose  wife  had 
preserved  one  of  the  offspring  of  David. 

Nevertheless  there  is  not  true  zeal  for  Jehovah. 
The  priests  keep  the  money  to  themselves,  which  they 
had  agreed  to  use  for  repairing  the  house  of  the  Lord, 
until  the  king  interposes  to  set  things  in  order. 

Walking  in  the  steps  of  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat, 
the  house  of  Jehu  was  no  protection  to  Israel  against 
Hazael.  But  the  compassion  of  Jehovah  raised  up  a 
deliverer.  To  His  pitiful  heart  there  was  yet  space 
for  long-suffering  towards  His  people.  Elisha,  at  the 
point  of  death,  puts  the  king  in  the  way  of  deliver- 
ance ;  but  his  heart  was  unable  to  embrace  it  in  its 
full  extent.  Still,  in  the  reign  of  Jehoash,  the  Syrians 
were  driven  back  into  their  own  land ;  and  Jeroboam, 
although  walking  in  the  evil  ways  of  the  son  of 
Nebat,  was  able  to  recover  all  the  original  possessions 
of  Judah  ;  for  God  had  pity  on  Israel,  and  had  seen 
that  their  affliction  was  very  bitter. 

Alas  !  when  it  is  not  the  faith  of  God's  people  that 
is  the  source  of  their  strength,  one  enemy  destroyed 
only  makes  room  for  another.  The  Assyrian  soon  ap- 
pears on  the  scene.  Elisha  being  dead,  Israel — de- 
prived of  this  last  link  with  God — soon  fall  into 
anarchy  and  ruin.  The  Assyrian  invades  the  land. 
Israel,  leagued  with  the  king  of  Syria,  turn  their  last 
efforts  against  Judah.  A  sorrowful  picture  of  the 
people  of  God  !  The  alliance  between  Syria  and  Israel 
brings  out  the  king  of  Judah's  unfaithfulness,  and 
entangles  him  in  the  snares  of  the  Assyrian. 

Elisha,  already  dead,  restores  life  to  a  corpse  which 
was  being  hastily  buried  on  account  of  an  invasion  of 
the  Moabites.  His  history,  unto  the  end,  is  stamped 
with  the  character  of  the  power  of  life.* 

*  To  understand  all  this  part  of  the  history  which  we  are 
considering,  the  prophets  Hosea  and  Amos  must  be  read,  and 
Isaiah  vii.  and  viii.  (compare  Hosea  v.  13 ;  viii.  4 ;  xi.  5 ;  Amos 


II   KINGS.  537 

This  resurrection,  wrought  by  contact  with  the  bones 
of  Elisha,  appears  to  me  to  give  the  comforting  in- 
struction, that,  while  apparently  lost  to  Israel,  the  true 
prophet  is  still  the  vessel  and  guardian  of  all  their 
hopes ;  and  that  when  Israel  is,  as  it  were,  dead  and 
forgotten.  He  will,  after  all,  restore  them  to  life  in  a 
manner  as  unexpected  as  powerful. 

We  come  now  to  the  connection  of  Judah  with  the 
Assyrian,  fruit  of  the  inward  demoralisation  of  the 
former. 

Ahaz  plunged  into  the  worst  idolatry.  Full  of 
worldly  wisdom,  he  seeks  in  the  new  power  of  As- 
syria a  support  against  enemies  nearer  home,  and  he 
succeeds  to  his  ruin.  We  see  again  here  the  nullity 
of  the  high  priest  in  presence  of  the  king.  It  ap- 
pears that  the  people  had  lost  their  confidence  in  the 
house  of  David,  as  had  the  latter  in  the  faithfulness 
and  goodness  of  the  Lord. 

Hoshea,  although  less  wicked  than  his  predecessors, 
concludes  the  list  of  kings,  whom  the  patience  of  God 
had  borne  with  in  Israel.  God  thought  of  His  people; 
and  now  there  was  no  more  hope  of  them.  They  were 
not  even  a  vessel  fit  to  contain  the  election  of  God,  to 
whom  He  made  Himself  known.  Brought  under  sub- 
jection to  the  king  of  Assyria,  Hoshea  had  sought 
help  from  Egypt.  After  the  king  of  Assyria  had 
put  him  in  prison,  Samaria  and  all  Israel  could  not 
long  resist.  The  people  of  God  are  carried  into 
captivity,  and  dispersed  among  the  cities  of  Assyria 
and  Media ;  and  the  land  which  belonged  to  Jehovah, 
and  which  had  been  given  in  possession  to  Israel,  is 

V.  27 ;  and  also  25,  26 ;  Hosea  xiii.  10, 11) ;  but,  to  understand 
well  God's  dealings,  the  whole  of  these  prophecies  should  be 
read.  I  have  only  quoted  the  passages  which  mark  the  connec- 
tion with  the  history  ;  but  the  internal  condition  of  the  people  is 
much  more  seen  in  the  prophets  than  even  in  the  books  which 
instruct  us  as  to  their  public  history. 
XII.-XVII. 


538  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

peopled  by  strangers,  sent  thither  by  the  king  of 
Assyria. 

In  the  prophecies  of  Hosea  the  two  great  principles 
of  God's  dealings  may  be  seen,  one  of  which  has  been 
set  before  us  in  Elisha  (the  connection  between  the  re- 
surrection of  the  man  about  to  be  buried,  and  the  first 
verse  I  shall  quote,  is  remarkable),  namely,  redemption 
from  the  power  of  death  (Hosea  xiii.  14) ;  and  the 
governmental  dealings  of  God.  (Hosea  xiv.  9.)  But 
how  the  prophet  labours  to  adapt  his  voice  to  the 
foolishness  of  Israel,  and  to  make  it  reach  the  con- 
science of  this  erring  people  !  He  comes  after  Elisha's 
death.  Elisha's  presence  among  them,  and  the  subse- 
quent testimony  of  Hosea,  bring  out  the  marvellous 
patience  and  kindness  of  God  towards  them.  Hosea 
gives  us  more  than  the  internal  history;  he  unfolds 
the  causes  of  the  judgments,  although  God  may  have 
sometimes  interposed  for  restoration,  and  may  have 
appeared  to  smite  when  the  king  was  less  wicked  than 
ordinarily. 

In  the  language  of  the  prophets  we  find  what  the 
people  really  were  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  promise 
of  their  restoration,  and  in  principle  even  that  of  our 
present  blessing,  is  found  there  also. 

The  history  of  that  which  happened  after  foreign 
nations  were  brought  in  shews  the  strange  confusion 
which  had  taken  place  in  Israel.  It  is  one  of  the 
former  priests  of  Jeroboam's  system  who  comes  to 
instruct  them  in  the  fear  of  Jehovah.  Together  with 
this  they  worship  their  own  gods.  A  medley,  hateful 
to  the  Lord,  is  the  consequence.  In  the  same  way 
that,  in  spite  of  their  unfaithfulness,  Jehovah  retained 
His  sovereign  rights  over  the  people,  we  find  Him  also 
vindicating  His  claim  to  the  land  after  the  people  were 
driven  out.     He  maintains  these  rights  for  ever. 

Chapter  xviii.  brings  us  to  a  rather  different  subject, 
namely,  the  relations  of  Judah  with  the  Assyrian,  who 


II  KINGS.  539 

had  become  their  oppressor  through  their  unfaithful- 
ness ;  and  also  their  relationship  with  Babylon. 

In  order  to  set  His  dealings  with  His  people  in  their 
true  light,  God  raises  up  a  faithful  king,  distinguished 
by  this,  that  he  puts  his  trust  in  Jehovah  as  no  king 
had  done  since  David  until  this  period,  and  as  none  did 
after  him  until  the  captivity.* 

That  which  happened  with  respect  to  the  brazen 
serpent  shews  us  the  tendency  of  the  heart  to  idolatry. 
And  how  many  things,  to  which  man  continues  at- 
tached in  a  carnal  way,  remain  hidden  in  the  midst  of 
so  many  blessings  and  chastenings !  This  teaches  us 
also  how  near — with  such  hearts  as  ours — is  the  re- 
membrance of  blessing,  to  idolatry  of  the  symbols  of 
blessing.  Faith  gets  rid  of  these  things ;  for  God  had 
given  the  brazen  serpent,  not  to  be  a  token  of  the  re- 
membrance after  the  cure,  but  in  order  to  cure.  Man 
preserved  it  by  a  very  natural  feeling ;  but  this  is  not 
of  God,  and  it  soon  became  the  instrument  of  Satan. 

Hezekiah  smites  the  Philistines,  those  inward  and 
perpetual  enemies  of  God's  people,  and  in  a  great 
measure  subdues  them. 

It  is  after  this  that  the  king  of  Assyria  comes  up. 

The  king  of  Assyria  had  carried  Israel  away  captive. 
His  successor  seeks  to  conquer  Judah  likewise.  Ac- 
cording to  the  prophet's  expression,  the  waters  of  this 
river  reached  even  to  the  neck.  The  power  of  the 
allied  kings  of  Israel  and  Sj^ria  appears  to  have  had 
some  attraction  for  the  people  of  Judah,  who,  on  the 
other  hand,  despised  the  weakness  of  the  house  of 
David ;  for  God  was  little  in  their  thoughts.  In  this 
confederacy,  favoured  apparently  by  the  people  of 
Judah  and  Jerusalem,  they  proposed  to  set  aside  the 
house  of  David  in  favour  of  the  son  of  Tabeal.  There 
was  an  apparently  well-conceived  plan  on  the  one  side, 

*  We  shall  see,  farther  on,  that  which  characterised  Josiah. 
XVUL 


540  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

and  an  imminent  danger  on  the  other.  But  these  were 
not  God's  thoughts.  In  His  mercy  He  would  not  yet 
put  out  the  lamp  of  David's  house.  He  sends  the 
promise  of  Emmanuel,  and  exhorts  the  remnant  to  put 
their  trust  in  Jehovah  Himself. 

We  shall  examine  this  more  in  detail  when  we  con- 
sider the  prophecy  of  Isaiah.  I  only  refer  to  it  now, 
in  order  to  elucidate  the  history  and  exhibit  the  con- 
dition of  the  people.  Ahaz,  who  did  not  trust  in  Jeho- 
vah, was  the  instrument  of  fulfilling  His  purposes; 
but  the  Assyrian,  in  whose  power  he  trusted,  became 
through  him  the  scourge  of  Judah. 

But,  in  order  still  to  bless  and  preserve  Jerusalem 
and  Judah,  God  raises  up  Hezekiah,  a  godly  and  faith- 
ful king,  who  put  his  trust  in  Jehovah.  Hezekiah  is 
unable  to  repulse  Sennacherib ;  so  that  the  people  are 
punished.  He  submits  to  Sennacherib,  offering  to  pay 
whatever  he  demands;  but  whether  the  king's  re- 
sources were  insufficient,  or  that  the  king  of  Assyria, 
after  having  accepted  the  present  which  Hezekiah  sent 
him,  broke  his  engagement  (compare  Isaiah  xxxiii.), 
Sennacherib,  taking  advantage  of  the  king's  apparent 
weakness,  requires  complete  submission,  both  from  the 
king  and  the  kingdom,  and  invites  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  to  come  out  of  the  city  and  place  them- 
selves under  his  command. 

We  see  however,  that  even  while  blaspheming  Jeho- 
vah, Sennacherib  is  conscious  that  he  is  in  the  presence 
of  a  principle  and  a  power  that  he  does  not  understand. 
The  people,  obedient  to  the  king's  commandment,  make 
him  no  answer.  Drawn  elsewhere  by  tidings  of  the 
king  of  Ethiopia's  attack,  Sennacherib  repeats  in  a  letter 
his  blasphemies  and  insults.  Hezekiah  lays  all  these 
things  before  Jehovah,  and  seeks  his  answer  through 
the  prophet  Isaiah.  The  same  night  God  smote  the 
army  of  the  Assyrians.  Sennacherib  returns  to  his  own 
country,  and  dies  there  by  the  hand  of  his  own  sons. 


I 


n  KINGS.  541 

Hezekiah  is  thus  a  t3rpe  of  the  true  Emmanuel,  of 
Him  before  whom  the  Assyrian,  the  desolater  of  Israel, 
will  fall.  This  is  a  very  important  history,  as  fore- 
shadowing the  events  of  the  last  days ;  but  it  will  be 
studied  more  advantageously  when  examining  the 
Book  of  Isaiah,  which  frequently  applies  it  in  this 
manner.  It  is  but  the  general  idea  that  needs  to  be 
touched  upon  here. 

We  find  here  again  in  a  figure  the  principle  with 
which  Israel's  deliverance,  and  that  of  all  men,  is  con- 
nected— a  principle  pointed  out  in  Elisha,  and  accom- 
plished in  Jesus.  Hezekiah  is  raised  as  from  the 
dead.  He  had  been  sick  unto  death  ;  but  Jehovah 
heard  his  prayer,  and,  on  his  humiliation,  revokes  the 
sentence  which  He  had  pronounced  through  Isaiah. 

But  man  can  scarcely  bear  exaltation.  Blessed  of 
Jehovah,  he  boasts  himself  of  that  which  he  has  re- 
ceived. After  having  displayed  all  his  riches  to  the 
ambassadors  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  who  were  sent  to 
congratulate  him  on  his  recovery,  he  is  warned  that  they 
shall  all  be  carried  away  even  to  Babylon.  The  king 
of  Babylon  felt,  perhaps,  some  satisfaction  in  allying 
himseK  with  one  who  had  not  yielded  to  the  power  of 
the  king  of  Assyria ;  but  the  world's  wisdom,  which 
cultivates  profitable  connections  with  the  people  of 
God,  is  always  a  snare  to  them.  Hezekiah  might 
have  made  known  the  source  and  giver  of  all  this ; 
but  he  acted  as  a  man.  Nevertheless  he  submits 
graciously  and  humbly  to  the  word  of  Jehovah,  which 
was  spoken  to  him  on  this  occasion. 

But,  at  this  period,  the  people  had  deeply  corrupted 
themselves,  and  the  impulse  which  God  had  given 
disappeared  entirely  with  the  man  in  whom  it  acted. 
The  son  of  Hezekiah  was  a  model  of  wickedness. 
God  was  about  to  transfer  power  to  the  Gentiles ; 
and,  even  while  making  it  manifest  that  certain  bless- 
ing  attended  faithfulness  and    trust  in  Himself,  He 

XIX.,   XX. 


642  THE  BOOKS  OF   THE    BIBLE. 

allowed  the  house  of  David  to  give  themselves  up  to 
debasement. 

When  Hezekiah  died  at  the  age  of  fifty-four,  his 
son  was  but  twelve  years  old.  Beguiled  himself, 
Manasseh  seduced  the  people,  who  were  but  too  will- 
ing to  commit  greater  iniquity  than  the  nations  who 
knew  not  God. 

The  particular  events  of  Manasseh's  life  are  not 
related  here.  The  Holy  Ghost,  having  given  us  the 
details,  in  that  which  precedes,  of  God's  public  govern- 
ment in  Israel,  until  He  had  said,  "  Lo-ruhamah," 
then  shews  us  God's  dealings  with  Judah,  governed  by 
the  conduct  of  their  kings,  until  God  has  said,  "  Lo- 
ammi."  This  had  been  already  announced  on  account 
of  Manasseh's  heinous  sins ;  and  Josiah's  piety  could 
not  change  the  just  judgment  of  God.  There  was  yet 
for  Judah  some  prolongation  of  tranquillity  ;  but  their 
repentance  under  Josiah  was  but  outward,*  and  evil 
regained  the  mastery  immediately  after  his  death. 
Amon  did  but  follow  the  evil  ways  of  his  father 
Manasseh. 

Observe  what  grace  raised  up  Hezekiah  and  Josiah, 
both  of  whom  were  born  of  fathers  given  up  to  idola- 
try, and  followed  by  sons  who  were  equally  abandoned 
to  it.  But  the  sovereign  grace  of  God  towards  Israel 
again  raised  up  this  testimony,  and  manifested  that  He 
was  always  ready  to  bless,  even  if  Israel  refused  to  be 
blessed,  and  chose  their  own  ruin  instead.  Without 
God,  what  is  the  heart  of  man?  In  all  this  the  patience 
of    God's  government  was  fully  demonstrated;    for, 

*  See  Jeremiah  iii.  10.  This  passage  teaches  us  how  seldom 
the  heart,  which  is  what  God  judges,  con-esponds  with  the  sem- 
blance of  zeal  for  Him  and  for  His  glory,  which  appears  on  the 
surface,  when,  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  a  man  of  faith  pre- 
sents himself  to  promote  His  glory.  See  also  under  Hezekiah's 
reign  the  condition  of  the  people  and  God's  judgment — Isaiah 


n  KINGS.  543 

under    Hezekiah,  many    things   still    existed    which 

escaped  the  king's  eye  and  judgment,  through  lack  of 
watchfulness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 

That  which  distinguished  Josiah  was  his  carefulness 
to  observe  the  law  of  Moses,  the  book  of  which  had 
been  discovered  in  the  temple;  trust  in  Jehovah  had 
characterised  Hezekiah ;  and  in  these  respective  cha- 
racteristics they  are  both  unequalled  as  to  their  walk. 

The  kingdom  of  Assyria  was  declining,  and  Josiah 
exercises  his  royal  power  through  the  whole  extent  of 
the  country.  The  threat  addressed  to  Jeroboam  of  old 
is  fulfilled.  All  the  high  places  of  Israel  are  destroyed. 
Perhaps  the  heart  of  Josiah  was  lifted  up.  Be  that  as 
it  may,  God  performed  His  promise,  and  took  him 
away  from  the  evil,  the  dreadful  accomplishment  of 
which  was  hastening  onwards ;  for,  whatever  might  be 
the  sincerity  of  Josiah's  piety,  all  hearts  were  cor- 
rupted. Compare  with  this  2  Chronicles  xxx.  17,  &c. 
— the  account  of  that  which  happened  long  before  his 
reign. 

The  kings  of  Israel  had  been  the  fatal  examples  of 
a  course  which  had  led  Judah  and  all  Israel  to  their 
ruin.  (See  chap.  xvi.  3.)  The  pious  Jehoshapliat's 
alliance  with  Ahab  was  the  origin  of  all  this,  for  evil 
bears  fruit  which  continues  long  to  reproduce  itself. 
Alas !  alas !  what  is  man  when  he  turns  aside  from 
Jehovah's  ways,  from  the  narrow  and  straight  path  of 
God's  word  and  will,  from  the  path  of  faith — the  true 
path  of  an  obedient  spirit  ? 

The  history  which  we  have  been  going  over  has 
given  us  an  account  of  the  Assyrian's  connection  with 
the  people  of  God.  He  was  a  cedar  of  Lebanon ;  but 
he  is  cut  down.  Pharaoh  thouglit,  for  a  moment,  of 
making  the  empire  his  own ;  he  sought  to  exalt  him- 
self that  he  might  rule  over  the  trees  of  the  forest. 
Judah,  brought  out  in  former  days  with  a  high  hand 
by  the  power  of  God  from  Pharaoh's  country,  is  subject 

XXL,   XXII. 


544  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

to  him.  But,  whatever  Pharaoh's  pretensions  may  be, 
this  is  not  the  purpose  of  God.  If  God  writes  "  Lo- 
Ammi "  on  His  people,  it  is  Babylon  which  is  to  begin 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles.*  Pharaoh  returns  into  his 
own  country,  and  Jehoiakim,  powerless  and  without 
God,  comes  under  the  dominion  of  Nebuchadnezzar.*f- 
We  need  not  go  into  the  details.  His  son,  as  wicked  as 
himself,  rebels  against  Nebuchadnezzar ;  for  Judah, 
the  son  of  the  Most  High,  was  little  used  to  bondage ; 
but  this  heifer  also  must  bend  its  neck  to  the  yoke 
(Hosea  x.  11),  and  Jehoiachin  is  carried  captive  to 
Babylon.  The  kingdom  and  the  temple  still  exist ;  but 
Zedekiah,  having  broken  the  oath  which  he  had  made 
in  the  name  of  Jehovah,^  and,  allowing  himself  to  be 
governed  by  the  princes,  persists  in  his  rebellion  and 
is  taken  prisoner.  His  sons  having  been  slain  before 
his  eyes,  and  himself  deprived  of  sight,  he  is  carried 

*  As  a  figure,  this  is  an  important  principle ;  for  Egypt  is  the 
state  of  nature,  out  of  which  the  assembly  is  brought ;  Babylon 
is  the  corruption  and  worldliness  into  which  she  falls. 

t  How  sorrowful  is  this  part  of  the  history,  in  which  the  only 
question  is,  whether  Egypt  or  Babylon  is  to  possess  the  land  of 
God's  people,  the  land  of  promise  !  It  being  no  longer  a 
doubtful  point  whether  Israel  shall  continue  to  possess  it,  it 
must  become  a  prey  to  one  or  the  other  of  these  hostile  and 
unbelieving  powers. 

Alas  !  Israel  was  unbelieving  with  more  light  than  the  others, 
who  did  but  take  advantage  of  the  position  and  the  strength 
which  the  unbehef  of  Israel  gave  them,  and  acknowledged  in 
them. 

X  This  filled  up  the  measure  of  sin.  We  shall  draw  the 
reader's  attention  to  this  when  considering  the  prophecy  of 
Ezekiel,  who  dwells  upon  it.  By  making  use  of  an  oath  in 
Jehovah's  name  in  the  hope  of  preventing  revolt,  Nebuchad- 
nezzar shewed  more  respect  for  that  name  than  Zedekiah  did, 
who  despised  such  an  oath.  God  permitted  this  final  CAddence 
of  iniquity.  Zedekiah  might  have  remained  a  spreading  vine 
of  low  stature.  One  who  was  above  aU,  alone  knew  how  to 
render  to  Caesar  the  things  which  are  Csesar's,  and  to  God  the 
things  that  are  God's. 


II   KINGS.  545 

away  to  Babylon.  The  temple  is  burnt ;  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem  are  broken  down ;  the  seat  of  Jehovah's 
throne  is  trodden  under  foot  of  the  Gentiles.  Sorrow- 
ful result  of  His  having  entrusted  His  glory  to  men 
among  whom  He  had  placed  His  throne !  Sorrowful, 
thrice  sorrowful,  conduct  of  man — of  that  generation 
whom  God  had  so  honoured !  On  the  other  hand,  God 
will  take  occasion  from  it  to  manifest  that  infinite 
goodness,  which,  in  sovereign  grace,  will  re-establish 
the  very  thing  that  man  has  cast  under  foot  to  the 
profane. 

The  prophets  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  must  be  read  to 
have  the  complete  history,  and  the  internal  history  of 
the  spirit  of  the  people,  and  that  of  the  king ;  the 
history  at  once  of  the  condition  which  drew  down  the 
judgment,  and  of  the  patience  of  God,  who,  even  until 
the  very  taking  of  the  city,  continued  to  send  them 
most  affecting  calls  to  repentance — alas !  in  vain ;  and 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  began. 

The  reader  who  would  thoroughly  understand  the 
events  of  all  this  history,  the  marvellous  patience  of 
God,  and  the  way  in  which  He  raised  up  faithful 
kings,  in  order  that  He  might  bless,  should  read  the 
prophets  Hosea,  Amos,  Jeremiah,  and  certain  chapters 
of  Isaiah,  which  speak  to  the  people  in  the  nan.w  of 
Jehovah  and  tell  them  of  their  true  condition. 


XXIII.-XXV.  N   N 


I    CHRONICLES. 

The  Books  of  Kings  have  given  us  the  general  and 
public  history  of  God's  government  in  Israel;  and, 
from  Rehoboam  to  Zedekiah,  the  history  of  the  kings 
of  Israel — a  history  in  which  the  result  of  the  fall  of 
the  kingly  power  is  manifested  in  presence  of  God's 
long-suffering.  That  which  is  said  in  these  books  re- 
specting Judah  only  extends  to  the  connection  of 
Judah  with  the  house  of  Israel  during  this  period. 

The  Books  of  Chronicles  give  us  the  history  of  the 
same  period  under  another  aspect  (that  is,  that  of 
blessing  and  of  the  grace  of  God) ;  and,  more  par- 
ticularly, they  give  us  the  history  of  the  house  of 
David  with  respect  to  which  this  grace  was  mani- 
fested. We  shall  see  this  verified  in  a  multitude  of 
instances. 

These  Books,  written  or  drawn  up  after  the  captivity 
(see  1  Chron.  vi.  15),  preserve  God's  history  of  His 
people,  recorded  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  He  loved  to 
remember  it,  exhibiting  only  such  faults  as  require  to 
be  known  in  order  to  understand  the  instructions  of 
His  grace. 

He  records  at  the  same  time  the  names  of  those  who 
had  gone  through  the  trials  mentioned  in  this  history 
without  being  blotted  out  of  the  book.  Here  indeed 
it  is  but  the  outward  figure  of  this  blessed  memorial 
of  tihe  people  of  His  grace;  but  in  fact  this  is  what 
we  find  here.  All  Israel  is  not  there ;  but  all  are  not 
Israex  who  are  of  Israel.  At  the  same  time  the  Spirit 
of  God  goes  farther  back,  and  gives  us  the  genealogy 
from  Adam  of  the  generation  blessed  by  grace  accord- 


I  CHRONICLES.  547 

ing  to  the  sovereignty  of  God,  with  that  which  be- 
longed to  it  outwardly,  or  after  the  iBlesh.  He  puts 
into  relief,  sufficiently  to  make  it  apparent,  the  part 
owned  in  grace,  which  stood  externally  in  relationship 
with  that  which  was  merely  outward  and  natural, 
putting  always  that  which  is  natural  first,  as  the 
apostle  tells  us. 

Thus,  beginning  with  Adam,  we  have  the  family  of 
Seth  down  to  Noah.  Then  comes  the  family  of  Japh- 
eth  and  of  Ham,  one  of  whose  descendants  began  to  be 
mighty  on  the  earth  ;  and  finally  that  of  Shem,  whose 
God  was  Jehovah,  and  whose  line  is  followed  down  to 
Abraham.  Abraham,  called  out  from  among  men, 
becomes,  as  it  were,  a  fresh  stock.  His  posterity  after 
the  flesh  is  first  given  us ;  then  Isaac,  the  child  of  pro- 
mise, a  fresh  stock,  whose  children  after  the  flesh  are 
exhibited,  with  their  kings  and  their  chiefs,  before  the 
child  of  election. 

At  length,  in  the  second  chapter,  we  find  Israel,  all 
of  whose  sons  were  more  or  less  under  the  care  of  God 
who  had  loved  Jacob. 

Judah  is  then  introduced  to  lead  us  to  the  royal  race 
of  David,  the  object  also  of  the  promises  according  to 
the  election  of  God. 

Besides  this,  we  find  a  picture  of  the  prosperity  of 
Judah's  family  in  general,  and  that  of  Caleb's  family 
in  particular,  who  was  faithful  to  God  in  his  genera- 
tion. God  has  preserved  the  memorial  of  it  in  this 
place.*     Thus   also  the  way  in  which  the  land  was 

*  It  is  well  to  remark  here,  that  in  all  these  genealogies, 
when  a  family  has  been  established  in  a  place,  the  name  of  the 
place  is  often  used  for  that  of  the  family ;  that  the  descendants, 
through  several  generations,  are  named  together  as  children  of 
the  head  of  the  race  (compare  chap.  iv.  1  with  the  commence- 
ment of  chap,  ii.) ;  and  that,  without  having  been  named  before, 
the  eminent  man  of  a  family  is  taken  to  begin  a  gei2^alogy 
anew.  (Chap.  viii.  29,  33.) 

L-III. 


548  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE  BIBLE. 

peopled  and  its  internal  history  are  vividly  presented 
to  the  reader. 

The  genealogy  of  David's  family  is  next  given  us,  as 
far  as  several  generations  after  the  return  from  the 
captivity ;  and  then  that  of  the  tribes  in  succession ; 
but  in  relationship  with  their  position  in  Israel,  and 
with  the  addition  of  certain  notices  of  possessions  ac- 
quired either  by  families  or  by  an  entire  tribe.  Dan 
and  Zebulun  are  wanting ;  Judah  is  found.  (Chap.  iv. 
1.)  Simeon  (chap.  iv.  24)  had  had  his  lot  within  the 
territory  of  Judah,  but  he  had  enlarged  his  domain; 
and  some  of  this  tribe,  having  gone  beyond  the 
borders  of  the  land,  had  escaped  the  captivity.  Reu- 
ben (chap.  V.  1),  Gad  (chap.  v.  11),  and  the  half  tribe 
of  Manasseh  (chap.  v.  23),  had  remained  eastward  of 
Jordan.  These  tribes  together  had  also  much  extended 
their  territory,  and  had  enriched  themselves  at  the  ex- 
pense of  their  enemies. 

These  tribes  come  together,  Judah  as  the  royal 
tribe  ;  Simeon  is  brought  in  with  him,  because  his 
territory  was  within  Judah's ;  then  Reuben,  the  j&rst- 
born,  and  with  him  the  tribes  beyond  Jordan  as  con- 
nected with  him.  Also  they  were  carried  away  captive 
before  the  rest.  The  God  of  Israel  brought  judgment 
upon  them.  Levi  came  genealogically  next ;  but  I 
apprehend  there  was  a  stronger  reason;  that  it  was 
the  priestly  tribe,  as  Judah  the  royal. 

In  the  genealogies  of  Levi  (chap,  vi.)  we  see,  first  of 
all,  the  line  of  high  priests  until  the  captivity;  and 
then  the  Levites,  their  services  and  their  cities.  After 
Levi  come  Issachar  (chap.  vii.  1),  Benjamin  (chap.  vii. 
6),  Naphtali  (chap.  vii.  13),  few  in  number ;  the  other 
half  tribe  of  Manasseh  (chap.  vii.  14),  Ephraim  (chap, 
vii.  20),  and  Asher  (chap.  vii.  30).  Then  we  find 
Benjamin  again  (chap,  viii.),  first  of  all  with  reference 
to  Jerusalem,  and  afterwards  in  connection  with  the 
family  of  SauL 


I  CHRONICLES.  549 

But  that  which  has  been  preserved  here  of  the  gene- 
alogies of  the  people — an  affecting  remnant  (through 
grace)  of  those  who  had  fallen  under  the  sorrowful 
condemnation  of  "  Lo-ruhamah  "  and  "  Lo-ammi  " — re- 
veals to  us  another  circumstance,  namely,  that,  where- 
ever  there  has  been  faith,  God  has  blessed  His  people 
individually.  Jabez  (chap.  iv.  9,  10),  the  son  of  afflic- 
tion, seeking  blessing  in  the  presence  of  the  God  of 
Israel,  failed  not  to  find  it.  Jehovah  enlarged  his 
borders,  and  so  kept  him  from  evil  that  it  grieved  him 
not.  Simeon,  although  dispersed  in  Israel,  was  able  to 
drive  out  the  enemy  and  possess  their  land,  even  unto 
mount  Seir.  The  two  tribes  and  a  half  beyond  Jordan 
enlarged  their  territories  also,  and  possessed  the  gates 
of  their  enemies,  "because  they  cried  unto  God." 
Afterwards  they  were  carried  away  captives,  because 
they  forsook  God.  Thus,  although  there  was  neither 
the  power  of  the  king  nor  the  order  of  the  kingdom, 
yet,  wherever  there  was  faith,  God  blessed  those  of  His 
people  who  trusted  in  Him. 

These  genealogies  were  imperfect.  The  condition  of 
Israel  bore  the  impress  of  the  ruin  which  had  befallen 
them ;  but  also  that  of  the  goodness  of  God  who  had 
brought  back  a  remnant,  and  who  had  preserved  all 
that  was  needful  to  place  those  who  formed  it  in  the 
record  of  His  people.  If  the  needful  proof  to  give 
them  a  title  to  this  were  wanting,  such  as  were  of  the 
people  ceased  to  enjoy  their  proper  privileges,  and  the 
priests  their  sacerdotal  position,  until  a  priest  stood  up 
with  Urim  and  with  Thummim.  For  these  genealogies 
served  as  a  means  to  recognise  the  people.  Happy  he 
who  had  preserved  his  own,  and  who  had  so  appre- 
<jiated  the  heritage  of  Jehovah  as  to  attach  value 
to  it !  It  was  a  proof  of  faith  ;  for,  it  might  have 
been  said.  Of  what  use  are  these  genealogies  in 
Babylon  ? 

As  to  the  Levites — for  it  is  good  to  serve  the  Lord 

IV. -VIII. 


650  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLB. 

■ — ^their  genealogies,  their  cities,  and  their  services 
were  known  with  sufficient  certainty,  even  with  re- 
spect to  those  that  dwelt  at  Jerusalem.  The  mercy  of 
God  has  not  forgotten  either  to  preserve  a  lamp  in  the 
house  of  Saul ;  for  in  judgment  God  remembers  mercy. 
Chapter  ix.  teaches  us  the  use  which  they  made  of 
their  genealogies;  for  those  mentioned  in  it  are 
persons  who  had  returned  from  the  captivity,  as  may 
be  seen  in  Nehemiah  xi.  This  portion  of  the  book 
closes  at  chapter  ix.  34.  Verse  35  begins  the  nar- 
rative. 

A  brief  recital  of  the  ruin  of  Saul's  house  intro- 
duces Jehovah's  establishment  of  the  house  of  David. 
All  that  took  place  before  the  people  gathered  them- 
selves to  David  at  Hebron,  and  before  the  kingdom 
was  established  in  his  house  over  all  Israel  at  Jerusa- 
lem, is  passed  over  in  silence. 

After  this  we  find,  as  a  general  subject,  the  order  of 
the  kingly  power,  and  of  the  kingdom  as  established 
in  the  house  of  David — the  kingdom,  looked  at  as  or- 
dained of  God  in  blessing,  rather  than  the  historical 
account  of  all  that  took  place ; — excepting  so  far  as 
was  necessary  to  furnish  this  picture.  There  is  not 
perfection  here ;  but  there  is  the  order  which  God  ap- 
pointed. The  faults  and  the  sufferings  of  David, 
whether  before  or  after  he  was  made  king,  are  conse- 
quently passed  over  in  silence. 

After  having  mentioned  the  king  himself,  anointed 
by  Samuel  according  to  the  word  of  Jehovah  to  rule 
over  all  Israel,  the  history  begins  with  that  which  con- 
stituted the  strength  and  glory  of  David's  kingdom. 
The  high  priest  no  longer  occupies  the  foreground. 
Jehovah's  anointed  is  essentially  a  man  of  war^ 
although  it  is  not  always  to  be  so.  Joab  and  the 
mighty  men  who  had  been  David's  companions  in 
arms  come  immediately  after  the  king. 

The  first  place  next  to  the  king  is  his  who  delivered 


I  CHRONICLES.  561 

Zion  out  of  the  enemy's  hands  ;*  and  this  spot,  chosen 
of  Jehovah,  becomes  the  city  of  David  and  the  seat 
of  royal  power.  We  are  then  told  how  David's  com- 
panions in  arms  successively  joined  him,  though  yet 
for  a  long  time  rejected  and  pursued  by  Saul,  mean  as 
yet  in  appearance,  a  fugitive  and  without  power  to 
resist. 

The  first  who  are  pointed  out  as  having  come  to  him 
— a  proof  that  God  and  the  knowledge  of  His  will 
had  more  value  in  their  eyes  than  parentage  and  the 
advantages  which  flow  from  thence — are  from  among 
the  brethren  of  Saul  (that  is,  of  the  tribe  of  Benja- 
min), and  men  of  the  greatest  skill  in  handling  the 
bow  and  the  sling,  the  weapons  with  which  Saul  was 
slain  in  the  battle  in  which  he  was  overthrown. 

There  were  some  who  came  from  beyond  Jordan  to 
David,  while  he  was  still  concealed  in  the  wilderness ; 
for  faith  and  the  manifestation  of  God's  power  tend  to 
bring  into  play  the  energy  and  strength  of  those  who 
connect  themselves  with  it.  He  with  whom  God  is 
attracts  those  with  whom  God  is  working ;  and  their 
energy  developes  itself  in  proportion  to  the  manifesta- 
tion of  His  presence  and  favour.  Many  of  these  had 
been  with  Saul,  but  when  with  him  they  were  not 


*  David  having  built  the  city  from  Millo  round  about,  Joab 
repaired  the  rest  of  the  city.  We  may  observe  that  Shammah 
the  Harorite  is  not  mentioned  here.  Perhaps  it  is  Shammah  in 
chapter  xi.  27  :  but  this  is  doubtful.  (See  2  Samuel  xxiii.  25.)  It 
may  also  be  observed  that  the  exploits  of  these  mighty  men  con- 
sisted especially  of  victories  over  the  Philistines,  the  enemies  by 
whom  Saul,  who  had  been  raised  up  for  the  purpose  of  destroy- 
ing them,  was  overcome.  Whatever  may  have  been  their  sub- 
sequent achievements,  it  was  there  they  learnt  to  conquer,  and 
that  they  acquired  the  reputation  which  procured  them  a  plae« 
in  the  archives  of  God. 

It  is  well  that  the  reader  should  remember  the  connectio» 
between  this  whole  history,  and  the  establishment  of  the  power 
of  Christ,  the  Son  of  David,  on  the  earth. 
IX.-XT. 


552  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

mighty  men;  many  also  had  never  been  with  him. 
Yet  even  in  Saul's  camp  David  had  been  able  to  slay 
the  Philistines  when  all  Israel  was  in  terror.  After 
that,  similar  achievements  become  almost  common.  At 
the  beginning  such  things  required  immediate  commu- 
nion with  God,  so  as  to  shut  out  the  influence  of  all 
that  surrounded  the  man  who  enjoyed  this  communion. 
Afterwards  the  surrounding  influence  was  favourable, 
and,  in  this  sense,  faith  propagates  itself.  These  were 
but  the  chief  of  the  mighty  men  whom  David  had. 
When  God  acts  in  power,  He  gives  strength  to  the 
weak,  and  produces,  by  the  energy  of  faith  and  of  Bis 
Spirit,  an  army  of  heroes. 

In  those  who  came  from  Benjamin  and  Judah  wc 
see  that  there  was  this  link  of  faith.  (Chap.  xii.  16.) 
They  knew  that  David's  God  helped  him.  David 
committed  himself  to  God  with  respect  to  those  who 
joined  him,  for  he  was  in  a  very  difficult  position  to- 
wards the  end  of  his  career  of  trial  and  affliction. 
Those  to  whom  God  had  given  energy  and  strength 
came  to  him  in  great  numbers;  for  everything  was 
ripe  for  his  elevation  to  the  throne  of  Israel,  and  for 
the  transfer  of  Saul's  kingdom  to  him. 

There  were  various  characteristics  in  this  army  of 
God :  all  famous  for  their  valour,  some  among  them 
had  understanding  of  the  times  to  know  what  Israel 
ought  to  do,  and,  in  this  case,  all  their  brethren  were 
at  David's  command;  others  were  armed  for  battle; 
others  had  all  instruments  for  war,  and  were  not  of  a 
double  heart.  And  these  things  were  according  to  the 
gift  of  God,  and  they  all  came  with  one  heart  to  make 
David  king;  their  brethren  had  prepared  everything 
in  abundance,  for  there  was  joy  in  Israel.  It  is  always 
thus  when  Christ  is  really  magnified  by  upright  hearts 
who  only  seek  His  glory. 

David  immediately  thinks  of  the  ark.  (See  Psalm 
cxxxii.)  He  consults  with  the  captains  of  the  thousands 


I   CHRONICLES.  553 

of  Israel  in  order  to  bring  it  back  amongst  them. 
Loving  the  people,  and  beloved  by  them,  he  acts  with 
and  for  them  :  but  his  zeal  was  still  too  much  con- 
nected with  his  warlike  spirit ;  and,  while  giving  him- 
self up  to  joy,  he  did  not  sufficiently  consider  Jehovah's 
ways.  He  imitates  no  doubt  the  means  by  which  God 
had  glorified  Himself,  when  the  ark  fell  into  the  hands 
of  the  Philistines.  These  were  quite  right  in  having 
nothing  to  do  with  it,  and  in  leaving  God  to  act,  and 
to  testify  of  Himself,  that  He  was  the  God  of  all 
creation,  exercising  a  power  that  overrules  nature  in 
His  creatures.  This  was  faith  in  the  Philistines ;  but 
it  was  not  faith  in  Uzza  to  touch  the  ark.  Amongst 
God's  people  it  is  His  word  that  must  direct.  God 
may  act  in  sovereignty  outside  of  all  this;  but  here 
the  word  rules.  Perez-Uzza  is  a  witness  that  it  can- 
not be  neglected  with  impunity,  and  that  the  order  of 
His  house  in  the  midst  of  His  people  is  a  thing  which 
He  will  cause  them  to  reverence.  It  was  through 
having  failed  in  this  reverence  that  David's  joy  was 
turned  into  sorrow  and  fear ;  but  the  house  of  Obed- 
edom  was  nevertheless  a  proof  that  the  presence  of 
God  assuredly  brings  blessing. 

The  history  of  the  royalty  continues.  David  esta- 
blishes himself  at  Jerusalem,  and  Jehovah  confirms 
the  kingdom  in  his  hands,  and  it  is  lifted  up  on  high 
because  of  His  people.  Having  inquired  of  God  and 
exactly  followed  His  directions,  David  twice  gains  a 
complete  victory  over  the  Philistines.  Being  thus 
blessed  of  Jehovah,  his  fame  goes  out  into  all  lands. 

He  makes  himself  houses  in  Jerusalem,  and  prepares 
a  place  for  the  ark  of  God,  pitching  a  tent  for  it. 

Warned   by  the  calamity*  which  his  neglect   had 


*  It  is  to  be  observed,  that,  although  this  had  its  origin  in  the 
gnilty  forgetfulness   of  David,   it   nevertheless  gave  occasion 
through  grace  to  his  being  set  in  his  true  position  for  the  regu* 
XII.-XIV. 


554  THE  BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

brought  upon  Uzza,  the  first  time  he  undertook  to 
bring  back  the  ark,  David  now  gathers,  not  only  all 
Israel  together,  but  also  the  Levites  and  the  children 
of  Aaron.  This  gives  occasion  to  the  setting  forth  of 
the  whole  order  of  Levitical  service  as  it  had  been  ap- 
pointed by  David,  and  of  the  relation  between  the 
priesthood  and  royalty;  that  is,  that  the  former  is 
subordinated  to  the  latter,  the  king  being  Jehovah's 
anointed,  although  the  service  of  the  sanctuary  be- 
longed to  the  priesthood. 

As  the  head,  David  orders  everything  and  appoints 
psalmody  for  the  service  of  God.  Then  by  the  help  of 
God,  the  ark  is  brought  from  the  house  of  Obed-edom 
into  the  tent  prepared  for  it  in  Zion,  with  offerings  to 
God  who  helped  the  Levites  by  His  power,  and  with 
joy  and  songs  of  triumph.  David  himself,  clothed 
with  a  robe  of  fine  linen  and  an  ephod,  dances  and 
plays  before  the  ark  of  Jehovah  who  was  going  up  to 
His  place  in  Zion.  This  action — unintelligible  to  the 
unbelieving  Michal,  to  whom  the  king's  behaviour  was 
therefore  unintelligible  also — was  of  very  great  im- 
portance. It  identified  kingly  power  in  Zion  (that  is 
to  say,  the  kingly  power  of  Christ,  as  deliverer  in 
grace)  with  the  token  of  Jehovah's  covenant  with 
Israel — a  token  established  there  in  grace,  when  Israel 
had  already  failed  entirely  under  the  law,  and  even 
after  their  rejection  of  God  as  their  King. 

The  Aaronic  priesthood  was  not  able  to  maintain  the 
people's  relationship  with  their  God,  and  consequently 


lation  and  appointment  of  all  that  concerned  the  Levites' 
service.  It  is  always  thus  with  regard  to  faith,  for  the  purposes 
of  God  are  fulfilled  in  favour  of  it.  Man  in  his  zeal  may  depart 
from  the  will  of  God,  and  God  wiU  chasten  him,  but  only  to 
Lring  him  into  more  honour,  by  setting  him  more  completely 
in  the  position  which  God  has  purposed,  and  in  the  under- 
standing of  His  ways,  according  to  which  He  will  magnify  His 
servant. 


I  CHRONICLES.  655 

the  outward  order  had  completely  failed.  The  altar  at 
which  the  priests  were  to  sacrifice  was  elsewhere  (at 
Gibeon),  and  not  before  the  tent  which  contained  the 
ark.  And  the  ark,  which  was  the  sign  of  the  covenant 
and  of  the  throne  of  Jehovah,  was  at  a  distance  from 
the  altar  at  which  the  priests  ministered. 

The  covenant  of  Jehovah  is  connected  with  the 
kingly  power,  and  that  in  Zion — the  place  which  He 
had  chosen  for  His  rest.  David  himself  assumes  some- 
what of  the  Melchisedec  character,  but  only  in  testi- 
mony and  by  anticipation.  (Chap.  xvi.  1-8.)  In  these 
verses  the  priests  do  not  appear. 

In  order  to  apprehend  more  clearly  the  import  of  the 
removal  of  the  ark  to  Zion,  it  will  be  well  to  consider 
Psalm  Ixxviii.  60-72  and  Psalm  cxxxii.,  and  to  com- 
pare verse  8  of  the  latter  with  what  Moses  said  during 
Israel's  journey  in  the  wilderness.  (Num.  x.  35,  36.) 
It  is  interesting  to  see  that  each  petition  in  the  earlier 
part  of  Psalm  cxxxii.  is  exceeded  by  its  fulfilment  at 
the  close. 

The  circumstance  of  the  ark  not  being  taken  to  the 
tabernacle  at  Gibeon  was  also  of  deep  significance.  It 
was  completely  judging  the  whole  system  connected 
with  this  tabernacle.  The  tabernacle  was  still  in  being, 
as  well  as  the  altar,  and  the  priests  ofifered  sacrifices 
there ;  but  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  Jehovah  had 
been  taken  away  from  it.  The  king  disposed  of  the 
latter  by  his  authority,  placing  it  elsewhere.  Ever 
since  the  ruin  of  Shiloh  this  judgment  had  continued 
as  a  chastisement  executed  by  the  enemy ;  but,  now 
that  God  interposes  by  means  of  David  and  acts  in 
power,  this  power  places  the  visible  sign  of  His  cove- 
nant with  His  people  elsewhere.  The  kingly  power  is 
established  at  Jerusalem,  and  the  sign  of  God's  cove- 
nant is  taken  away  from  the  tabernacle  of  the  con- 
gregation to  be  placed  on  Mount  Zion,  the  seat  of  the 
kingly  power. 

XV.,  XVI. 


656  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

When  the  people  were  to  journey,  Moses  said,*  "Rise 
up,  Jehovah,  and  let  thine  enemies  be  scattered,  and 
let  them  that  hate  thee  flee  before  thee."  This  was 
when  the  ark  went  before  them  to  search  out  a  resting- 
place  for  them.  When  it  rested,  he  said,  "  Return,  O 
Jehovah,  unto  the  ten  thousand  thousands  of  Israel.'* 
But,  when  God  had  up  to  a  certain  point  given  rest  to 
Israel,  they  knew  not  how  to  enjoy  it.  They  took  the 
ark  out  of  its  place  to  carry  it  into  the  camp  of  Israel, 
when  defeated  on  account  of  their  unfaithfulness  by 
their  enemies ;  but  this  was  not  now  the  place  for  the 
ark.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  of  Moses's  expres- 
sions was  suitable  to  this  transfer  of  the  ark  to  the 
midst  of  the  camp.  The  ark  was  taken,  and,  as  we 
have  seen  elsewhere,  Ichabod  was  pronounced  upon 
the  people.-|-  But  the  faithfulness  of  God  is  abiding  ; 
and,  now  that  He  has  interposed  in  grace  and  power, 
and  that  the  throne  is  established  as  the  vessel  of  this 
power  and  grace,  another  word  is  given :  "  Arise,  O 
Jehovah,  into  thy  rest,  thou  and  the  ark  of  thy 
strength."  (Psalm  cxxxii.  8.)  Israel,  the  camp,  and  the 
priesthood  were  no  longer  the  rest  of  God. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  import  of  this  establishment 
of  the  ark  and  of  the  throne  in  Zion,  as  set  before  us 
in  the  psalm  which  David  wrote  on  this  occasion. 

It  is  true  that,  so  far  as  it  was  entrusted  to  man,  J 
the  kingly  power  failed;  but  it  is  not,  therefore,  the 
less  true   that  it  has   been  placed   in  the   house  of 

*  ThuR  in  the  wilderness,  it  was  Israel  journeying,  who  were 
seeking  their  rest,  who  were  to  find  enemies  on  their  way,  and 
whose  faith  recognised  these  enemies  as  the  enemies  of  Jehovah ; 
or  Israel  carefully  surrounding  the  token  of  the  presence  of  their 
God,  when  He  gave  a  temporary  rest  unto  His  people. 

t  Expressed  in  these  words,  He  has  "  delivered  his  strength 
into  captivity,  and  his  glory  into  the  enemy's  hand."  (Psalm 
Ixxviii.) 

t  Compare  Psalm  cxxxii.  11,  12,  the  two  principles  already 
pointed  out  in  the  thoughts  on  the  Books  of  Kings. 


I  CHRONICLES.  557 

David,  according  to  the  counsels,  the  gift,  and  the 
calling  of  God,  and  that  all  the  promises  connected 
with  it — the  sure  mercies  of  David — will  be  fulfilled 
in  Christ. 

In  that  which  we  read  here  (chap,  xvi.)  the  throne  is 
considered  in  the  light  of  God's  thoughts,  and  of  the 
blessing  which,  according  to  those  thoughts,  is  linked 
with  it.  David,  havinsj  offered  burnt-offerins^s  and 
peace-offerings,  and  having  blessed  the  people,  deals  to 
every  one,  both  to  man  and  woman,  a  loaf  of  bread, 
and  a  good  piece  of  flesh,  and  a  flagon  of  wine ;  for  God 
will  "abundantly  bless  her  provision,  and  satisfy  her 
poor  with  bread."  Then  David  gives  the  Levites  a 
psalm  to  sing  praises  unto  Jehovah. 

This  Psalm  is  composed  of  a  part  of  Psalm  cv.,  of 
Psalm  xcvi.  with  some  alterations,  of  the  beginning  of 
Psalms  cvi.,  cvii.,  cxviii.,  and  cxxxvi.,  which  is  an  im- 
portant form  of  words ;  and  of  Psalm  cvi.  47,  48. 

The  following  are  its  subjects  in  the  order  which 
the  psalm  follows.  First,  Psalm  cv.  in  which  the 
deeds  of  Jehovah  are  celebrated,  as  well  as  His 
marvellous  works,  and  the  judgments  of  His  mouth. 
Israel,  as  His  people  and  the  assembly  of  His  chosen 
ones,  are  commanded  to  remember  these  things,  for  He 
is  Jehovah  their  God,  and  His  judgments  are  in  all  the 
earth.  Israel  is  called  to  remember,  not  Moses  and  the 
conditional  promises  given  to  the  people  through  him, 
but  the  covenant  made  with  Abraham  unconditionally 
— an  everlasting  covenant  to  give  the  land  to  his  seed. 
Israel  is  reminded  of  the  way  in  which  God  preserved 
those  heirs  of  promise,  when  they  went  from  nation  to 
nation.  The  remainder  of  the  psalm  is  omitted;  it 
speaks  historically  of  the  ways  of  God,  with  respect  to 
the  preservation  of  His  people  in  Egypt,  and  of  their 
deliverance  thence,  to  be  established  in  Canaan,  that 
they  might  observe  the  statutes  of  Jehovah ;  and  this 
part  of   the  psalm  would  have  been  unsuitable  here, 

XVI. 


558  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

where  grace  is  celebrated  in  the  establishment  of  the 
people  in  power  after  those  statutes  had  been  broken. 
The  beginning  of  the  psalm  celebrates  grace  towards 
Israel  according  to  the  promises  made  to  Abraham,  to 
Isaac,  and  to  Jacob,  when  the  judgments  of  God  are  in 
all  the  earth.  This  is  the  first  thing  founded  upon  the 
presence  of  the  ark,  and  the  establishment  of  the 
throne  in  Zion. 

The  verses  23-33  are  almost  the  words  of  Psalm 
xcvi.  It  is  a  call  to  the  heathen  to  acknowledge  Jeho- 
vah, whose  glory  should  be  declared  among  all  nations. 
This  psalm  belongs  to  a  series  of  psalms,  which,  from 
the  first  cry  of  the  people  until  the  universal  joy  of 
the  nations,  relate  in  order  all  that  refers  to  the  bring- 
ing again  the  Firstborn  into  the  world.  Only  in  Psalm 
xcvi.  the  words,  "  Say  among  the  heathen  that  Jehovah 
reigneth,"  have  a  place  which  gives  them  a  more  pro- 
phetic character.  Here  the  joy  of  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  precedes  this  message  to  the  heathen,  and,  instead 
of  saying  "  his  courts,"  it  is  said  "  before  him."  The 
words,  "  He  shall  judge  the  peoples  with  righteous- 
ness,"* are  also  omitted,  as  well  as  the  second  half  of 
the  last  verse,  which  applies  this  judgment  to  the 
world.  Apart  from  these  alterations,  which  appear  to 
me  to  give  this  psalm  more  of  the  character  of  a 
present  joy,  these  verses  correspond  with  Psalm  xcvi. 

The  omission  of  the  judgment  of  the  peoples  in 
righteousness  is  remarkable.  It  is  because  the  subject 
here  is  joy,  and  the  grace  of  deliverance  in  the  esta- 

*  People  is  D''D^>  habitually  in  the  Psalms  I  think  the  peoples 
associated  with  U^H-    See,  however,  verse  26 ;  at  any  rate,  they 

T    T 

are  not  treated  as  heathen.  "  Judge  the  peoples  in  uprightness  " 
(Ps.  xcvi.  10)  is  V*"^,  controversies  and  litigation ;  Z03li7  is  more 

general  judicial  authority.  The  last  is  the  word  used  at  the 
end  of  this  Psalm.  "  Say  among  the  heathen  that  the  Lord 
reigneth,"  is  displaced  here. 


I  CHRONICLES.  559 

blishment  of  power,  with  the  subsequent  government 
of  the  earth,  and  that  the  nations  are  called  up  to 
Jerusalem  to  present  themselves  there  before  Jehovah. 
This  is  the  leading  thought. 

We  have  then  in  these  two  parts  the  fulfilment,  in 
Israel's  joy  before  Jehovah,  of  the  covenant  made  with 
the  fathers,  following  after  His  mighty  works;  and 
the  call  addressed  to  the  nations  to  come  up  to  the 
place  of  His  glory.*  We  have  next  this  form  of 
words,  "  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever,"  declaring  that 
in  spite  of  all  the  faults,  all  the  sins,  and  all  the  un- 
faithfulness of  Israel,  Jehovah's  mercy  has  stood  firm. 
It  will  be  when  the  Lamb,  the  true  ark  of  the  cove- 
nant and  the  real  David,  shall  be  upon  Mount  Zion, 
even  before  He  assumes  the  character  of  Solomon,  that 
this  will  be  fully  demonstrated.  Accordingly,  since 
David,  this  has  been  sung.  (Compare  ver.  41 ;  2  Chron. 
V.  13;  Ezra  iii.  11 ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  11.) 

Psalm  cvi.,  which  concludes  the  fourth  book  of 
Psalms,  opens  at  length  the  proofs  of  this  precious 
declaration,  while  the  psalm  we  are  considering,  after 
giving  the  promises  made  to  Abraham,  passes  over  the 
whole  history  to  the  end  (omitting  the  latter  part  of 
Psalm  cv.,  from  verse  16,  which  speaks  of  it,  and  places 
Israel  under  responsibility  in  Canaan),  and  goes  on 
with  the  first  verse  of  Psalm  cvi.,  which  declares  that 

*  Psalm  c.  could  not  have  been  used  here,  because  before 
that  Psalm  Jehovah  had  already  been  celebrated  as  sitting 
between  the  cherubim  (xcix.  1) ;  while  the  act  of  placing  the 
ark  in  Zion  was  only  an  anticipation.  It  is  Psalm  xcvi,,  there- 
fore, which  is  quoted.  It  is  the  presence  of  Christ  on  Mount 
Zion  to  fulfil  the  promises  in  power,  before  reigning  in  peace, 
which  explains  all  these  allusions,  as  well  as  some  Psalms, 
which  seem  to  speak  of  a  return  from  captivity,  and  a  rebuilding 
of  Jerusalem,  while  praj^ing  at  the  same  time  for  the  accomphsh- 
ment  of  this  return.  In  some  the  celebration  of  the  blessing  is 
in  spirit,  and  the  cry  for  blessing  the  fact  preceding  the  accom- 
phshment  of  it. 

XVI. 


560  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

the  mercy  of  God  has  continued  in  spite  of  every- 
thing. 

Psalm  cvii.  treats  the  same  subject,  but  in  connection 
with  the  deliverance  and  the  return  of  Israel  at  the 
end  of  the  age. 

Psalm  cxviii.  brings  out  this  truth  in  connection 
with  the  Person  of  the  Messiah,  suffering  with  His 
people,  but  at  last  known  and  accepted  in  the  day 
which  Jehovah  has  made. 

Finally,  in  Psalm  cxxxvi.,  the  same  doxology  is  sung 
in  connection  with  the  full  blessing  of  Israel  and  of 
all  creation;  beginning  with  the  creation  itself,  and 
celebrating  the  proofs  of  this  mercy  throughout  all 
things,  until  the  blessing  of  the  earth,  resulting  in  the 
redemption  of  Israel. 

Here  we  may  remark,  that  from  Psalm  exxxii., 
which  we  have  already  noticed  as  celebrating  the 
establishment  of  the  ark  on  Mount  Zion,  the  psalms 
are  consecutive  until  Psalm  cxxxvi.  Only  they  go 
beyond  our  present  subject  and  introduce  us  to  the 
restored  temple,  although  still  speaking  of  Zion  as 
the  place  of  blessing.  (Compare  Psalms  cxxxiii., 
cxxxiv.,  cxxxv.,  and  finally  cxxxvi.,  of  which  we  are 
speaking,  and  which,  as  a  chorus,  concludes  the  series.) 

Finally  we  have  the  two  concluding  verses  of  Psalm 
cvi.,  the  first  of  which  prays  that  God  would  gather 
Israel*  from  among  the  heathen,  which  will  be  the 
result  of  the  throne  of  Jesus  being  set  up  in  Zion  ;-|- 
and  the  second  of  which  concludes  the  psalm  (as  we 
find  at  the  close  of  each  book  of  Psalms)  by  blessing 
for  ever  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel.  This  song  of 
praise  contains  then  every  subject  which  the  presence 
of  Christ  in  Zion  will  give  occasion  to  celebrate,  when 

*  This  petition  proves  the  prophetic  character  of  the  psalm, 
and  shews  that  it  reaches  onward  to  the  latter  times  of  Israel. 

t  See  Matthew  xxiv.  31  (although  it  is  there  in  connection 
with  His  coming  from  heaven),  and  Psalm  cxxvi. 


I  CHRONICLES.  561 

lie  shall  already  have  appeared  to  establish  there  His 
power  in  grace,  but  before  the  effects  of  His  presence 
have  been  felt  all  around. 

At  the  close  of  chapter  xvi.  we  see  that  the  king 
regulates  everything  that  was  to  be  done  before  the 
ark,  and  before  the  altar  which  was  in  the  high  place 
at  Gibeon  (that  is  to  say,  for  the  service  of  every  day 
before  the  ark,  and  for  the  sacrifices  upon  the  altar) ; 
and  that  he  also  appointed  Levites  to  praise  Jehovah, 
and  to  sing  that  "  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever." 

It  is  touching  to  see,  that  the  testimony  to  this  pre- 
cious faithfulness  on  God's  part  is  not  only  found  in 
the  place  where  power  had  set  the  ark,  but  there  also 
where  the  heart  of  the  people  needed  it  meantime, 
namely,  at  the  altar,  which,  although  the  place  where 
the  people  drew  nigh  to  God,  had  become  after  all  a 
testimony  to  the  fallen  condition  of  the  people,  a 
tabernacle  without  the  ark. 

Faith,  apprehending  the  counsels  and  the  work  of 
God,  could  see  in  the  establishment  of  the  ark  in  Zion 
(an  act  which,  according  to  the  old  order,  was  thorough 
disorder),  the  progress  of  God's  power  and  intervention 
towards  the  peaceful  and  glorious  reign  of  the  Son  of 
David.  The  sure  mercies  of  David  were  as  bright  to 
the  eye  of  faith  as  the  dawn  of  day,  in  that  the  ark 
of  the  covenant  had  been  set  up  by  David  the  king  in 
the  mountain  which  God  had  chosen  for  His  everlasting 
rest. 

But  all  did  not  apprehend  this  intervention  and 
these  ways  of  God,  so  precious  to  those  who  under- 
stood them ;  and  the  condescending  mercy  of  God 
stooped  at  Gibeon  to  the  low  estate  of  the  people 
whom  He  loved,  and  He  still  spoke  to  them  after  His 
own  heart  there,  at  the  altar  where  this  people  could 
draw  near  to  God  in  an  ignorance  perhaps  which  saw 
no  farther;  but  where,  as  far  as  this  ignorance  al- 
lowed, they  were  faithful  to  Him  who  had  brought 
VOL.  I.  XVI.  O  O 


562  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

them  out  of  Egypt :  there  God  spoke  to  them,  telling 
them  that  His  mercy  endured  for  ever.  This  was  in 
fact  a  touching  proof  of  it.  David  returns  to  bless 
his  house,  always  a  distinct  thing,  for  David  as  for 
Solomon,  from  the  people,  and  from  the  glory  con- 
nected with  them. 

But  although  David  was  to  connect  kingly  power  in 
Zion  with  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  thus  to  secure 
blessing  by  the  power  of  the  king  whom  God  had 
chosen,  yet  the  warrior  king  was  not  to  build  the 
Lord's  house.  The  energy  which  was  victorious  over 
the  enemies  of  God  and  of  His  people  was  not  yet  the 
peaceful  and  glorious  power  which  would  bring  the 
people  into  the  enjoyment  of  all  God's  blessing,  when 
the  enemy  should  be  no  more  and  all  should  yield 
implicit  obedience  to  the  throne  of  God  upon  the 
earth.  Like  Abraham,  David  was  to  be  in  his  own 
person  the  depositary  of  the  promises  ;  but  he  was 
not  himself  to  enjoy  the  result  of  the  promises  on  the 
earth. 

When  the  people  had  been  redeemed,  their  first 
spiritual  desire  was  to  build  a  habitation  in  which 
God  should  dwell  among  them  (Ex.  xv.  2),*  and  this 
desire  was  according  to  the  mind  of  God.  (Ex.  xxix. 
44-46.) 

But  if  God  had  accompanied  His  people  in  their 
wanderings;  if  He  had  borne  with  their  unfaithful- 
ness, when  He  had  entrusted  to  them  His  glory  in  the 
earth,  which  He  had  promised  them ;  and  if  the  song, 
"His  mercy  endureth  for  ever,"  echoed  around  His 
altar  in  the  midst  of  the  ruin ;  if,  for  the  deliverance 
of  His  people.  He  had  set  up  a  king  after  His  own 
heart,  and  placed  the  ark  (rescued  from  the  enemy) 
upon  Mount  Zion,  the  place  which  He  had  chosen  for 

*  This  translation  here  is  more  than  doubtful,  but  Exodus 
xxix.  46  is  quite  clear  as  to  the  purpose  of  God. 


I  CHRONICLES.  5(33 

His  rest ;  nevertheless  it  was  still  true  that  there  re- 
mained  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God.  The  victory 
which  obtained  it  was  not  this  rest,  neither  was  tlie 
grace  which  bestowed  the  victory  this  rest.  When 
God  should  give  His  people  full  and  entire  rest,  then 
the  house  in  which  He  would  dwell  among  them 
should  be  built ;  for  God  comes  into  the  midst  of 
His  people  according  to  their  condition  and  their 
need.* 

But  the  holy  desire  to  build  it  for  the  glory  of  God 
becomes  the  occasion  of  revealing  to  David  all  the 
counsels  of  God  with  respect  to  himself.  Grace  had 
chosen  him  when  in  a  low  estate,  and  had  set  him  up 
to  rule  the  people  of  God,  who  had  Himself  been  with 
David  wherever  he  went,  who  had  cut  off  David's  ene- 
mies, and  who  had  exalted  him.  And  this  was  not  all. 
He  had  ordained  a  rest  for  His  people,  which  should  no 
more  be  disturbed,  as  it  had  been  aforetime  and  during 
all  the  days  of  the  judges. 

Moreover  God  would  subdue  all  his  enemies,  and 
would  build  him  a  house.  It  should  no  longer  be 
saviours  occasionally  raised  up  to  deliver  a  people 
from  the  miseries  into  which  their  unfaithfulness  had 
plunged  them ;  but  the  counsels  of  God  on  their  be- 
half should  be  accomplished,  and  blessing  established 
for  evermore  in  the  house  and  family  of  the  king.   The 

*  "V^Hien  Israel  was  a  slave,  God  became  his  Bedeemer ;  when 
he  dwelt  m  tents,  God  abode  in  one  also  ;  when  in  conflict,  God 
presented  Himself  as  captain  of  Jehovah's  host ;  when  settled 
in  peace,  God  establishes  Himself  in  the  house  of  His  gloiy. 
The  interval  was  the  probation  of  His  people  on  earth.  God 
abode  in  the  tent,  and  even  His  ark  is  taken.  He  interposes  in 
gi-ace  for  deliverance. 

Christ  also,  since  we  were  born  of  woman,  is  born  of  a  woman  ; 
since  His  people  were  under  the  law.  He  is  born  under  the  law : 
now  that  He  will  have  a  heavenly  people,  He  is  on  high  for  us ; 
when  He  comes  in  gloiy,  we  shall  come  with  Him,  and  reigo 
when  He  reigns,  but  in  these  last  we  are  with  Him. 
XVII. 


)64  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

'^n  of  David  should  sit  upon  his  throne ;  he  should  be 
a  son  unto  Jehovah,  and  Jehovah  should  be  his  father, 
and  Jehovah's  mercy  should  not  be  taken  away  from 
him.  He  should  also  be  settled  in  the  house,  and  in 
the  kingdom  of  Jehovah  for  ever,  and  his  throne  should 
be  established  for  evermore. 

It  will  be  remarked  here,  that  all  question  of  the  re- 
sponsibility of  David's  seed*  is  left  out,  and  that  the 
whole  refers  to  the  fulfilment  of  God's  purposes  in 
Christ,  the  true  Son  of  David  according  to  the  pro- 
mise. God  takes  the  matter  in  hand.  While  His 
people  are  still  deprived  of  rest.  He  is  pleased  to  go 
with  them  from  tent  to  tent,  and  desires  not  that  they 
should  build  Him  a  house.  At  length  He  will  Himself 
laise  up  the  One  who  shall  build  up  a  house,  and 
under  whose  reign  the  people,  established  in  power  for 
ever,  shall  enjoy  the  rest  which  God  Himself  shall 
have  procured  them.  David,  with  overflowing  heart, 
makes  answer  to  Jehovah,!  who,  for  His  servant's 
sake,  and  according  to  His  own  heart,  had  done  all 
these  great  thinofs,  and  had  revealed  them  to  make  His 
servant  know  them.  Whilst  acknowledging  Israel's 
glorious  privilege,  in  being  the  people  of  such  a  God 
— the  only  true  God,  he  prays  that  the  God  of  Israel 
will  in  fact  be  a  God  to  Israel,  and  that  He  will 
fulfil  all  that  He  had  spoken  to  him  concerning  his 
posterity. 

In  chapters  xviii.  xix.  and  xx.  David,  already  de- 
livered from  all  internal  conflict  in  Israel,  triumphs 

*  The  latter  part  of  verse  14  in  2  Samuel  vii.  is  omitted. 

t  It  is  beautiful  to  see,  in  this  affecting  prayer,  how  David's 
heart  is  full  of  that  which  Grod  is  in  this  matter.  "There  is 
none  like  thee ;"  and,  if  he  speaks  of  the  blessing  upon  His 
people,  Israel  is  not  that  which  the  people  are,  but  '*  the  only 
nation  in  the  earth  whom  God  went  to  redeem  to  himself,  that 
tbey  might  be  his  own  people,  to  make  himself  a  name  of  great- 
nesa  and  ctrriblbuesfc."  "  Let  thy  name  be  magnified  for  ever." 
This  is  the  proper  effect  of  faith 


I  CHRONICLES.  565 

over  the  heathen,  and  spreads  the  glory  of  Israel  and 
of  his  reign  on  every  side.  These  are  the  events  which 
occasioned  Psalm  xviii.,  although  it  has  a  more  ex- 
tended meaning.  (Compare  vers.  36-45.) 

It  will  also  be  remarked  that  all  David's  faults  are 
passed  over  in  silence.  Faithfully  recounted  elsewhere, 
they  have  no  place  here,  because  it  is  the  fulfilment  of 
the  ways  and  thoughts  of  God  in  the  house  of  the  elect 
king  that  is  here  depicted. 

The  children  of  the  giant  fall  with  the  Philistines 
before  the  children  of  Israel. 

But  prosperity  exposes  David  to  the  temptations  of 
the  enemy.  Head  over  Israel,  and  conqueror  of  all  his 
enemies,  he  wishes  to  know  the  strength  of  Israel, 
which  was  his  glory,  forgetting  the  strength  of  God, 
who  had  given  him  all  this  and  had  multiplied  Israel. 
This  sin,  always  a  great  one  and  still  more  so  in 
David's  case,  did  not  fail  to  bring  chastisement  from 
God — a  chastisement  however,  which  was  the  occasion 
of  a  fresh  development  of  His  grace,  and  of  the  ac- 
complishment of  His  purposes.  David,  in  his  heart, 
knew  God  although  for  a  moment  he  had  forgotten 
Him,  and  He  commits  himself  to  Him,  choosing  rather 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  God  than  to  hope  anything 
from  man;  and  the  pestilence  is  sent  by  God.  This, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  gives  occasion  for  another  element 
of  David's  glory — for  the  honour  which  God  gave  him 
of  being  the  instrument  to  fix  the  spot,  where  the 
altar  of  God  was  to  be  the  means  of  the  daily  connec- 
tion between  the  people  and  Himself.  Jerusalem  was 
beloved  of  God.  This  election  on  His  part  is  now 
manifested.  The  spot  of  groimd  in  question  was  the 
threshing-floor  of  a  stranger ;  the  moment  was  one  in 
which  the  people  were  suffering  under  the  conse- 
quences of  sin.  But  here  all  is  grace ;  and  God  stays 
the  angel's  hand  when  stretched  out  to  smite  Jeru- 
salem.     Grace  anticipates  all    movement  in  David's 

XVIII.-XXI. 


566  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

heart  ;*  for  it  acts  and  has  its  source  in  the  heart 
God.  Moved  by  this  same  grace,  David  on  his  part 
intercedes  for  the  people,  taking  the  sin  on  himself; 
and  God  hears  his  prayer,  and  sends  His  prophet  to 
direct  him  in  offering  the  atoning  victim,  which  in  fact 
formed  the  foundation  of  all  subsequent  relationship 
between  the  people  and  God.  One  cannot  but  feel — 
defective  as  the  type  is,-f  in  comparison  with  the  reality 
— ^how  much  this  calls  Him  to  mind  who  took  upon 

*  It  is  interesting  to  see  the  order  unfolded  here  in  the  esta- 
blishment of  the  relations  of  sovereign  grace :  first  of  all,  the 
heart  of  God  and  His  sovereign  grace  in  election,  suspending 
the  execution  of  the  deserved  and  pronounced  judgment  (ver. 
15) ;  next,  the  revelation  of  this  judgment,  a  revelation  which 
produces  humiliation  before  God  and  a  full  confession  of  sin  be- 
fore His  face.  David,  and  the  elders  of  Israel,  clothed  in  sack- 
cloth, fall  upon  their  faces,  and  David  presents  himself  as  the 
guilty  one.  Then,  instruction  comes  h'om  God,  as  to  that  which 
must  be  done  to  cause  the  pestilence  judicially  and  definitively 
to  cease,  namely,  the  sacrifice  in  Oman's  threshing-floor.  God 
accepts  the  sacrifice,  sending  fire  to  consume  it,  and  then  He 
commands  the  angel  to  sheathe  his  sword.  And  sovereign  grace, 
thus  canied  out  in  righteousness  through  sacrifice,  becomes  the 
means  of  Israel's  approach  to  their  God,  and  establishes  the 
place  of  their  access  to  Him.  The  tabernacle,  a  testimony  to 
the  conditions  under  which  the  people  had  tailed,  offered,  as  we 
have  seen,  no  resource  in  such  k  case.  On  the  contrary,  it  oc- 
casioned fear.  He  was  afraid  to  go  to  Gibeon.  Nothing  would 
do  but  the  definitive  intervention  of  God  according  to  His  own 
grace  (the  circumstance  of  the  sin,  on  the  king's  own  part, 
leaving  no  room  for  any  other  means).  The  whole  system  and 
principle  ofi»the  tabernacle  as  a  legal  institution  is  set  aside, 
and  the  worship  of  Israel  founded  on  grace,  by  sacrifice  coming 
in  where  all,  even  the  king  as  responsible,  had  failed.  Such 
was  Israel's  position  for  him  who  understoou  xu. 

t  And  even  historically  quite  opposed  ;  for  it  is  the  king's  own 
sin  that  has  brought  chastisement  on  the  people.  Christ,  how- 
ever, made  the  sin  His  own.  Nevertheless,  this  shews  us  how 
everything  depended  now  on  the  throne.  It  is  not  the  priest 
who  brings  in  the  remedy.  David  intercedes  and  David  offers. 
The  fact  that  the  king,  in  whom  the  promises  were  had  wuned. 
tnade  sovereign  giuce  necessary . 


I   CHRONICLES.  567 

Himself,  and  even  in  behalf  of  this  very  people,  the 
sin  which  was  not  His  own. 

David  having  offered  the  sacrifice  according  to  God's 
ordinance,  God  marks  His  acceptance  of  it  by  send- 
ing fire  from  heaven ;  and  at  God's  command  the  angel 
sheathes  his  sword. 

Here  all  is  evidently  grace.  It  is  not  the  kingly 
power  which  interposes  to  deliver  Israel  from  their 
enemies,  and  gives  them  rest.  The  ark  of  the  cove- 
nant being  there  through  the  energy  of  faith,  out  of 
its  regular  place  which  is  now  desolate  in  consequence 
of  the  people's  sin,  it  is  Israel's  own  sin*  (for  all  de- 
pends upon  the  king)  which  is  in  question.  God  acts 
in  grace,  ordains  and  accepts  the  atoning  sacrifice ; 
David,  in  sackcloth  with  his  elders,  presenting  himself 
before  Him  in  intercession. 

In  the  place  where  God  has  heard  his  prayer,  David 
ofters  his  sacrifices ;  and  of  this  place  it  is  said,  "  This 
is  the  house  of  Jehovah-Elohim,  and  this  is  the  altar  of 
the  burnt-ofiering  for  Israel."  In  the  presence  of  the 
sin,  God  acts  in  grace,  and  institutes,  by  means  of  sa- 
crifice, the  regular  order  of  the  religious  relationship 
between  Himself  and  His  people  who  are  accepted  in 
grace,  and  the  place  of  His  own  habitation  in  which 
they  were  to  draw  nigh  unto  Him.f  It  was  a  new 
order  of  things.  The  former  presented  no  resource 
against  the  judgment  of  God  :  on  the  contrary,  David 
himself  feared  to  go  to  the  tabernacle  ;  it  was  all  over 
with  it  as  a  means  of  approach  to  God.  David's  sin 
became  the  occasion  of  putting  an  end  to  it,  by  shew- 

*  This  difference  between  Israel's  deliverance  from  their 
enemies,  and  the  sense  of  their  own  sin  before  God,  in  the  last 
day,  is  found  in  the  psalms  of  degi-ees :  see  Psalm  cxxx. 

t  Observe  too  here,  how  sin  gives  occasion  to  the  bringing  out 
of  the  counsels  of  God,  though  the  responsibility  was  also  met 
in  what  did  so.  So  the  cross.  Compare  Titus  i.  2,  3,  and  2 
Timothy  i.  9,  10 ;  Ephesians  iii. ;  Colossians  i. 

XXI. 


568  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

ing  the  impossibility  of  using  it  in  such  a  case,  and 
by  being  thus  made  the  occasion  of  founding  every- 
thing upon  sovereign  grace. 

From  this  chapter  to  verses  28,  29  of  chapter  xxvi. 
all  refers  to  the  house  which  is  to  be  built.  We  see 
the  provision  that  David  made  of  everything  necessary 
for  its  construction,  the  order  of  the  Levites'  service 
who  were  appointed  for  song,  of  those  among  them 
who  were  porters,  of  the  priests  in  their  classes,  all 
being  ordered  and  arranged  by  David.  How  entirely 
all  was  dependent  on  the  king  is  especially  shewn  in 
this  that,  without  any  distinctive  break,  the  other 
royal  appointments  of  his  house,  his  administration, 
his  officers  and  guard,  are  then  continuously  intro- 
duced; finally,  the  chief  among  the  people,  the  number 
of  whom  is  mentioned. 

As  to  the  numbering  of  the  people,  it  had  not  been 
finished  because  of  the  wrath  of  God.  The  thing  of 
interest  here  is,  that  all  is  ordered  and  arranged  by 
David,  even  for  the  doors  of  the  house  which  was  not 
yet  built.  Thus,  in  Christ,  all  is  appointed  before  it  is 
manifested  in  glory. 

We  see  too  that  David  had  it  always  at  heart,  and 
what  immense  preparations  he  had  made.  For  what- 
ever the  warfare  may  be,  the  glory  of  God  in  peace 
among  His  people  is  always  in  the  heart  which  is  in 
unison  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  in  the  heart  of  Christ 
Himself. 

It  is  David  who  places  Solomon  on  the  throne,  who 
commands  the  princes  to  aid  him,  and  who  appoints 
prophecy  in  inspired  psalms.*  He  ordains  the  age  at 
which  the  Levites'  service  should  commence — a  dif- 
ferent age  from  that  ordained  by  Moses.-|* 


*  Heman   himself,  apparently,  was  inspired   also.     Several 
psalms  are  ascribed  to  him,  as  well  as  to  Asaph. 

t  At  any  rate  the  probably  probationary  period  of  four  years 


I  CHRONICLES.  569 

It  is  the  whole  order  of  the  house  of  God  and  of 
the  king,  which  is  appointed  under  his  hand;  a  new 
system  which  is  established,  founded  upon  grace  as  its 
principle. 

Solomon  only  puts  in  execution  the  order  and  plans 
of  divine  wisdom  in  David.  Glory  is  but  the  fruit  of 
grace.  It  is  the  Christ  who  has  suffered,  who  is  the 
wisdom  and  the  power  of  God,  unto  whom  all  the 
order  of  the  house  belongs.  All  the  rest  is  glorious, 
but  it  is  only  a  result.  Only  we  have  already  seen 
that  it  is  in  peace,  and  by  Christ,  as  Prince  of  peace, 
that  this  house  must  be  built.  It  did  not  become  the 
habitual  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God,  that  there 
should  be  enemies  to  combat;  neither  was  it  suitable 
to  the  character  of  His  people's  joy.  The  character 
of  such  a  state  of  things  should  be  that  of  blessing 
flowing  without  obstacle  from  God. 

It  is  very  important  to  observe  how  everything  here 
is  ruled  by  David.  It  is  important,  in  the  first  place, 
morally.  The  intelligence,  the  right  of  ordering  all 
things,  the  energy  which  grasps  the  whole  thought  of 
God,  the  fellowship  with  Him  in  His  counsels,  the 
germ  and  moral  foundation  of  all  these  counsels,  as 
well  as  the  power  of  maintaining  them,  are  connected 
with  the  sufferings  which  Christ  underwent  for  the 
glory  of  His  Father.  This  is  true  of  us  also  in  our 
measure.  It  is  the  humbled  suffering  Christ,  who  is 
morally  on  a  level  with  all  this  glory.  It  is  im- 
portant, in  the  second  place,  as  to  intelligence  in  the 
ways  of  God ;  for  I  doubt  not  that  Christ,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  His  reign,  will  act  in  the  character 
of  David. 

We  may  also  remark  here,  that  the  extent  of  autho- 
rity which  David  exercised  was  very  great  and  of  wide 

ifi   not  mentioned.     David   ordains  the  age  by  his  own  aa- 
thority. 

XX1I.-XXVIIL 


570  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BLBLia. 

bearing.  The  whole  religious  order  was  reconstructed. 
Everything,  even  to  the  age  of  the  Levites'  service, 
depends  on  the  authority  and  regulations  of  David,  as 
formerly  on  those  of  Moses.  All  the  pattern  of  the 
temple,  and  of  its  vessels,  is  given  him  by  inspiration, 
as  that  of  the  tabernacle  and  all  belonging  to  it  had 
been  given  to  Moses.  He  also  introduced  singing,  and 
divers  musical  instruments,  which  are  even  called  "  the 
musical  instruments  of  God,"  and  which,  as  well 
as  the  singing,  had  previously  formed  no  part  of  the 
public  service.  With  the  exception  of  the  ark,  even 
the  various  vessels  were  different  from  those  of  the 
tabernacle;  and  for  each  thing  the  precise  weight  in 
gold  or  in  silver  was  determined  by  David. 

God  would  also  associate  the  people  with  David  in 
this  willing  service  of  the  day  of  His  power;  and, 
even  as  they  had  been  associated  with  him  in  his  wars 
and  conflicts,  there  are  those  who  shall  be  so  likewise 
in  the  liberality  which  he  manifests  towards  the  house 
of  his  God.  They  are  at  a  great  distance  from  him,  it 
is  true:  it  is,  so  to  say,  a  superfluous  thing.  They 
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  wisdom  that  arranges 
and  prepares,  but  they  are  allowed  to  share  in  the 
work.  This  favour  is  granted  them,  and  their  good- 
will is  acceptable  to  God,  and  it  is  also  the  fruit  of  His 
grace. 

David  here  (chap.  xxix.  18)  again  acknowledges  God 
according  to  the  promises  made  unto  the  fathers,  and 
according  to  the  memorial  of  God  for  ever ;  "  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Israel,  our  fathers ;"  he  seeks  that 
which  will  be  accomplished  under  the  new  covenant, 
and  directs  the  thanksgivings  of  the  whole  assembly 
Sacrifices  of  righteousness  are  offered,  and  they  eat 
before  Jehovah  with  great  gladness. 

Solomon  is  made  king  the  second  time.  (See  chap, 
xxiii.  1.)  The  first  time  was  when  grace  was  fully 
established  in  the  altar  built  on  the  threshing-floor  of 


I  CHRONICLES.  571 

Oman,  where  the  son  of  David,  as  the  prince  of  peace, 
was  to  build  the  temple.  Solomon  is  introduced  as  the 
head  of  all  that  was  being  established,  and  as  holding 
the  first  and  supreme  place  in  the  mind  of  God — the 
one  on  whom  all  the  rest  depended,  which  could  not 
even  exist  now  without  him.  The  house,  the  whole 
order  of  the  house,  and  its  government,  all  referred  to 
Solomon;  and  thus  his  identification  with  David,  in 
that  both  were  on  the  throne  at  the  same  time,  makes 
it  much  easier  to  understand  the  type  of  Christ  in 
this.  It  is  one  person,  whom  His  sufferings  and 
victories  place  on  the  throne  of  glory  and  of  peace. 
For  at  this  moment,  although  the  result  of  the  glory 
was  not  yet  manifested,  God  had  aiven  rest  unto  His 
people,  that  they  might  dwell  at  Jerusalem.  (Chap, 
xxiii.  25.) 

David  now  disappears,  although  it  is  he  who  puts 
Solomon  in  this  position.  That  which  we  see,  as  filling 
the  whole  scene  of  royal  glory,  is  Solomon  himself 
reigning  in  peace  over  a  willing  people,  who  can  oflfer 
these  sacrifices  of  righteousness.  The  son  of  David  is 
seen  in  his  own  true  character,  and  in  this  character 
alone,  namely,  that  of  Jehovah's  anointed,  the  governor 
of  the  people ;  and  Zadok,  the  faithful  priest  (not  Abia- 
thar),  walks  before  the  anointed  one  (all  the  counsel  of 
God,  according  to  Hannah's  song,  and  the  words  of  the 
man  of  God  in  1  Samuel  ii.  being  thus  fulfilled).  "And 
Solomon  sat  on  the  throne  of  Jehovah  " — a  remarkable 
expression :  everything  is  subject  to  him. 

The  attentive  reader  cannot  fail  to  observe  tne 
prominent  place  given  to  the  counsels  of  God  respect- 
ing Christ  the  Lord,  and  the  contrast  there  is  between 
this  and  the  history  of  Adonijah  in  Kings — a  history 
which,  by  the  contrast  it  presents  with  the  narrative 
in  Chronicles,  so  fully  proves  that  the  thought  and 
intention  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  this  Book  was  to 
give  us  in  type  the  expression  of  God's  purposes  with 

XXIX. 


572  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

regard  to  the  true  Son  of  David,  and  the  position  He  is 
to  occupy,  and  to  shew  what  will  be  the  character  in 
those  days  of  the  throne  at  Jerusalem,  when  Christ 
shall  be  seated  upon  it.  It  will  be  the  throne  of  Jeho- 
vah, and  the  royal  majesty  in  Israel  shall  be  such  as 
has  never  yet  been  known.  With  reference  to  this  the 
Book  of  Chronicles  is  full  of  instruction. 


II  CHRONICLES. 

This  Second  Book  of  Chronicles  unfolds  the  reign  ot 
the  son  of  David  and  of  the  family  of  David.  It  does 
not  commence  with  the  faith  of  David  at  the  ark,  but 
with  the  tabernacle  that  Moses,  the  servant  of  Jehovah 
had  set  up,  and  the  brazen  altar,  at  which  the  king 
and  the  congregation  worshipped.  The  kingly  power 
is  realised  in  connection  with  Israel,  the  people  of  God 
whom  Moses  brought  out  of  Egypt.*  It  is  the  means 
by  which  the  purposes  of  God  with  respect  to  them 
are  accomplished  ;  it  is  not  yet  assuredly  a  new  cove- 
nant by  a  new  power,  but  the  object  of  blessing  is 
Israel.  If  it  is  Boaz  and  Ruth  who  raise  up  th& 
family,  it  is  to  Naomi  that  a  son  is  born,  that  is, 
through  sovereign  grace,  by  a  redeemer  "  in  whom  is 
strength  :"t  one  who  had  no  title  (and  Israel  had  na 
more  any)  is  introduced  into  the  enjoyment  of  the 
promises.  Israel,  long  known  as  the  "  pleasant  one ''% 
of  God,  is  the  people  which  receives  into  its  bosom  the 
son  that  is  born.  To  us,  they  say,  a  son  is  born, 
(Isaiah  ix.  7.)  At  the  altar  which  was  before  Jehovah 
in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  Solomon  recog- 
nises his  position.  He  is  to  judge  the  people  of  God, 
Hereafter  all  this  shall  take  place  in  power. 

This  book  presents  us  also  with  kingly  power  in 
connection  with  the  earth  and  the  government  of  the 
people  on  the  earth.      Glory  and  riches  are  added  to 

*  But  the  connection  is  not  with  the  ark  in  Zion.  He  goes^ 
historically,  where  the  people  are. 

t  Such  is  the  meaning  of  the  name  of  Boaz. 
X  Naomi  means  "  my  pleasant  one." 
I. 


574  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

that  which  Solomon  requests.  Neither  enemies  nor 
the  energy  of  faith  is  in  question.  The  king's  position 
is  the  result  of  the  victory  which  that  faith  had 
obtained.  He  reigns,  and  is  established  in  glory  and 
in  riches.  He  begins  to  build  the  house.  Hiram  ac- 
knowledges Jehovah  as  the  creator  of  heaven  and 
earth,  and  the  strangers  who  dwell  in  Israel  are  the 
king's  servants  to  do  his  work.  In  the  temple  the 
cherubim  have  their  faces  towards  the  house,  that  is, 
outwards.*  The  attributes  of  God  do  not  now  look 
only  at  the  covenant  to  maintain  it  in  spite  of  every- 
thing, but  they  also  look  outwards  in  order  to  bless. 
It  is  the  time  of  the  millennium ;  but  the  veil  is  here 
found  again  in  the  temple.  Whatever  may  be  the 
blessing  of  the  true  Solomon's  reign,  Israel  and  the 
earth  have  not  immediate  and  direct  access  to  Him 
who  is  hidden  in  the  heavens.  That  is  our  portion, 
even  to  enter  boldly  now  through  the  veil,  and  to  find 
no  veil  in  heaven :  blessed  be  God  !  There  is  no  temple 
there.  Jehovah  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the 
temple  of  it.  The  stability  of  a  divine  government  is 
granted  to  the  earth,i-  and  the  blessing  of  a  God  whose 
face  is  turned  towards  it ;  but  those  who  are  blessed 
do  not  behold  that  face,  do  not  draw  nigh  unto  it. 
There  is  also  an  altar  adapted  for  worship  in  a  time  of 
such  blessing.  The  altar  and  the  veil  are  not  men- 
tioned in  the  Book  of  Kings,  where  the  structure  of 
the  temple  is  the  figure  of  things  not  seen,  and  where, 

*  In  the  Authorised  Version  it  is  inwards.  It  is  literally 
towards  the  house,  which,  generally,  would  mean  inwards  ;  but, 
as  the  cherubim  were  at  the  very  bottom  of  the  house,  looking 
towards  the  house  was  really  outwa/rds.  The  French  transla- 
tion is  literal. 

t  This  stabihty  consists,  apparently,  in  two  things — God  shall 
establish  it,  and  then  in  Him  is  strength.  These  are  the  two 
sources  of  the  stability  of  Christ's  kingdom.  This  is  the  mean- 
ing of  the  words  Jachin  and  Boaz,  the  names  of  the  pillars 
before  the  temple. 

VI. 


II   CHRONICLES.  575 

as  a  whole,  it  is  presented  to  us  as  the  dwelling-place 
and  manifestation  of  God.  We  are  told  of  a  golden 
door,  opening  with  two  leaves,  before  the  oracle,  and 
nothing  is  said  about  the  altar. 

In  Chronicles  the  order  is  arranged  also  according  to 
the  state  of  things  which  this  book  sets  before  us,  that 
is  to  say,  according  to  the  state  of  Christ's  glorious 
kingdom.  There  is  a  court  for  the  priests,  and  the 
large  outer  court  with  doors.  All  was  arranged  (chap. 
iv.  9)  for  the  relationship  of  which  we  speak. 

So  also,  as  to  the  manifestation  of  the  glory,  nothing 
is  said  in  the  Book  of  Kings  of  the  public  acceptance 
of  the  sacrifice ;  but  it  is  simply  stated  that  when  the 
ark  had  been  carried  into  the  holy  place,  and  the 
priests  were  gone  out,  and  the  staves  of  the  ark  had 
been  drawn  out,  so  that  the  dwelling  of  Jehovah  was 
definitively  established  there,  the  glory  of  Jehovah 
fi[lled  the  house.  It  is  God's  habitation,  a  figure  of  the 
heavenly  dwelling-place  which  awaits  us,  our  Father's 
house.  On  the  other  hand,  that  which  is  set  before  us 
in  the  Book  of  Chronicles  is  God's  connection  with 
His  people  Israel  in  the  last  days,  prefigured  by  that 
which  happened  to  Solomon.  It  was  when  the  trumpe- 
ters and  singers  lifted  up  their  voices  with  one  accord 
to  praise  Jehovah,  saying  "  His  mercy  endureth  for 
ever,"  that  the  house  was  filled  with  a  cloud.  As  we 
have  seen,  when  all  shall  be  accomplished  for  Israel, 
these  words  will  celebrate  th©  untiring  mercy  of  which 
Israel's  blessing  will  be  the  proof  in  that  day.  It  is 
the  deliverance  and  blessing  of  that  people  which 
demonstrate  the  truth  of  those  words. 

We  have  seen  that  there  was  a  second  part  of  grace, 
the  acceptance  of  Israel  as  worshippers  after  their  sin 
— not  only  the  ark  on  Mount  Zion,  but  the  sacrifice 
and  pardon  and  consequent  worship  of  Mount  Moriah, 
the  threshing-floor  of  Araunah  the  Jebusite. 

Thus  Solomon  having  prayed,  and  entreated  Jehovah 
II.-VL 


576  THE   BOOKS    OF   THE   B1J3LE. 

that  His  eyes  should  be  open,  and  His  ears  attent  to 
the  prayers  that  should  be  offered  to  Him  in  that  place 
(quoting  David's  petition  in  Psalm  cxxxii.,  and  using 
His  mercies  to  David  as  a  plea),  the  fire  comes  down 
and  consumes  the  burnt-offering  and  the  sacrifices; 
and  the  glory  of  Jehovah  fills  the  house.  And  now,  it 
is  not  only  that  the  priests  cannot  enter,  but  the 
children  of  Israel  behold  the  glory  which  rests  upon 
the  house ;  they  fall  upon  their  faces  and  worship.  It 
is  the  public  acceptance  of  the  sacrifice  which  sets  the 
people  in  public  connection  with  God,  and  makes  them 
confess  that  "Jehovah  is  good,  and  that  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever."  (Compare  Lev.  ix.  24.)  Only  in  this 
last  passage  the  acknowledgment  of  God's  unwearied 
mercy  was  not  the  point. 

There  is  also  another  element  in  the  scene  we  are 
considering,  and  that  is  the  public  and  joyful  assembly 
of  the  whole  people,  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  the  great 
congregation  (Psalm  xxii.  25),  and  also  the  dedication 
of  the  altar. 

These  are  the  two  things  which  mark  Israel's  parti- 
cipation in  the  blessing,  namely,  the  altar,  and  the 
feast  of  tabernacles ;  worship  subsequent  to  their  fall 
*nd  ruin,  founded  on  the  acceptance  of  the  sacrifice, 
and  the  realised  effect  of  the  promises,  the  people  being 
no  longer  in  distress.* 

We  find  again  here  the  musical  instruments  of 
Jehovah,  which  David  had  made  to  praise  Jehovah, 
"  because  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever ;"  when  David 
himself  "  praised  by  their  ministry "  (vii.  6)  ;  blessed 
thought !  for  who  is  this  David  ?  (Compare  Psalm  xxii. 
22.)  The  people  saw  themselves  blessed  and  happy  in 
all  the  goodness  of  Jehovah.     After  this  the  Lord  sets 

*  It  does  not  appear  however  that  they  made  booths  with  the 
branches  of  trees.  Since  Joshua,  this  had  not  been  done  until 
the  days  of  Nehemiah.  At  the  time  which  we  are  considering, 
joy  and  prosperity  had  made  them  a  Uttle  neglectful  of  the  word. 


II  CHRONICLES.  577 

before  Solomon  the  conditions  under  which  He  places 
him,  as  well  as  the  people,  for  the  enjoyment  or  for 
the  recovery  of  these  blessings.  He  had  chosen  this 
house  of  prayer.  If  there  was  chastening  and  the 
people  humbled  themselves,  there  was  respite:  the 
eyes  and  the  heart  of  Jehovah  should  be  there  per- 
petually. 

Then,  with  respect  to  Solomon  and  the  seed  of  David 
generally,  on  their  faithfulness  the  blessing  of  the 
whole  people  was  to  depend.  If  the  house  of  David 
should  turn  away  from  God,  Israel  should  be  rooted 
out  of  the  land ;  and  the  house,  which  had  been  sanc- 
tified by  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  should  become  a  by- 
word among  all  nations,  and  a  witness  to  the  just 
judgment  of  God. 

Chapter  viii.  gives  us  a  few  more  details  of  the  state 
of  Israel — a  state  which  prefigures  that  of  the  last 
days.  Solomon  brings  everything  into  subjection  that 
could  have  hindered  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  pro- 
mised land  in  its  whole  extent,  whether  on  the  side  of 
Tyre  or  of  Syria.  The  strangers  in  the  land  continue 
to  pay  tribute,  and  the  children  of  Israel  are  captains 
and  men  of  war.  Zion  is  entirely  sanctified,  and  the 
worship  of  Jehovah  maintained  and  honoured  by  the 
king.  The  service  of  the  house  of  God,  the  praises, 
and  the  whole  order  connected  therewith,  were  ap- 
pointed according  to  the  ordinances  of  David.  The 
king's  commandment  was  the  absolute  rule  for  every- 
thing. Edom  itself  was  his  possession ;  and,  as  far  as 
the  Red  Sea,  all  were  the  king's  subjects.  The  king 
of  Tyre,  who  represents  the  Gentile  glory  of  the 
world,  supplied  all  that  he  needed  to  accomplish  his 
designs. 

But  it  is  not  only  within  the  borders  of  the  land 

that  the  power  and  glory  of  Solomon  are  known.    His 

fame  spreads  among  the  heathen,  even  to  distant  lands ; 

and  the  queen  of  Sheba  comes  to  bring  him  her  tribute 

VOL.  I.  VII.-IX.  p  p 


678  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

:►£  admiration,  and  the  precious  things  of  the  Gentiles, 
who  thus  contribute  to  the  splendour  and  glory  of  the 
place  chosen  by  God,  whose  light  had  come,  and  upon 
which  the  glory  of  Jehovah  had  risen  (in  type  doubt- 
less for  the  moment,  but  according  to  the  principle  of 
grace,  and  by  the  power  that  will  fully  accomplish  it, 
according  to  the  counsels  of  God).  It  is  a  glory,  the 
report  of  which  attracts  the  nations,  but  which,  when 
seen,  surpasses  all  that  could  be  said  of  it ;  and  which 
one  must  be  near  to  appreciate.  It  is  a  glory  that 
excels  all  that  the  world  has  seen,  a  wisdom  never 
equalled — a  wisdom  that  attracted  all  the  kings  of  the 
earth,  who,  each  year,  brought  their  offerings  and  their 
gifts  to  the  king  who  sat  upon  the  throne  of  Jehovah 
©n  earth. 

Thus,  ruling  even  to  the  farthest  limits  of  the  pro- 
mised land,  he  causes  all  Israel  to  enjoy  the  abundance 
and  the  blessing,  which  God  poured  out  upon  His 
people. 

But  soon  the  picture  changes. 

Solomon's  faults  are  not  related  here  for  reasons 
which  we  have  already  pointed  out ;  but  the  history  of 
Rehoboam  shews  us  the  immediate  fall  of  the  kingly 
power  which  God  had  established.  The  king's  folly 
occasioned  it,  but  it  was  only  the  fulfilment  of  the 
Lord's  word  by  Ahijah. 

The  war  which  Rehoboam  began  against  the  revolted 
tribes  was  prevented.  Rehoboam  submits  to  the  man 
of  God's  prohibition.  He  is  blessed  and  fortifies  him- 
self in  Judah.  The  Levites  repair  to  Jerusalem  as 
well  as  a  great  number  of  the  faithful,  who  would  not 
forsake  the  true  worship  of  Jehovah  to  bow  down  be- 
fore golden  calves,  to  which  His  name  had  been  at- 
tached. Thus  Judah  was  strengthened;  for,  during 
three  years,  the  king  walked  in  the  ways  of  David  and 
Solomon.  But  soon  he  forsook  the  law  of  Jehovah, 
and,  secure  against  revolted  Israel,  he  is  chastised  by 


II  CHRONICLES.  .579 

unexpected  enemies,  and  all  the  riches  amassed  by 
Solomon  fall  into  their  hands.  Nevertheless  he  hum- 
bled himself,  and  the  wrath  of  Jehovah  was  turned 
from  him. 

In  the  history  which  we  are  about  to  consider  we 
shall  find  the  ways  of  God  more  immediate  and  direct 
with  those  who  were  in  direct  and  avowed  relation- 
ship with  Him,  according  to  His  grace  towards  David, 
and  in  connection  with  the  house  that  had  been  abdi- 
cated to  His  name.  When  their  kings  were  faithful, 
all  went  on  well. 

In  his  wars  with  Jeroboam  Abijah  stands  entirely 
upon  this  ground,  and  he  is  blessed. 

Asa  follows  his  steps;  and,  whether  at  peace,  or 
while  at  war  with  the  Ethiopians,  Israel  prospers  in 
his  reign.  He  takes  away  the  strange  gods ;  for  we 
contmually  find  them  again.  Energy  is  required  to 
cast  them  out  and  prevent  their  return.  Even  the 
king's  mother  is  deprived  of  her  royal  position,  on  ac- 
count of  her  idolatry.  Nevertheless  "  the  high  places 
were  not  taken  away." 

^  But,  although  Asa's  faithfulness  continued,  his  trust 
m  God  failed  afterwards.  Jealous  of  the  Israelites  re- 
sorting to  Judah,  Baasha  builds  a  city  to  prevent  it  • 
and  Asa,  instead  of  looking  to  the  Lord,  allies  himself 
vf^h  Syria— an  alliance  which  produced  the  desired 
effect,  but  which  stirred  up  Gentiles  against  Israel 
And  this  was  not  all ;  alliance  with  the  world  prevents 
our  overcoming  the  world.  Had  he  not  done  this  the 
Syrians  would  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Asa'  for 
"  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the 
whole  earth,  to  shew  himself  strong  in  the  behalf  of 
them  whose  heart  is  perfect  towards  him."  Solemn 
and  precious  word  !  Wounded  in  his  self-love,  and 
irritated  at  having  thus  missed  so  good  an  opportunity 
Asa  puts  the  seer  who  gave  this  testimony  in  prison ' 
and  he  oppresses  the  people.     He  is  chastened  of  God' 

X.-XVL 


580  '  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

and  alas  !  he  does  not  seek  God  in  the  chastening. 
Nevertheless,  except  in  this  instance,  Asa  continued 
faithful  and  was  honoured. 

Jehoshaphat,  his  son  succeeds  him,  and  begins  his 
reign  by  walking  faithfully  with  God.  He  strength- 
ened his  kingdom  against  Israel,  an  enemy  more 
dangerous  by  their  example  than  by  their  strength. 
When  anything  pretends  to  be  in  connection  with  God 
and  to  acknowledge  Him,  there  is  no  safety  except  in 
judging  it  with  a  spiritual  judgment — which  can  only 
be  formed  through  a  just  sense  of  God's  honour — 
making  no  terms  with  that  which  pretends  to  be  con- 
nected with  Him,  and  treating  it  as  an  enemy.  This  is 
what  Jehoshaphat  did  at  first ;  and,  as  he  did  not  walk 
in  the  ways  of  Israel,  Jehovah  established  the  king- 
dom in  his  hand.  Blessed  of  Jehovah,  he  takes  away 
the  high  places  and  the  groves,  and  seeks  with  much 
faithfulness  and  zeal  to  instruct  the  people  in  the  true 
knowledge  of  the  Lord :  Jehovah  preserves  him  from 
war,  and  some  of  the  nations  even  become  tributary 
to  him  on  account  of  his  power. 

In  many  respects  this  is  a  more  beautiful  picture 
than  anything  we  have  yet  read  in  the  history  of  the 
kings.  But  this  prosperity  becomes  a  snare  to  him; 
and  it  bore  most  bitter  fruits  when  his  real  piety  was 
not  present  as  a  counterpoise. 

The  prosperity  with  which  God  had  blessed  him  in 
consequence  of  his  faithfulness  made  it  worth  while  to 
seek  alliance  with  him,  and  rendered  it  more  difficult 
to  attack  him.  Thus  at  ease,  Jehoshaphat  on  his  part 
joins  affinity  with  Israel.  His  prosperity  put  him  in  a 
condition  to  do  so  in  a  manner  which  made  the  alliance 
honourable.  The  human  heart,  when  it  is  not  kept 
by  God,  can  act  generously  with  respect  to  the  evil 
which  it  fears  not ;  but  this  is  not  charity.  Outwardly 
Jehoshaphat  is  faithful  to  Jehovah,  but  the  wrath  of 
Jehovah  is  upon  him. 


n  CHRONICLES.  581 

Nevertheless,  when  he  had  returned  to  his  house, 
the  king  sets  himself  to  bring  back  the  people  to  the 
fear  of  Jehovah,  and  to  cause  judgment  and  righteous- 
ness to  be  executed  in  Israel.  But  war  begins.  He 
could  no  longer  have  the  unmingled  blessing  of  having 
to  do  with  God  alone  without  trial.  The  intervention 
of  the  enemy  was  now  needful  for  his  good,  according 
to  God's  government,  although  in  the  trial  through 
which  he  passes  he  may  have  full  blessing.  His  piety 
was  genuine;  the  trial  proves  it.  He  appeals  to  the 
relationship  of  God  with  Abraham  and  to  His  pro- 
mises to  Solomon,  when  the  latter  had  built  the  house. 
Jehoshaphat  understood  also  the  relation  in  which  the 
enemy  stood  to  Israel,  looked  at  in  connection  with 
God's  dealings.  (Chap.  xx.  10,  11.)  God  answers  him, 
and  the  king  encourages  the  people  by  acknowledging 
the  voice  of  the  prophets,  and  by  singing  the  praises 
of  God  before  the  blessing  came — singing  in  faith  that 
His  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  God  abundantly  granted 
his  prayer.  Israel,  whose  enemies  had  slain  each  other, 
had  only  to  carry  away  the  spoil ;  and  God  gave  rest  to 
the  king,  and  his  realm  was  quiet. 

Still,  if  Jehoshaphat  no  longer  united  himself  with 
the  king  of  Israel  to  make  war,  he  joined  him  in  a 
matter  of  commerce.  But  God  put  a  stop  to  his 
Tindertakings. 

In  spite  of  some  faults  the  character  of  Jehosha- 
phat is  a  fine  one,  and  refreshes  the  heart.  But  soon 
the  sorrowful  fruits  of  his  league  with  Ahab  ripen 
and  bring  Judah  into  distress.  Jehoram,  his  son, 
Ahab's  son-in-law,  walks  in  the  ways  of  the  kings  of 
Israel.  The  Edomites  revolt,  and  Libnah,  a  city  of 
Judah,  does  the  same.  The  king  makes  high  places, 
and  compels  Judah  to  worship  at  them.  The  judg- 
ment of  God  is  soon  manifested.  He  whom  God  has 
raised  up  as  a  witness  against  the  sins  of  the  house  of 
Ahab  has  foreseen  their  fruits  in  Judah  ;  and  a  writing 

XVII.-XXI. 


682  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

of  Elijah's  is  brought  to  the  king,*  threatening  him 
with  the  terrible  judgments  of  God.  Judah  also  is  at- 
tacked by  their  enemies,  who  pillage  the  land,  laying 
waste  even  the  king's  house,  and  slaying  all  his  sons 
excepting  one.  This  was  of  Jehovah.  It  is  His 
government  which  we  see  here;  for  He  rules  over 
those  who  are  in  covenant  with  Him,  those  who  are 
His  house. 

Finally,  the  king  perishes,  according  to  Elijah's  pre- 
diction. Disaster  upon  disaster  falls  upon  Judah  in 
consequence  of  this  connection  with  the  house  of 
Ahab.  To  connect  oneself  with  that  which  claims  to 
be  of  God,  according  to  His  religion,  but  which  is  not 
so,  is  intolerable  to  God.  The  only  son  that  remained 
to  Jehoram  is  slain  by  Jehu,  as  participating  in  the 
iniquity  of  Ahab's  family;  and  Athaliah,  who  be- 
longed to  this  family,  takes  possession  of  the  throne, 
destroying  all  the  seed  royal,  except  one  child  that 
God  in  His  grace  took  care  of,  who  would  not  have  the 
lamp  of  David  put  out  at  Jerusalem,  although  He 
chastened  his  family.  The  sister  of  Ahaziah,  wife  to 
the  high  priest,  preserves  the  child,  who  is  concealed  in 
the  house  of  God  for  six  years. 

Everything  was  in  a  very  low  state;  and,  to  out- 
ward appearance,  all  was  over  with  the  house  of 
David  ;  but  the  faithfulness  of  God  did  not  fail.  And, 
although  the  power  of  the  throne  is  absolutely  de- 
stroyed, and  the  family  of  David  set  aside,  God  raises 
up  a  man  of  faith,  in  the  person  of  the  high  priest,  to 
restore  the  whole.      The   chastisement  of    God  was 


*  Elijah  had  been  taken  up  to  heaven  some  time  before  the 
writing  reached  its  destination.  Being  a  prophecy,  there  is 
nothing  which  makes  any  difficulty  in  believing  that  this 
writing,  like  any  other  prophecy,  was  left  by  Elijah  to  be  used 
at  the  suitable  time.  It  was  a  function  which,  according  to  the 
ways  of  God,  naturally  belonged  to  him  as  a  witness  against 
the  iniquity  of  Ahab. 


n  CHRONICLES.  583 

complete.  The  entire  order  of  the  throne  wag  sub- 
verted by  His  judgment.  Nothing  was  left  but  the 
faithfulness  of  God.  Man  was  judged.  He  had  no 
longer  any  means  of  recovery.  But  all  things  are  at 
God's  disposal,  the  heart  of  Jehoshaphat  and  the  faith 
of  Jehoiada.  The  latter  takes  the  needful  steps,  and 
the  king  is  set  upon  his  throne;  and,  after  all,  the 
same  thing  which  we  have  seen  before  again  takes 
place:  the  king  appoints  everything  concerning  the 
re-establishment  of  the  order  in  the  house  of  God. 

How  often  the  energy  of  faith  may,  so  to  say,  esta- 
blish a  kingdom,  yet  fail  at  the  same  time  in  maintain- 
ing the  ordinary  duty  of  those  who  have  to  do  with 
the  service  of  God  !  Faithful  at  the  commencement  of 
his  reign,  Joash  walks  nevertheless  more  by  Jehoiada's 
faith  than  by  his  own;  and,  after  the  death  of  the 
high  priest,  he  leans  on  the  princes  of  Judah,  and 
serves  idols,  and  even  puts  to  death  the  son  of  Jeho- 
iada, by  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  had  testified  against 
him.  Joash,  forsaken  of  God,  is  defeated  by  the 
Syrians.  He  falls  into  many  diseases,  and  is  at  length 
slain  by  his  own  servants. 

In  this  whole  history  we  must  observe  that  the  im- 
mediate government  of  a  God  of  judgment  is  in  exer- 
cise, because  those  whom  He  judges  were  in  close 
connection  with  Himself. 

Amaziah,  up  to  a  certain  point,  walks  with  God,  but 
in  weakness  and  with  an  unsteady  step.  He  leans 
upon  an  arm  of  flesh  :  but  he  hearkens  to  the  pro- 
phet, and  this  saves  him  from  being  defeated.  The 
cities  of  Judah,  however,  suffer  the  consequences  of  his 
false  step,  and  are  plundered  by  the  army  of  Israel, 
which  Amaziah  had  sent  back.  Lifted  up  by  the 
victory  that  he  had  obtained  over  Edom,  he  takes  the 
gods  of  Seir  which  could  not  deliver  their  own  people, 
and  bows  himself  down  before  them.  He  then  turns  a 
deaf  ear  to  the  prophet  who  rebukes  him.      But  pride 

XXII.-XXV. 


584  THE   BOOKS   OF   THE   BIBLE. 

goes  before  confusion,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a 
fall.  Amaziah,  making  war  against  Israel,  is  ignomi- 
niously  defeated  and  made  prisoner,  and  Jerusalem 
itself  is  laid  waste. 

We  should  remark  in  this  part  of  the  history  the 
goodness  of  the  Lord,  who  continually  interposes  by 
means  of  prophets. 

Uzziah,  the  son  of  Amaziah,  walks  for  a  long  time 
with  Jehovah  and  prospers.  The  strength  of  Judah  is 
increased,  and  all  the  king's  undertakings  are  success- 
ful. "  But  when  he  was  strong,  his  heart  was  lifted 
up ;"  he  takes  upon  himself  the  priestly  function,  and 
is  smitten  with  leprosy  by  the  hand  of  God. 

We  enter  now  on  a  period  in  which  Isaiah  throws 
much  light  on  the  state  of  the  people.  This  state  was 
partly  exhibited  before,  in  the  reign  of  Joash,  who,  as 
soon  as  he  hearkens  to  the  princes,  falls  into  idolatry. 
But  in  reading  the  first  two  chapters  of  Isaiah,  or  the 
prophecy  of  Hosea,  we  shall  see  the  terrible  condition 
of  the  people,  the  greatness  of  God's  patience,  and 
the  manner  in  which  iniquity  and  idolatry  multiplied 
on  every  side,  when  the  king  was  not  faithful  and 
energetic* 

Jotham,  the  son  of  Uzziah,  walks  uprightly;  and 


*  We  find  consequently,  that  Isaiah,  after  exposing  the  evil 
and  the  consequent  judgment,  immediately  introduces  the  pro- 
mises of  latter-day  blessing  and  of  the  Messiah.  In  the  first 
chapters  he  sets  forth  the  state  of  the  people,  as  well  as  the 
blessing  of  the  last  days.  The  house  of  David  is  not  judged 
till  chapter  vii.,  and  it  is  there  that  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  the 
virgin,  is  brought  in  as  the  resource,  and  the  means  of  deliver- 
ance and  gi-ace  according  to  the  counsels  of  God.  The  rest  of 
this  prophet's  writings  gives  us  the  whole  history  of  the  people, 
according  to  the  thoughts  ot  God,  and  that  of  the  nations,  in 
connection  with  Israel,  until  the  accompHshment,  at  the  end  of 
the  age,  of  full  blessing  in  Christ,  with  the  judgment  of  Israel's 
sin  in  respect  of  Jehovah  (xl.-xlviii.),  and  in  respect  of  Christ 
(xlix.-lvii.) 


II   CHRONICLES.  685 

he  avoids  his  father's  fault ;  but  the  people  are  still 
corrupt.  Nevertheless  the  faithfulness  of  Jotham 
procures  him  blessing  and  prosperity.  For  it  is  always 
the  state  of  the  king  which  is  the  object  of  God's 
judgment.  As  we  have  seen,  the  people  as  such  had 
failed  long  before. 

The  reign  of  Ahaz  forms  an  epoch.  Entirely  for- 
saking Jehovah,  he  gives  himself  up  wholly  to  idol- 
atry ;  and,  the  more  he  is  smitten  of  God,  the  more  he 
sins  against  Him.  He  is  delivered  into  the  hands  of 
the  Syrians,  and  into  the  hand  of  Pekah,  the  king  of 
Israel.  In  the  latter  case,  however,  God  interposes  for 
the  rescue  at  least  of  the  captives.  The  Edomites, 
and  afterwards  the  Philistines,  invade  Judah.  All 
this  distress  induces  Ahaz  to  seek  help  from  the  king 
of  Assyria,  who  only  brought  him  into  still  greater 
trouble.  (Compare  Isaiah  vii.  17 ;  see  also  Hosea  v. 
13-15.) 

If  piety  is  not  transmitted  from  father  to  son,  grace 
can  work  in  the  heart  and  direct  the  steps  of  one  who 
had  the  most  wicked  father.  This  was  the  case  with 
the  son  of  Ahaz.  The  way  in  which  Hezekiah  sought 
the  glory  of  his  God  shews  remarkable  faith  and 
energy.  In  the  better  days  of  the  kingdom,  true 
piety  and  the  work  of  righteousness  were  manifested 
in  Jehoshaphat ;  great  energy  of  faith  is  now  dis- 
played in  Hezekiah  ;  and  we  shall  find  in  Josiah  pro- 
found reverence  for  the  scriptures,  for  the  book  of  the 
law. 

I  recall  here  the  great  principle,  the  effects  of  which 
the  reader  has  to  remark  in  the  book  which  occupies 
us,  namely,  the  government  of  God,  which  visited 
every  act  with  its  immediate  consequences,  a  govern- 
ment which  always  had  reference  to  the  king's  con- 
duct. But,  in  spite  of  some  awakenings  and  some 
restorations  wrought  by  grace,  the  people  having 
entirely  corrupted  themselves,  the  kingly  power 
xxvi.-xxvin. 


686  THE   BOOKS   OF  THE   BIBLE. 

which  alone  recalled  them  to  their  duties  came  short 
of  the  glory  of  God ;  and  at  length,  the  oath  made  in 
Jehovah's  name  being  broken,  the  measure  of  sin  was 
filled  up,  and  the  judgment  of  Israel,  and  the  times  of 
the  Gentiles  commenced. 

Hezekiah  acknowledges  the  sinful  state  of  Israel, 
and  he  invites  the  people  to  cleanse  themselves.  A 
true  worship,  affecting  in  its  character,  is  re-established 
(chap.  xxix.  25-29),  and  the  service  of  Jehovah's  house 
is  set  in  order. 

But  Hezekiah's  zeal  embraces  all  Israel,  and  he 
sends  letters  which,  although  the  greater  part  laughed 
them  to  scorn,  brought  up  many  serious  souls  to  the 
worship  of  Jehovah  in  Jerusalem.  If  everything  is 
not  re-established  as  a  whole,  yet,  wherever  faith  is  in 
action  and  a  sincere  heart  seeks  to  glorify  God,  there 
is  always  cause  for  the  faithful  to  rejoice  in  the  deal- 
ings of  God.  God  pardoned  their  failure  in  the  puri- 
fication necessary  for  participation  in  the  service  of  the 
sanctuary;  the  prayer  for  blessing  came  up  to  His 
holy  dwelling-place  and  was  granted. 

Strengthened  by  this  communion  with  Jehovah,  all 
Israel  that  had  been  present  went  out  and  destroyed 
the  groves  and  the  images,  not  only  in  Judah,  but  also 
in  Ephraim  and  Manasseh.  The  state  of  disorder  in 
Israel  gave  an  opportunity  on  God's  part  for  the  exer- 
cise of  faithfulness  and  the  manifestation  of  devoted- 
ness  in  His  people.  Abundance  and  blessing  are  found 
in  Judah,  and  Jehovah's  house  is  filled  with  proofs  of 
His  goodness  brought  in  by  grateful  hearts  according 
to  the  ordinances  of  the  law ;  and  even  in  the  cities  of 
the  priests  all  is  set  in  order  according  to  the  law,  and 
everything  prospers.* 

*  Observe  here  that,  when  God  blesses  and  there  is  faithful- 
ness, the  instruments  whom  He  emploj'^s  in  His  service  partake 
of  the  glory  that  is  connected  with  the  blessing.  Their  names 
are  inscribed  in  the  record  of  God's  dealings. 


n  CHRONICLES.  687 

God  fully  answered  the  king's  faith ;  but  the  iniquity 
of  the  people's  heart  was  little  changed,  and  the  ways 
of  God  in  judgment  began  to  be  manifested ;  and  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  make  it  evident  that,  in  the  midst 
of  His  judgments,  and  at  the  height  of  the  enemy's 
power,  the  faithful  seed  of  David  should  be  the  infal- 
lible resource  of  His  people.  This  is  the  lesson  of 
chapter  xxxii.  This  man  is  the  peace  of  the  people 
when  the  Assyrian  enters  the  land.  See,  in  Isaiah 
viii.,  the  Assyrian's  entrance  into  the  land  already 
called  the  land  of  Immanuel  through  the  prophetic 
revelation  of  the  birth  of  the  virgin's  Son — a  revela- 
tion addressed  to  the  unfaithful  king,  to  Ahaz ;  see 
also,  in  the  same  chapter,  the  revelation  of  the  terrible 
distress  of  the  people,  the  law  being  sealed  and  en- 
trusted to  the  remnant  who  would  follow  Christ  as  a 
prophet,  until  the  people  confess  that  a  Son  was  born 
unto  them.  See  also,  in  chapter  xxii.  of  the  same  pro- , 
phet,  the  Spirit's  judgment  as  to  the  moral  condition 
of  the  people,  on  the  occasion  of  those  events  which 
are  recorded  in  2  Chronicles  xxxii.  Hezekiah  himself 
did  not  render  again  to  Jehovah  according  to  the 
benefit  done  unto  him  ;  but  his  heart  was  lifted  up. 
Neverthelsss,  as  he  humbled  himself,  he  was  allowed 
to  see  the  peace  of  Jerusalem  all  the  days  of  his  life. 

Manasseh,  his  son,  who  gave  himself  up  to  iniquity 
in  spite  of  the  warnings  of  the  prophets,  brought 
desolation  and  ruin  upon  himself  and  afterwards  upon 
Israel.  Guilty  of  sins  which  God  could  not  forget, 
his  personal  repentance  in  his  captivity  procured  him 
personal  restoration  and  peace  through  the  mercy  of 
God ;  and  after  his  return  to  Jerusalem  he  acted  faith- 
fully and  was  jealous  for  the  glory  of  God ;  for  the 
time  of  Judah's  judgment  was  not  yet  come.  His 
son  Amon  followed  him  in  his  iniquity,  but  not  in  his 
repentance,  and  he  dies  by  the  hand  of  his  own 
servants. 

XX IX. -XXXIII. 


588  THE  BOOKS   OF  THE  BIBLE. 

We  find  in  Josiah  a  tender  heart,  subject  to  the 
word,  and  a  conscience  that  respected  the  mind  and 
will  of  God :  only  at  last  he  had  too  much  confidence 
in  the  effect  of  this  to  secure  blessing  Yrom  God,  with- 
out the  possession  of  that  faith  which  gives  intelli- 
gence in  His  ways  to  understand  the  position  of  God's 
people.  God  however  makes  use  of  this  confidence  to 
take  Josiah  away  from  the  evil  He  was  preparing  in 
the  judgments  which  were  to  fall  upon  Judah,  the 
knowledge  of  which  should  have  made  Josiah  walk 
more  humbly.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  began  by  the 
grace  of  God  to  seek  Jehovah ;  and  at  twenty  he  had 
acquired  the  moral  strength  necessary  for  acting  with 
energy  against  idolatry,  which  he  destroyed  even  unto 
Naphtali.  We  see  here  how  sovereign  grace  came 
in;  for  both  Hezekiah  and  Josiah  were  the  sons  of 
extremtcly  wicked  fathers. 

Having  cleansed  the  land  from  idolatry,  Josiah  be- 
gins to  repair  the  temple ;  and  there  the  book  of  the 
law  was  found.  The  king's  conscience,  and  his  heart 
also,  are  bowed  under  the  authority  of  the  word  of 
his  God.  He  seeks  for  the  prophetic  testimony  of 
God  with  respect  to  the  state  in  which  he  sees  Israel 
to  be,  and  God  makes  known  to  him  by  Huldah  the 
judgment  about  to  fall  upon  Israel;  but  tells  him  at 
the  same  time  that  his  eyes  shall  not  see  the  evil.  It 
was  this  communication  which  should  have  made  him 
act  with  less  precipitation,  and  with  a  more  exercised 
heart  than  he  manifested  when  he  went  up  against  the 
king  of  Egypt.  The  knowledge  that  their  well-de- 
served judgment  was  soon  to  overwhelm  Israel,  and 
that  there  was  no  remedy  for  their  sins  (although 
Josiah  himself  was  spared),  ought  to  have  prevented 
his  going  up  against  Pharaoh,  when  the  latter  did  not 
attack  him,  and  even  warned  him  to  forbear ;  but  he 
would  not  hearken,  and  was  lost  through  a  hardihood 
Avhich  was  not  of  God. 


II  CHRONICLES.  589 

His  death  opened  the  sluices  to  the  affliction  of 
Judah  and  Jerusalem,  which  had  been  blessed  through 
his  means  ;  for  they  had  followed  Jehovah  all  the  days 
of  Josiah,  and  had  therefore  been  blessed ;  they  had 
also  mourned  for  his  death.  Jeremiah  (that  is  to  say, 
the  Spirit  of  God  by  the  prophet),  in  lamenting  over 
the  last  king  who  would  maintain  the  relations  of  God 
with  His  people,  wept  for  the  ruin  and  desolation 
which  sin  would  bring  upon  the  flock  which  Jehovah 
loved — the  vineyard  that  He  had  planted  with  the 
choicest  vine. 

However  faithful  Josiah  had  been,  this  had  not 
changed  the  heart  of  the  people.  (Compare  Jer.  iii.  10.) 
Josiah 's  faith  was  in  action,  and  overruled  this  state 
of  things ;  and,  as  we  have  constantly  seen,  blessing 
depended  on  the  conduct  of  the  king,  although 
the  undercurrent  was  always  tending  to  the  ruin  and 
rejection  of  the  people. 

It  remains  for  us  to  notice  the  passover.  Everything 
is  set  in  order  according  to  the  ordinances  of  Moses 
and  David,  and  that  in  a  remarkable  manner.  It  ap- 
pears that  even  the  ark  had  been  removed  from  its 
place  (chap.  xxxv.  3) ;  but  now,  the  ark  being  restored 
to  its  rest,  the  Levites  occupy  themselves  diligently 
with  their  service,  and  even  make  ready  for  the 
priests,  that  they  might  keep  the  feast.  They  were 
all  in  their  places  according  to  the  blessing  of  Israel 
in  the  rest  they  enjoyed  under  Solomon.  Those  who 
taught  all  Israel  no  longer  bore  the  ark,  but  they 
ministered  to  God  and  to  His  people.  The  singers 
were  there  also,  according  to  their  order,  so  that  there 
had  not  been  such  a  passover  since  the  days  of  Samuel. 
It  was  like  the  last  glimmering  of  the  lamp  which 
God  had  lighted  among  His  people  in  the  house  of 
David.  It  was  soon  extinguished  in  the  darkness  of 
the  nation  which  knew  not  God,  and  those  who  had 
been  His  people  came  under  the  judgment  expressed 
xxxiv.,  xxxv. 


590  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

by  the  word  Lo-ammi  (Not-my-people) ;  but  this  was 
only  to  give  occasion  afterwards  to  the  manifesta- 
tion of  His  infinite  grace  towards  the  one,  and  BQs  un- 
changeable faithfulness  to  the  others.  Ezekiel  dates 
his  prophecy  from  the  year  of  this  passover,  when  he 
says  "  the  thirtieth  year."  Why  so,  I  cannot  tell.  Was 
it  the  year  of  the  jubilee  ?  or  did  the  passover  itself 
form  an  epoch  ? 

Little  need  be  said  of  the  succeeding  reigns.  The 
king  of  Egypt  took  possession  of  the  land,  and  the 
iniquity  of  Jehoiakim,  whom  he  made  king  in  Jeru- 
salem, was  far  from  leading  to  restoration  on  God's 
part.  One  more  powerful  than  the  king  of  Egypt,  a 
king  by  whom  God  would  commence  the  dominion  of 
the  Gentiles,  comes  up  against  Jerusalem,  and  binds 
Jehoiakim  in  fetters,  yet  leaves  him  after  all  to  end 
his  reign  and  his  life  at  Jerusalem.  Three  years  after 
he  carried  away  his  son  to  Babylon. 

Zedekiah,  whom  this  king  had  made  to  swear  by 
Jehovah — thus  acknowledging  the  authority  of  that 
Name  over  his  conscience, — more  sinful  in  this  respect 
than  Nebuchadnezzar,  despises  his  oath  and  the  name 
of  Jehovah ;  and,  after  an  interval  of  fruitless  resist- 
ance, in  which  he  perseveres  in  spite  of  Jeremiah's 
testimony,  he  falls  into  the  hands  of  the  king  of 
Babylon,  who  utterly  destroys  the  city  and  the  sanc- 
tuary. For  botji  people  and  priests  were  thoroughly 
corrupted ;  they  dishonoured  Jehovah,  and  despised 
His  prophets,  till  there  was  no  remedy,  and  the  land 
enjoyed  her  sabbaths. 

Sad  and  solemn  lesson  of  the  sin  and  iniquity  of 
man,  and  of  the  just  judgment  of  God ! 

"  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the 
earth  ;  therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  all  your  ini- 
quities." But  in  His  judgments  God  remembers 
mercy ;  and  in  the  counsels  of  His  grace  He  had  al- 
ready prepared,  and  even  proclaimed  by  His  prophets 


n  CHRONICLES.  591 

(and  that  by  name),  an  instrument  to  give  His  people 
some  respite. 

After  the  seventy  years  which  Jeremiah  had  an- 
nounced as  the  period  of  Judah's  captivity,  Jehovah 
put  it  into  the  heart  of  Cyrus  to  proclaim  publicly 
that  it  was  Jehovah  the  God  of  heaven,  who  had  given 
him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  and  that  He  had 
charged  him  to  build  Him  a  house  at  Jerusalem.  He 
invites  the  people  of  God  to  go  thither,  assuring  them 
that  Jehovah  their  God  will  be  with  them. 

Thus  it  is  by  mercy — but  by  a  mercy  which  recog- 
nises that  power  has  passed  into  the  hands  of  the 
Gentiles — that  the  history  of  Israel's  downfall  con- 
cludes; the  downfall  of  a  people  placed  in  the  most 
favourable  circumstances,  so  that  God  could  say  to 
them,  "  What  could  have  been  done  more  to  my  vine- 
yard that  I  have  not  done  in  it  ?" — of  a  people  that 
had  already  been  pardoned  once ;  and  who,  after 
having  allowed  the  ark  of  Jehovah  to  fall  into  the 
enemy's  hands,  and  after  God  had  forsaken  Shiloh, 
His  habitation,  had  been  re-established  in  blessing,  but 
re-established  in  vain.  The  long-sufiering  of  God,  the 
restoration  He  had  granted  them,  the  establishment  of 
the  house  of  David  in  grace,  all  was  fruitless.  The 
vineyard  (for  they  were  men)  brought  forth  wild 
grapes.  Its  walls  were  broken  down ;  it  had  been  laid 
waste.  Jerusalem  had  ceased  for  the  present  to  be  the 
throne  of  Jehovah,  and  government  and  power  in  the 
earth  have  been  entrusted  to  the  Gentiles, 
xxxvi. 


END   OF  VOL.  L 


London  :  G.  Moebibh,  20,  Paternoster  Square,  E.G. 


€' 


Date  Due 


■"i  2   'm 


^ 


