1 


PRESENTED 


TO 


W^cltffe 

TORONTO, 

BY    JOHN    CHARLES    SHARPE, 
1911. 


OXFORD  EDUCATIONAL  SUPPLY, 


LIBRARY 


Wgrliff?  (Cnllrgr 


TORONTO 


Register  No.  I  [  0  00 


THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF  PENTECOST 


A-*-/ 


THE  FULL  BLESSING 
OF  PENTECOST   '"'] 

THE   ONE   THING   NEEDFUL 


REV.   ANDREW  MURRAY,   D.D. 

WELLINGTON,  SOUTH  AFRICA 

AUTHOR  OF 

"ABIDE  IN  CHRIST"  "LIKS  CHRIST" 
ETC.  ETC. 


"He  that  believeth  on  Me,  out  of  his  belly  shall 
flow  rivers  of  living  water " 


JAMES    NISBET    &   CO.    LIMITED 

22  BERBERS  STREET,  W 

1908 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  DUTCH 

EY 

REV.  J.  P.   LILLEY,  M.A.,  D.D. 

ARBROATH 


105-600  / 

Printed  by  MORRISON  &  GIBE  LIMITBD,  Edinburgh 


PREFACE 


FT! HE  Dutch  Eeformed  Church  of  South  Africa 
•*-  has,  during  the  past  forty  years,  been  in 
the  habit  of  observing  the  ten  days  between 
Ascension  and  Whitsunday  as  days  of  prayer. 
The  custom  had  its  origin  during  the  revival 
that  passed  over  this  country  between  1860  and 
1862  in  the  suggestion  of  the  minister  of  a 
parish  which  at  that  time  had  received  special 
blessing.  The  observance  has  in  many  cases 
been  accompanied  with  blessing.  The  oppor 
tunity  it  gives  for  training  Christians  in  the 
knowledge  of  what  God's  Word  teaches  con 
cerning  the  Spirit,  to  the  practice  and  the  faith 
to  which  it  calls,  to  prayer  and  fellowship 
and  special  efforts  in  behalf  of  the  careless,  has 
often  been  of  the  greatest  value.  Each  year 
subjects  for  meditation  and  discourse  have  been 
published. 

It    was    when    I    was    about    to    proceed    to 
England  in   1895   that  I  was  led  to  write  and 


vi  PREFACE 

publish  a  little  book  with  the  title,  The  Full 
Pentecostal  Blessing.  I  never  had  any  thoughts 
of  translating  it  into  English,  as  about  that 
time  there  had  been  various  books  published 
on  the  subject.  A  request  has  lately  corne  to 
me  from  Holland  urging  that  it  should  appear 
in  English  too,  specially  for  the  sake  of  some 
English  friends  with  whom  those  in  Holland  had 
been  in  close  intercourse.  Though  I  was  in 
doubt  about  the  need,  I  gladly  gave  my  consent. 
I  venture  just  one  remark.  In  all  our  study 
of  the  work  of  the  blessed  Spirit,  and  in  all  our 
pursuit  of  a  life  in  His  fulness,  we  shall  ever 
find  the  sum  of  Christ's  teaching  in  those 
wonderful  words :  "  He  that  believeth  on  Me,  as 
the  Scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belly  shall 
flow  rivers  of  living  water."  It  is  as  we  are  con 
victed  of  the  defectiveness  of  our  faith  in  Christ, 
and  what  He  has  promised  to  do  in  saving  and 
keeping  us  from  sin,  and  as  we  understand  that 
believing  in  Him  means  a  yielding  up  of  the 
whole  heart  and  life  and  will,  to  let  Him  rule 
and  live  within  us,  that  we  can  confidently 
count  upon  receiving  all  that  we  need  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  power  and  presence.  It  is  as 
Christ  becomes  to  us  all  that  God  has  made 
Him  to  be,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  can  flow  from 
Him  and  do  His  blessed  work  of  leading  us 


PREFACE  vn 

back  to  know  Him  better  and  to  believe  in  Him 
more  completely. 

My  attention  has  lately  again  been  directed 
by  a  brother  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
and  to  the  way  it  speaks  of  Christ  in  His 
heavenly  glory  and  power  as  the  object  of  our 
faith.  In  my  book,  The  Holiest  of  All,  I 
have  tried  to  point  out  (see  chaps.  Ixv.— Ixx., 
and  elsewhere)  how  the  Holy  Spirit  reveals  the 
way  into  the  Holiest  as  opened  by  the  blood  of 
Christ,  and  invites  us  by  faith  in  Christ  to 
have  our  life  there.  It  is  as  we  yield  our 
hearts  to  the  leading  of  the  Spirit  to  know 
Christ  and  look  at  Him,  and  believe  in  what  is 
revealed,  that  the  Spirit  can  take  possession  of 
us.  The  Spirit  is  given  to  reveal  Christ,  and 
every  revelation  of  Christ  fully  accepted  gives 
the  Spirit  room  to  dwell  and  work  within  us. 
This  is  the  sure  way  in  which  the  promise  will 
be  fulfilled :  "  He  that  belie veth  on  Me,  rivers  of 
living  water  shall  flow  out  of  him."  May  God 
lead  us  to  this  simple  and  full  faith  in  Christ, 
our  great  High  Priest  and  King  in  the  heavens, 
and  so  into  a  life  in  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit. 


ANDREW  MUKKAY. 


WELLINGTON, 

6th  November  1907. 


CONTENTS 


THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF  PENTECOST  : 

PAGE 
I.   HOW   IT   IS   TO   BE   TAUGHT  .  .  .7 

II.  HOW  GLORIOUS  IT   IS        .  .  .  .21 

III.  HOW   IT   WAS   BESTOWED   FROM   HEAVEN  .         35 

IV.  HOW   LITTLE   IT   IS   ENJOYED          .  .  .49 
V.    HOW   THE   BLESSING   IS   HINDERED             .                .         64 

-  VI.    HOW   IT   IS    OBTAINED   BY   US  .  .77 
-   VII.    HOW   IT   MAY   BE   KEPT      .                 .                 .  .92 

VIII.    HOW   IT   MAY   BE   INCREASED         .  .  .107 

-  IX.    HOW   IT   COMES   TO   ITS   FULL   MANIFESTATION  .      121 
—    X.    HOW   FULLY   IT   IS   ASSURED   TO   US   BY  GOD  .      137 
/  XI.    HOW   IT   IS   TO    BE   FOUND   BY   ALL              .  .152 

XII.   HOW   EVERYTHING   MUST   BE   GIVEN   UP   FOR   IT        16G 


INTRODUCTION 


message  which  this  little  book  brings 
is  simple  but  most  solemn.  It  is  to  the 
effect  that  the  one  thing  needful  for  the 
Church,  and  the  thing  which,  above  all  others, 
men  ought  everywhere  to  seek  for  with  one 
accord  and  with  their  whole  heart,  is  to 
be  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God. 

In  order  to  secure  attention  to  this  message 
and  attract  the  hearts  of  my  readers  to  the 
blessing  of  which  it  speaks,  I  have  laid  particular 
emphasis  on  certain  main  points.  These  I 
briefly  state  here. 

1.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  every  one  of 
His  children  should  live  entirely  and  unceas 
ingly  under  the  control  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

2.  Without  being   filled  with   the   Spirit, 
it  is  utterly  impossible  that  an  individual 
Christian    or   a   church    can    ever    live    or 

work  as  God  desires, 

i 


2  INTRODUCTION 

3.  Everywhere  and  in  everything  we  see 
the   proofs,  in   the   life   and   experience   of 
Christians,  that  this  blessing   is   but   little 
enjoyed   in   the   Church,   and,  alas !   is   but 
little  sought  for. 

4.  This  blessing  is  prepared  for  us  and 
God  waits  to   bestow   it.      Our    faith   may 
expect  it  with  the  greatest  confidence. 

5.  The  great  hindrance  in  the  way  is  that 
the  self-life,  and  the  world,  which  it  uses  for 
its   own   service    and    pleasure,   usurp   the 
place  that  Christ  ought  to  occupy. 

6.  We   cannot   be   filled  with   the   Spirit 
until  we  are  prepared  to  yield  ourselves  to 
be  led  by  the  Lord  Jesus  to  forsake  and  sacri 
fice  everything  for  this  pearl  of  great  price. 

I  feel  very  deeply  the  imperfection  that 
attaches  to  this  little  volume.  Yet  I  am  not 
without  the  hope  that  the  Lord  will  make  it 
a  blessing  to  His  people.  We  have  such  a 
feeble  conception  of  the  unspiritual  and  sinful 
state  which  prevails  in  the  Church,  that, 
unless  we  take  time  to  devote  our  heart  and 
our  thoughts  to  the  real  facts  of  the  case,  the 
promise  of  God  can  make  no  deep  impression 


INTRODUCTION  3 

upon  us.  I  hope  that  the  attempt  I  have 
made  to  exhibit  the  subject  in  various  aspects 
will  help  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  conviction 
that  this  blessing  is  in  truth  the  one  thing 
needful,  and  that  to  get  possession  of  this  one 
thing  we  ought  to  bid  farewell  to  everything 
else  we  hold  dear.  I  frankly  invite  Christian 
disciples  into  whose  hands  the  book  may  fall 
to  peruse  it  carefully  more  than  once.  Owing 
to  the  prevailing  lack  of  the  presence  and 
operation  of  the  Spirit,  it  takes  a  long  time 
ere  these  spiritual  truths  concerning  the  need, 
and  the  fulness,  and  the  reality  of  the  Spirit's 
power  can  obtain  entire  mastery  over  us.  It  is 
only  by  the  exercise  of  self-sacrifice  and  persist 
ing  in  keeping  our  minds  occupied  with  these 
thoughts,  that  we  can  ever  obtain  what  might 
otherwise  come  to  us  at  once. 

On  reviewing  what  I  have  written,  I  am 
inclined  to  think  that  there  is  one  point  on 
which  I  ought  to  have  spoken  more  definitely. 
I  refer  to  the  place  which  persevering  prayer 
must  occupy  in  connection  with  this  blessing. 
This  little  book  was  not  exclusively  written  for 
prayer  at  the  season  of  Pentecost.  Every  day 


4  INTRODUCTION 

ought  to  be  a  Pentecostal  season  in  the 
Church  of  Christ.  For  just  as  little  as  a  man 
can  remain  in  sound  health  without  the  fresh 
air  of  heaven,  can  Christians  or  the  Church  live 
according  to  the  will  of  God  without  this  bless 
ing.  The  book  is  designed  to  point  to  what  must 
prevail  throughout  all  the  year ;  and  it  seems  to 
me  now  that,  perhaps  under  the  impression  that 
in  the  season  of  Pentecost  prayer  for  the  blessing  is 
practically  unanimous,  I  have  not  strongly  enough 
exhorted  my  readers  to  ceaseless  calling  upon 
God  in  the  confidence  that  He  will  answer.  Let 
me  advert  again  to  this  point  in  a  few  sentences. 
When  we  read  the  Book  of  the  Acts,  we  see 
that  the  filling  with  the  Spirit  and  His  mighty 
operation  was  always  obtained  by  prayer. 
Recall,  for  example,  what  took  place  at  Antioch. 
It  was  when  the  Christians  there  were  engaged 
in  fasting  and  prayer  that  God  regarded  them 
as  prepared  to  receive  the  revelation  that  they 
must  separate  Barnabas  and  Saul ;  and  it  was 
only  after  they  had  once  more  fasted  and 
prayed  that  these  two  men  went  forth,  sent  by 
the  Holy  Spirit.1  These  servants  of  God  felt 

1  Acts  xiii.  2,  3. 


INTRODUCTION  5 

that  the  boon  they  needed  must  come  only 
from  above.  To  obtain  the  blessing  we  so 
much  need,  from  heaven  and  out  of  the  hands 
of  the  living  God  Himself,  we  in  like  manner, 
even  with  fasting,  must  liberate  ourselves  as  far 
as  possible  from  the  demands  of  the  earthly  life, 
even  in  that  which  otherwise  appears  quite  lawful  ; 
and  no  less  must  we  betake  ourselves  wholly 
to  God  in  prayer.  Let  us  therefore  never 
become  weary  or  dispirited,  but  in  union  with 
God's  own  elect,  who  call  upon  Him  day  and 
night,  entreat  Him  and  even  weary  Him  by  our 
incessant  entreaties  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may 
again  assume  His  rightful  place  and  exercise 
full  dominion  in  ourselves  and  the  Church  as 
a  whole :  yea,  more,  that  He  may  again  have  His 
true  place  in  the  Church,  be  held  in  honour  by  all, 
and  in  everything  reveal  the  glory  of  our  Lord 
Jesus.  To  the  soul  that  in  sincerity  prays  accord 
ing  to  His  Word,  God's  answer  will  surely  come. 
There  is  nothing  so  fitted  to  search  and  to 
cleanse  the  heart  as  true  prayer.  It  teaches 
one  to  put  to  himself  such  questions  as  these : 
Do  I  really  desire  what  above  everything  I 
pray  for  ?  Am  I  willing  to  cast  out  everything 


6  INTRODUCTION 

to  make  room  for  what  God  is  prepared  to  give 
me  ?  Is  the  prayer  of  my  lips  really  the  prayer 
of  my  life  ?  Do  I  really  continue  in  intercourse 
with  God,  waiting  upon  Him,  in  quiet  trust, 
until  He  gives  me  this  great,  heavenly,  super 
natural  gift,  His  own  Spirit,  to  be  niy  spirit, 
the  spirit  of  my  life  every  hour  ? 

0  let  us  "  pray  always  and  not  faint,"  set 
ting  ourselves  before  God  with  supplications  and 
strong  crying  as  His  priests  and  the  representa 
tives  of  His  Church.  We  may  reckon  upon  it 
that  He  will  hear  us. 

"  In  my  distress  I  called  upon  the  Lord, 
And  cried  unto  my  God  : 
He  heard  my  voice  out  of  His  temple, 
And  my  cry  before  Him  came  into  His  ears. 
He  delivered  me  from  my  strong  enemy, 
He  brought  me  forth  also  into  a  large  place."1 

Brother,  you  know  that  the  Lord  is  a  God 
that  often  hideth  Himself.  He  desires  to  be 
trusted.  He  is  oftentimes  very  near  to  us  without 
our  knowing  it.  He  is  a  God  who  knows  His  own 
time.  Yet,  "  though  He  tarry,  wait  for  Him. 
He  will  surely  come.  He  will  not  tarry  "z 

1  Ps.  xviii.  6,  17,  19  (K.V.).  2  Hab.  ii.  3. 


THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF 
PENTECOST 


it  is  to  fce  taught 


'  '  And  it  came  to  pass  that  Paul  came  to  Ephesus  and  found 
certain  disciples  :  and  he  said  unto  them,  Did  ye  receive  the 
Holy  Spirit  when  ye  believed  ?  "  —  ACTS  xix.  1-2. 

TT  was  about  twenty  years  after  the  outpouring 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  the  incident  which 
is  referred  to  in  the  beginning  of  this  chapter 
of  the  Acts  took  place.  In  the  course  of  his 
journey  Paul  came  to  Ephesus,  and  found  in 
the  Christian  church  there  some  disciples  in 
whom  he  observed  that  there  was  something 
lacking  in  their  belief  or  experience.  Accord 
ingly  he  put  to  them  the  question  :  "  Did  ye 
receive  the  Holy  Spirit  when  ye  believed  ?  " 
Their  reply  was  that  they  had  not  yet  heard 

7 


8       THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  had  been  baptized 
by  disciples  of  John  the  Baptist  with  the 
baptism  of  repentance  with  a  view  to  faith  in 
Jesus  as  One  who  was  to  come ;  but  with  the 
great  event  of  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit 
or  the  significance  of  it  they  were  still  un 
acquainted.  They  came  from  a  region  of  the 
country  into  which  the  full  Pentecostal  preach 
ing  of  the  exalted  Saviour  had  not  yet  penetrated. 
Accordingly,  Paul  took  them  at  once  under  his 
care,  made  them  conversant  with  the  full  gospel 
of  the  glorified  Lord,  who  had  received  the  Spirit 
from  the  Father  and  had  sent  Him  down  to  this 
world,  that  every  one  of  His  believing  disciples 
might  also  receive  Him.  Hearing  this  glad 
tidings  and  consenting  to  it,  they  were  baptized 
into  the  name  of  this  Saviour,  who  baptizes  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  Thereupon  Paul  prayed  for  them 
and  laid  his  hands  upon  them,  and  they  received 
the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  then,  in  token  of  the  fact 
that  this  whole  transaction  was  a  heavenly 
reality,  they  obtained  a  share  in  the  Pentecostal 
miracle,  and  spake  "  with  other  tongues." 

In   these   chapters  it   is  my  desire   to   bring 
to  the  children  of  God  the  message  that  there 


HOW   IT   IS   TO   BE   TAUGHT  9 

is  a  twofold  Christian  life.  The  one  is  that 
in  which  we  experience  something  of  the 
operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  just  as  many 
did  under  the  old  covenant,  but  do  not  yet 
receive  Him  as  the  Pentecostal  Spirit,  as  the 
personal  indwelling  Guest,  concerning  whom  wre 
know  that  He  has  come  to  abide  permanently 
in  the  heart.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a 
more  abundant  life,  in  which  the  indwelling 
just  referred  to  is  known  and  the  full  joy  and 
power  of  redemption  are  facts  of  personal  ex 
perience.  It  will  be  only  when  Christians  come 
to  understand  fully  the  distinction  betwixt  these 
two  conditions,  and  discern  that  the  second 
of  these  is  in  very  deed  the  will  of  God 
concerning  them,  and  therefore  a  possible  ex 
perience  for  each  believer ;  when  with  shame 
and  confusion  of  face  they  shall  confess  the 
sinful  and  inconsistent  elements  that  still  mark 
their  life :  that  we  shall  dare  to  hope  that  the 
Christian  community  will  once  more  be  restored 
to  its  Pentecostal  power.  It  is  with  our  eye 
fixed  on  this  distinction  that  we  desire  to  ponder 
the  lessons  presented  to  us  in  the  record  of  this 
incident  at  Ephesus. 


10     THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

I 

For  a  healthful  Christian  life,  it  is  indispensable 
that  we  should  be  fully  conscious  that  we  have  re 
ceived  the  Holy  Spirit  to  dwell  in  us. 

Had  it  been  otherwise,  Paul  would  never  have 
put  the  question :  "  Did  ye  receive  the  Holy 
Spirit  when  ye  believed  ?  "  These  disciples  were 
recognised  as  believers.  This  position,  however, 
was  not  enough  for  them.  The  disciples  who 
walked  with  the  Lord  Jesus  on  earth  were  also 
true  believers,  yet  He  commanded  them  not  to 
rest  satisfied  until  they  had  received  the  Holy 
Spirit  from  Himself  in  heaven.  Paul  too  had 
seen  the  Lord  in  His  heavenly  glory  and  was  by 
that  vision  led  to  conversion  ;  yet  even  in  his 
case  the  spiritual  work  he  required  to  have  done 
in  him  was  not  thereby  completed.  Ananias 
had  to  go  to  him  and  lay  his  hands  iipou  him 
that  he  might  receive  the  Holy  Spirit.  Only 
then  could  he  become  a  witness  for  Christ.  All 
these  facts  teach  us  that  there  are  two  ways  in 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  works  in  us.  The  first  is 
the  preparatory  operation  in  which  He  simply  acts 
on  us  but  does  not  yet  take  up  His  abode  within 


HOW  IT   IS   TO   BE   TAUGHT  11 

us,  though  leading  us  to  conversion  and  faith  and 
ever  urging  us  to  all  that  is  good  and  holy.  The 
second  is  the  higher  and  more  advanced  phase  of 
His  working  when  we  receive  Him  as  an  abiding 
gift,  as  an  indwelling  Person,  concerning  whom 
we  know  that  He  assumes  responsibility  for  our 
whole  inner  being,  working  in  it  both  to  will  and 
to  do.  This  is  the  ideal  of  the  full  Christian  life. 

II 

There  are  disciples  of  Christ  who  know  little  or 
nothing  of  this  conscious  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  understand 
and  hold  fast  this  statement.  The  more  fully 
we  come  under  the  conviction  of  its  truth,  the 
better  shall  we  understand  the  condition  of  the 
Church  in  our  times  and  be  at  last  enabled  to 
discover  where  we  ourselves  really  stand. 

The  condition  I  refer  to  becomes  very  plain 
to  us  when  we  consider  what  took  place  at 
Samaria.  Philip  the  evangelist  had  preached 
there ;  many  had  been  led  to  believe  in  Jesus 
and  were  baptized  into  His  name ;  and  there 
was  great  joy  in  that  city.  When  the  apostles 


12     THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

heard  this  news,  they  sent  down  Peter  and  John, 
who,  when  they  came  to  Samaria,  prayed  that 
these  new  converts  might  receive  the  Holy 
Spirit.1  This  gift  was  thus  something  quite 
different  from  the  working  of  the  Spirit  that  led 
them  to  conversion  and  faith  and  joy  in  Jesus  as  a 
Saviour.  It  was  something  higher  :  for  now  from 
heaven,  and  by  the  glorified  Lord  Himself,  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  imparted  in  power  with  His  abiding 
indwelling,  to  consecrate  and  fill  their  hearts. 

If  this  new  experience  had  not  been  bestowed, 
the  Samaritan  disciples  would  still  indeed  have 
been  Christians,  but  they  would  have  remained 
weak,  defective,  and  sickly  ;  and  thus  it  is  that  in 
our  own  days  there  is  still  many  a  Christian  life 
that  knows  nothing  of  this  bestownient  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Amidst  much  that  is  good  and  amiable, 
with  even  much  earnestness  and  zeal,  the  life  of 
such  Christians  is  still  hampered  by  weakness  and 
stumbling  and  disappointment,  simply  because  it 
has  never  been  brought  into  vitalising  contact  with 
power  from  on  high,  because  such  souls  have  not 
received  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  Pentecostal  gift, 
to  be  possessed,  and  kept,  and  filled  by  Him. 
1  Acts  viii.  16,  17. 


HOW   IT   IS   TO   BE   TAUGHT  13 

III 

It  is  the  great  ivork  of  the  gospel  ministry  to 
lead  believers  to  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Was  it  not  the  great  aim  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  after 
He  had  educated  and  trained  His  disciples  for 
three  years  by  His  intercourse  with  them,  to  lead 
them  up  to  the  point  of  waiting  for  the  promise  of 
the  Father  and  receiving  the  Holy  Spirit  sent 
down  from  heaven  ?  Was  not  this  the  chief  object 
of  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when,  after 
summoning  those  who  were  pricked  in  their 
hearts  to  repent  and  be  baptized  for  the  forgive 
ness  of  sins,  he  assured  them  that  they  should 
then  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  ? l  Was  it  not  this 
also  that  Paul  aimed  at  when  in  his  Epistles  he 
asked  his  fellow- Christians  if  they  did  not  know 
>  that  they  were  each  one  "  a  temple  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,"  or  reminded  them  that  they  had  to  be 
"  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit "  ? 2  Yes :  the  supreme 
need  of  the  Christian  life  is  to  receive  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  when  we  have  it,  to  be  conscious  of 
the  fact  and  live  in  harmony  with  it.  An  evan 
gelical  minister  must  not  merely  preach  about 

1  Acts  ii.  38.  2  1  Cor.  vi.  19  ;  Eph.  v.  18. 


14     THE   FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

the  Holy  Spirit  from  time  to  time  or  even  often 
times,  but  also  direct  all  his  efforts  towards 
teaching  his  congregation  that  there  can  be  no 
true  worship  save  through  the  indwelling  and 
unceasing  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

IV 

To  lead  believers  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  great 
lack  in  their  life  must  be  pointed  out  to  them. 

This  was  manifestly  the  intention  in  Paul's 
question :  "  Did  ye  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  when 
ye  believed  ? "  Just  as  only  those  that  are 
thirsty  will  drink  water  with  eagerness  and 
only  those  that  are  sick  will  desire  a  physician, 
so  it  is  only  when  believers  are  prepared  to 
acknowledge  the  defective  and  sinful  character 
of  their  spiritual  condition,  that  the  preaching 
of  the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost  will  find  an 
entrance  into  their  hearts.  So  long  as  Christians 
imagine  that  the  only  thing  lacking  in  their  life 
is  more  earnestness,  or  more  importunity,  or  more 
strength,  and  that  if  they  only  obtain  these  benefits 
they  themselves  will  become  all  they  ought  to 
be,  the  preaching  of  a  full  salvation  will  be  of 
little  avail.  It  is  only  when  the  discovery  is 


HOW   IT   IS   TO   BE   TAUGHT  15 

made  that  they  are  not  standing  in  a  right 
attitude  towards  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  they  have 
only  His  preparatory  operations,  but  do  not  yet 
know  and  honour  Him  in  His  indwelling,  that 
the  way  to  something  higher  will  ever  be  open 
or  even  be  desired.  For  this  discovery,  it  is 
indispensable  that  the  question  should  be  put  to 
each,  man  by  man,  as  pointedly  and  as  personally 
as  may  be  :  "  Did  ye  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  when 
ye  believed  ?  "  When  the  answer  shall  take  the 
shape  of  a  deeply  felt  and  utterly  sincere  Alas  ! 
the  time  of  revival  is  not  far  off. 

V 

Believers  must  receive  help  to  appropriate  this 
Messing  in  faith. 

In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we  read  often 
about  laying  on  of  hands  and  prayer.  Even  a 
man  like  Paul — whose  conversion  was  due  to  the 
direct  interposition  of  the  Lord,  and  was  there 
fore  so  effectual — had  to  receive  the  Spirit  through 
laying  on  of  hands  and  prayer  on  the  part  of 
Ananias.1  This  implies  that  there  must  be 
amongst  ministers  of  the  gospel  and  believers 
1  Acts  ix.  17 


16     THE   FULL   BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

generally  a  power  of  the  Spirit  which  makes  them 
the  channel  of  faith  and  courage  to  others.  Those 
who  are  weak  must  be  helped  to  appropriate  the 
blessing  for  themselves.  But  those  who  have 
and  bring  this  blessing,  as  well  as  those  who  desire 
to  have  it,  must  realise  and  acknowledge  their 
absolute  dependence  on  the  Lord  and  expect  all 
from  Him. 

The  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  imparted  only  by  God 
Himself.  Every  fresh  bestowment  of  the  Spirit 
comes  from  above.  There  must  be  frequent 
personal  dealing  with  God.  The  minister  of  the 
Spirit  whom  God  is  to  use  for  communicating 
the  blessing,  as  well  as  the  believer  who  is  to 
receive  it,  must  meet  with  God  in  immediate  and 
closest  intercourse.  Every  good  gift  comes  from 
above :  it  is  faith  in  this  truth  that  \vill  give  us 
courage  to  expect  with  confidence  and  gladness 
that  the  full  Pentecostal  blessing  may  con 
fidently  be  looked  for,  and  that  a  life  under  the 
continual  leading  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  within 
our  reach. 


HOW   IT   IS   TO   BE   TAUGHT  17 

VI 

The  proclamation  and  appropriation  of  this 
blessing  will  restore  the  Christian  community  to  the 
primary  Pentecostal  power. 

On  the  day  of  Pentecost  the  speaking  "  with 
other  tongues "  and  the  prophesying  was  the 
result  of  being  filled  with  the  Spirit.  Here  at 
Ephesus,  twenty  years  later,  the  very  same 
miracle  is  again  witnessed,  as  the  visible  token 
and  pledge  of  the  other  glorious  gifts  of  the 
Spirit.  We  may  reckon  upon  it  that  where  the 
reception  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  possibility 
of  being  filled  with  Him  are  proclaimed  and 
appropriated,  the  blessed  life  of  the  Pentecostal 
community  will  be  restored  in  all  its  pristine 
power. 

In  our  days  there  is  an  increasing  acknow 
ledgment  of  the  lack  of  power  in  the  Church  of 
the  Lord.  In  spite  of  all  the  multiplication  of 
the  means  of  grace,  there  is  neither  the  power  of 
the  divine  salvation  in  believers,  nor  the  power 
for  conversion  in  preaching,  nor  the  power  in 
the  conflict  of  the  Church  with  worldliness  and 
unbelief  and  unrighteousness  that,  according  to 


18     THE   FULL  BLESSING  OF  PENTECOST 

God's  Word,  we  are  bound  to  look  for.  The 
complaint  is  made  with  justice.  Would  that 
the  expression  of  it  became  so  strong  that  the 
children  of  God,  driven  by  a  keen  sense  of  need, 
might  be  led  to  cast  themselves  upon  the  great 
truth  which  the  Word  of  God  teaches — 
namely,  that  it  is  only  when  faith  in  the  full 
Pentecostal  blessing  and  the  full  enjoyment  of 
it  are  found  in  the  Christian  Church  that  the 
members  of  it  shall  again  find  their  strength  and 
be  able  to  do  their  first  works. 

VII 

The  most  urgent  need  of  the  Church  is  that  of 
men  who  shall  be  able  to  bear  testimony  to  this 
blessing. 

Whether  it  be  of  teachers  like  Peter  and  Paul, 
of  deacons  like  Philip,  or  of  ordinary  believers 
like  Ananias  who  came  to  Paul,  this  is  our 
first  need.  It  furnishes  abundant  reason 
why  teachers  and  members  of  congregations 
should  unitedly  call  upon  God,  that  alike  in 
preaching  and  pastoral  intercourse  there  may  be 
more  manifest  proof  that  those  who  preach 
Christ  Jesus  may  preach  Him  as  John  the 


HOW  IT   IS   TO   BE   TAUGHT  19 

Baptist  did,  as  the  One  who  baptizes  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.  It  is  only  the  minister  that  stands 
forth  as  a  personal  witness  and  living  proof  of 
the  ministry  of  the  Spirit  whose  word  will  have 
full  entrance  into  the  hearts  of  the  people  and 
exercise  full  sway  over  them.  The  first  disciples 
obtained  the  baptism  on  their  knees ;  on  their 
knees  they  obtained  it  for  others.  It  will  be 
on  our  knees  also  that  the  full  blessing  will 
be  won  to-day.  On  our  knees :  let  this  be  the 
attitude  in  which  we  await  the  full  blessing  of 
our  God,  alike  in  our  individual  and  collective  life. 

Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Spirit  since  ye 
believed?  Let  every  reader  submit  himself  to 
this  heart-searching  question.  To  be  filled  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  to  have  the  full  enjoy 
ment  of  the  Pentecostal  blessing,  is  the  will  of 
God  concerning  us.  Let  us  judge  our  life  and  our 
work  before  the  Lord  in  the  light  of  this  question, 
and  return  the  answer  to  God.  0  do  not  be 
afraid,  my  brother,  to  confess  before  your  Lord 
what  is  still  lacking  in  you.  Do  not  keep  back, 
although  you  do  not  as  yet  fully  understand 
what  the  blessing  is  or  how  it  comes.  The  early 


20     THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

disciples  did  not  know  that,  yet  they  called 
upon  their  Lord  and  waited  for  it  with  prayer 
and  supplications.  Let  but  your  heart  be  filled 
with  a  deep  conviction  of  what  you  lack,  a 
desire  for  what  God  offers,  a  willingness  to 
sacrifice  everything  for  it,  and  you  may  rest 
assured  that  the  marvel  of  Jerusalem  and  of 
Samaria,  of  Ciesarea  and  Ephesus,  will  once  again 
be  repeated.  We  may,  we  shall,  bo  filled  with 
the  Spirit.  Amen. 


THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF 
PENTECOST 

II 
l&ofo  glorious  it  is 

"  They  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit."— ACTS  ii.  4. 

1ITHENEVER  we  speak  of  being  filled  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  desire  to  know  what  it 
precisely  is,  our  thoughts  always  turn  back  to 
the  clay  of  Pentecost.  There  we  see  as  in  a 
mirror  how  glorious  the  blessing  is  that  is 
brought  from  heaven  by  the  Holy  Spirit  and 
with  which  He  can  fill  the  hearts  of  men. 

There  is  one  fact  which  makes  the  great 
event  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  doubly  instructive — 
this,  namely,  that  we  have  learned  to  know  very 
intimately  the  men  who  were  then  filled  with 
the  Spirit,  by  their  intercourse  for  three  years 

21 


22     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

with  the  Lord  Jesus.  Their  infirmities  and 
defects,  their  sins  and  perversities,  all  stand 
open  to  our  view.  But  the  blessing  of  Pente 
cost  wrought  a  complete  transformation.  They 
became  entirely  new  men,  so  that  one  might  say 
of  them  with  truth :  "  Old  things  have  passed 
away :  behold,  all  is  become  new."  Close 
study  of  them  and  their  example  helps  us  in 
more  than  one  way.  It  shows  us  to  what  weak 
and  sinful  men  the  Spirit  will  come.  It  teaches 
us  how  they  were  prepared  for  the  blessing. 
It  teaches  us  also  —  and  this  is  the  principal 
thing — how  mighty  and  complete  the  revolution 
is  that  is  brought  to  pass  when  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  received  in  His  fulness.  It  lets  us  see  how 
glorious  the  grace  that  awaits  us  is  if  we  press 
on  to  the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost. 

I 

The  ever-abiding  presence  and  indwelling  of  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

In  this  we  have  the  first  and  principal  blessing 
of  the  Pentecostal  life.  In  the  course  of  our 
Lord's  intercourse  with  His  disciples  on  earth 
He  spared  no  pains  to  teach  and  train  them,  to 


HOW   GLORIOUS   IT   IS  23 

renew  and  sanctify  them.  In  most  respects, 
however,  they  remained  just  what  they  were. 
The  reason  was  that  up  to  this  point  He  was 
ever  still  nothing  more  than  an  external 
Christ  who  stood  outside  of  them  and  from 
without  sought  to  work  upon  them  by  His  word 
and  His  personal  influence.  With  the  advent 
of  Pentecost  this  condition  was  entirely  changed. 
In  the  Holy  Spirit  He  came  down  as  the 
inward,  indwelling  Christ,  to  become  in  the 
very  innermost  recesses  of  their  being  the  life 
of  their  life.  This  is  what  He  Himself  had 
promised  in  the  words  :  "I  will  not  leave  you 
orphans  :  /  come  unto  you.  In  that  day  ye  shall 
know  that  I  am  in  My  Father,  and  ye  in  Me, 
and  I  in  you."  l  This  was  the  source  of  all  the 
other  blessings  that  came  with  Pentecost.  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Crucified,  the  Glorified,  the  Lord  from 
heaven,  came  in  spiritual  power,  by  the  Spirit, 
to  impart  to  them  that  ever-abiding  presence  of 
their  Lord  that  had  been  promised  to  them ; 
and  that  indeed  in  a  way  that  was  at  once  most 
intimate,  all-powerful,  and  wholly  divine :  by  the 
indwelling  which  makes  Him  in  truth  their  life. 

1  John  xiv.  18,  20. 


24     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

Him  whom  they  had  had  in  the  flesh,  living  with 
them  on  earth,  they  now  received  by  the  Spirit 
in  His  heavenly  glory  within  them.  Instead  of 
an  outward  Jesus  near  them,  they  now  obtained 
the  inward  Jesus  within  them. 

II 

From  this  first  and  principal  blessing  sprang 
the  second :  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  came  into  them 
as  the  life  and  the  power  of  sanctification. 

Here  I  shall  allude  at  the  outset  to  only  one 
feature  in  this  change.  We  know  how  often 
the  Lord  had  to  rebuke  them  for  their  pride 
and  exhort  them  to  humility.  It  was  all  of  no 
avail.  Even  on  the  last  night  of  His  earthly 
life,  at  the  table  of  the  Holy  Supper,  there 
was  a  strife  amongst  them  as  to  which  of  them 
should  be  the  greatest.1  The  outward  teaching 
of  the  outward  Christ,  whatever  other  influences 
it  may  have  exercised,  was  not  sufficient  to 
redeem  them  from  the  power  of  indwelling  sin ; 
this  could  be  achieved  only  by  the  indwelling 
Christ.  Only  when  Jesus  descended  into  them 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  did  they  undergo  a  complete 

1  Luke  xxii.  24. 


HOW   GLORIOUS   IT   IS  '  25 

change.  They  received  Him  in  His  heavenly 
humility  and  subjection  to  the  Father,  and  in 
His  self-sacrifice  for  others,  as  their  life.  Hence 
forth  all  was  changed.  From  that  moment 
onwards  they  were  animated  by  the  spirit  of  the 
meek  and  lowly  Jesus. 

This,  in  very  truth,  is  still  the  only  way  to  a 
real  sanctifi cation,  to  a  life  that  actually  overcomes 
sin.  It  is  just  because  so  many  preachers  and 
so  many  Christians  keep  their  minds  occupied 
only  with  the  external  Christ  on  the  Cross  or 
in  heaven,  and  wait  for  the  blessing  of  His 
teaching  and  His  working  without  understanding 
that  the  blessing  of  Pentecost  brings  Him  into 
us,  to  work  Himself  all  in  us,  that  they  make 
so  little  progress  in  sanctification.  Christ  Him 
self  is  of  God  made  unto  us  sanctification  :  and 
that  in  no  other  way  than  by  our  living  and 
being  moved  and  existing  in  Him,  because  He 
lives  and  abides  in  our  heart  and  works  all  there. 

Ill 

An  overflowing  of  the   heart  with  the  love  of 
God  is  also  a  part  of  the  blessing  of  Pentecost. 
Next  to  pride,  lack  of  love — or,  as  we  may  put 


26     THE   FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

it  in  one  word,  lovelessness — was  the  sin  for 
which  the  Lord  had  so  often  to  rebuke  His 
disciples.  These  two  sins  have  in  truth  one 
and  the  same  root :  the  self-seeking  /,  the  desire 
for  self-pleasing.  The  new  commandment  that 
He  gave  them,  the  token  whereby  all  men 
should  know  that  they  were  His  disciples,  was 
love  to  one  another.  How  gloriously  was  it 
manifested  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  that  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  shed  abroad  His  love  in  the 
hearts  of  His  own.  The  multitude  of  them 
that  believe  were  as  one  heart,  one  soul :  all 
things  they  possessed  were  held  in  common ;  no 
one  said  that  anything  of  that  which  he  had 
was  his  own.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  with  its 
life  of  love  had  come  down  to  them.  The  spirit, 
the  disposition,  the  wonderful  love  of  Jesus,  filled 
them,  because  He  Himself  had  come  into  them. 

How  closely  the  mighty  working  of  the  Spirit 
and  the  indwelling  of  the  Lord  Jesus  are  bound 
up  with  a  life  in  love  appears  from  the  prayer 
of  Paul  in  behalf  of  the  Ephesians,  in  which  he 
asks  that  they  might  be  strengthened  with 
power  by  the  Spirit,  in  order  that  Christ  might 
dwell  in  their  hearts.  Then  he  forthwith  makes 


27 

this  addition :  "  that  ye,  being  rooted  and 
grounded  in  love,  may  be  strong  to  apprehend 
the  love  which  passeth  knowledge."  l  The  filling 
with  the  Spirit  and  the  indwelling  of  Christ 
bring  of  themselves  a  life  that  has  its  root,  its 
joy,  its  power,  its  evidence  in  love,  because  the  in 
dwelling  Christ  Himself  is  Love.  0  how  would 
the  love  of  God  fill  the  Church  and  convince  the 
world  that  she  has  received  a  heavenly  element 
into  her  life,  if  the  filling  with  the  Spirit  and  the 
indwelling  of  Christ  in  the  heart  were  recognised 
as  the  blessing  which  the  Father  has  promised  us  ! 

IV 

The  coming  of  the  Spirit  changed  weakness  and 
fear  into  courage  and  power. 

We  all  know  how,  from  fear  rising  in  his  heart 
at  the  word  of  a  woman,  Peter  denied  his  Lord ; 
and  how  that  same  night  all  the  disciples  fled  and 
forsook  Him.  Their  hearts  were  really  attached  to 
Him,  and  they  were  sincerely  willing  to  do  what 
they  had  promised  and  go  to  die  with  Him ;  but 
when  it  came  to  the  crisis,  they  had  neither  courage 
nor  power.  They  had  to  say  :  "  To  will  is  present 

1  Eph.  iii.  16-19. 


28     THE   FULL  BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

with  me,  but  how  to  perform  I  find  not."  After 
the  blessing  of  the  Spirit  of  Pentecost,  there  was 
no  more  question  of  merely  willing  apart  from 
performing.  By  Christ  dwelling  in  us  God 
works  both  the  willing  and  the  doing.  With 
what  confidence  of  spirit  did  Peter  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost  dare  to  preach  the  Crucified  One  to 
thousands  of  hostile  Jews.  With  what  boldness 
was  he  able,  in  opposition  to  the  leaders  of  the 
people,  to  say :  "  We  must  obey  God  rather 
than  men."  l  With  what  courage  and  joy  were 
Stephen  and  Paul  and  so  many  others  enabled  to 
encounter  threatening  and  suffering  and  death  : 
they  did  this  even  triumphantly.  It  was  because 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  the  Victor, — yea,  the  Christ 
Himself,  who  had  been  glorified, — dwelt  within 
them.  It  is  the  joy  of  the  blessing  of  Pentecost 
that  gives  courage  and  power  to  speak  for  Jesus, 
because  by  it  the  whole  heart  is  filled  with  Him. 

V 

The  blessing  of  Pentecost  makes  the  whole  Word 
of  God  new. 

How  distinctly  do  we  see  this  fact  in  the  case 
1  Acts  v.  29. 


HOW   GLORIOUS   IT   IS  29 

of  the  disciples.  As  with  all  the  Jews  of  that 
age,  their  ideas  of  the  Messiah  and  the  kingdom 
of  God  were  utterly  external  and  carnal.  All 
the  instruction  of  the  Lord  Jesus  throughout 
three  long  years  could  not  detach  their  minds 
from  them.  They  were  utterly  unable  to  com 
prehend  the  doctrine  of  a  suffering  and  dying 
Messiah  or  the  hope  of  His  invisible  spiritual 
dominion.  Even  after  His  resurrection  He 
had  to  rebuke  them  for  their  unbelieving  spirit 
and  their  backwardness  in  understanding  the 
Scriptures.  With  the  coming  of  the  day  of 
Pentecost  an  entire  change  took  place.  The 
whole  of  their  ancient  Scriptures  opened  up 
before  them.  The  light  of  the  Holv  Spirit  in 

o  J         IT 

them  illumined  the  Word.  In  the  preaching 
of  Peter  and  Stephen,  in  the  addresses  of  Paul 
and  James,  we  see  how  a  divine  light  had  shone 
upon  the  word  of  the  Old  Testament.  They  saw 
everything  through  the  Spirit  of  this  Jesus  who 
had  made  His  abode  within  them. 

So  will  it  be  also  with  ourselves.  It  is  as 
necessary  as  it  is  helpful  that  we  should  study 
the  Scriptures  and  meditate  upon  them,  and 
keep  the  word  of  God  alike  in  head  and  heart 


30     THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF  PENTECOST 

and  daily  walk.  Let  us,  however,  constantly 
remember  that  it  is  only  when  we  are  filled 
with  the  Spirit  that  we  can  rightly  and  fully 
experience  the  spiritual  power  and  truth  of  the 
Word.  He  is  "  the  Spirit  of  truth."  He  alone 
guides  into  all  truth  when  He  dwells  in  us. 

VI 

It  is  the  blessing  of  Pentecost  that  gives  power 
to  Uess  others. 

The  divine  power  of  the  exalted  Jesus  to 
grant  repentance  and  the  forgiveness  of  sins  is 
exercised  by  Him  through  His  servants  whom 
He  sends  forth  to  proclaim  these  blessings. 
The  minister  of  the  gospel  who  desires  to 
preach  repentance  and  forgiveness  through 
Jesus  with  success  in  winning  souls,  must  do 
the  work  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  this 
Jesus.  The  chief  reason  why  so  much  preaching 
of  conversion  and  pardon  is  fruitless  lies  in  the 
fact  that  these  elements  of  truth  are  presented 
only  as  a  doctrine,  and  that  preachers  endeavour 
to  secure  a  way  to  the  hearts  of  their  audience 
in  the  power  of  merely  human  earnestness,  and 
reasoning,  and  eloquence.  But  little  blessing  is 


HOW  GLORIOUS   IT  IS  31 

won  by  these  means.  It  is  the  man  that  makes 
it  his  chief  desire  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit 
of  God,  and  then  by  faith  in  the  indwelling  of 
Christ  comes  to  be  assured  that  the  glorified 
Lord  will  speak  and  work  in  him,  who  will 
obtain  blessing.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  this 
blessing  will  not  always  be  given  in  the  very 
same  measure  or  in  the  very  same  manner, 
but  it  will  always  certainly  come  :  just  because 
the  preacher  permits  the  Lord  to  work  in  and 
through  him.  Alike  in  preaching  and  in  the 
daily  life  of  a  servant  of  Christ,  the  full  blessing 
of  Pentecost  is  the  sure  way  of  becoming  a  bless 
ing  to  others.  "  He  that  believeth  on  Me,"  said 
Jesus,  "  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living 
water."1  This  he  said  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  A  heart 
filled  with  the  Spirit  will  overflow  with  the  Spirit. 

VII 

It  is  the  blessing  of  Pentecost  that  will  make  the 
Church  of  Christ  what  God  would  have  her  ~be. 

We  have  spoken  of  what  the  Spirit  will  do 
in  individual  believers.  We  have  also  to  think 
of  what  the  blessing  will  be  when  the  Church 

1  John  vii.  38. 


32     THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

as  a  whole  shall  apprehend  her  calling  to  be 
filled  with  the  Spirit,  and  then  to  exhibit  the 
life  and  the  power — yea,  and  the  very  presence — 
of  her  Lord  to  the  world.  We  must  not  only 
seek  and  receive  this  blessing,  every  one  for 
himself,  but  we  must  also  remember  that  the 
full  manifestation  of  what  the  blessing  itself  is, 
cannot  be  given  until  the  whole  body  of  Christ 
be  filled  with  it.  "  If  one  member  suffer,  all 
the  members  suffer  with  it."  l  If  many  members 
of  the  Church  of  Christ  are  content  to  remain 
without  this  blessing,  the  whole  Church  will 
suffer.  Even  in  individual  disciples  the  blessing 
cannot  come  to  its  full  manifestation.  Hence 
it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  we  should 
not  only  think  of  what  the  being  "  filled  with  the 
Spirit "  means  for  ourselves,  but  also  consider 
what  it  will  do  for  the  Church,  especially  in  our 
own  neighbourhood,  and  by  her  for  all  the  world. 
To  this  end,  let  us  simply  recall  the  morning 
of  the  day  of  Pentecost.  At  that  juncture  the 
Christian  Church  in  Jerusalem  consisted  only 
of  one  hundred  and  twenty  disciples,  most  of 
them  poor  unlearned  fishermen,  publicans,  and 
1  1  Cor.  xii.  26. 


HOW  GLORIOUS   IT   IS  33 

humble  women,  an  insignificant  and  despised 
gathering.1  Yet  it  was  just  by  these  believers 
that  the  kingdom  of  God  had  to  be  proclaimed 
and  extended :  and  they  did  it.  By  them,  and 
those  who  were  added  to  them,  the  power  of 
Jewish  prejudice  and  of  pagan  hardness  of  heart 
was  overcome,  and  the  Church  of  Christ  won 
glorious  triumphs.  This  grand  result  was 
achieved  simply  and  only  because  the  first 
Christian  church  was  filled  with  the  Spirit. 
The  members  of  it  gave  themselves  wholly  to 
their  Lord.  They  allowed  themselves  to  be 
filled  and  consecrated,  governed  and  used  only 
by  Him.  They  yielded  themselves  to  Him  as 
instruments  of  His  power.  He  dwelt  in  them 
and  wrought  in  them  all  His  wondrous  deeds. 

It  is  to  this  same  experience  that  the  Church 
of  Christ  in  our  age  must  be  brought  back. 
This  is  the  only  thing  that  will  help  her  in  the 
conflict  with  mere  civilisation  or  paganism,  with  sin 
or  the  world.  She  must  be  filled  with  the  Spirit. 

Beloved  fellow-Christians,  this  summons  comes 
to   you.     "  One    thing    is    needful."     Alike    for 
1  Acts  i.  15, 

3 


34     THE   FULL  BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

yourselves  and  the  whole  Church  of  the  Lord, 
this  is  the  one  thing  that  is  needful :  we 
have  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit.  Pray  do  not 
imagine  that  you  must  comprehend  or  under 
stand  it  all  before  you  seek  and  find  it.  For 
those  that  wait  upon  Him  God  will  do  even 
that  which  has  not  yet  entered  into  their  heart 
to  conceive.  If  you  would  taste  the  happiness, 
if  you  would  know  by  personal  experience  the 
unutterable  blessedness,  of  having  Jesus  in  the 
heart,  of  having  in  you  His  Spirit  of  holiness 
and  humility,  of  love  and  self-sacrifice,  of  courage 
and  power,  as  naturally  and  continuously  as  you 
have  your  own  spirit ;  if  you  would  have  the 
Word  of  God  in  you  as  light  and  power,  and  be 
enabled  to  carry  it  about  as  a  blessing  for  others  ; 
if  you  would  fain  see  the  Church  of  Christ  stand 
forth  arrayed  in  her  first  splendour  —  then 
separate  yourselves  from  everything  that  is  evil, 
cast  it  utterly  out  of  your  heart,  and  fix  your 
desire  on  this  one  thing :  to  be  filled  with  the 
Spirit  of  God.  Beckon  upon  receiving  this  as 
your  rightful  heritage.  Appropriate  it  and  hold 
it  fast  by  faith.  It  shall  certainly  be  given  to 
you. 


THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF 
PENTECOST 


in 
it  foas  fjestofortJ  from  P?eabert 


"If  ye  love  Me,  ye  will  keep  My  commandments.  And  I 
will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another  Com 
forter,  that  He  may  be  with  you  for  ever,  even  the  Spirit  of 
truth."—  JOHN  xiv.  15,  16. 

A  TREE  lives  always  according  to  the  nature 
-*"*-  of  the  seed  from  which  it  sprang.  Every 
living  being  is  always  guided  and  governed  by 
the  nature  which  it  received  at  its  birth.  Thus 
the  Church  of  Christ  received  the  promise  and 
the  law  of  her  existence  and  her  growth  in  that 
which  was  bestowed  upon  her  in  the  Holy 
Spirit  on  the  day  of  her  birth.  This  is  the 
reason  why  it  is  of  such  importance  for  us  to 
turn  back  often  to  the  day  of  Pentecost  and  not 

35 


36     THE   FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

to  rest  until  we  thoroughly  understand,  and 
receive,  and  experience  what  God  did  for  His 
people  on  that  day.  When  we  see  how  the 
blessing  was  then  for  the  first  time  given  from 
heaven,  and  what  the  disposition  of  heart  was 
that  fitted  the  disciples  for  receiving  the  Spirit, 
then  we  know  for  all  coming  time  what  remains 
to  be  done  by  ourselves  to  enjoy  the  same  bless 
ing.  The  first  disciples  serve  us  as  examples 
and  forerunners  on  the  way  to  the  fulness  of  the 
Spirit. 

What,  then,  was  there  in  them  which  enabled 
them  to  become  the  recipients  of  these  heavenly 
gifts  and  made  them  fit  objects  of  the  unspeak 
able  grace  that  in  them  first  of  all  the  Three-One 
God  came  to  take  up  His  abode  ?  The  right 
answer  to  this  question  will  help  us  not  a  little 
on  the  way  to  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

What  do  we  find  in  these  first  disciples  ? 

I 

In  the  first  place,  there  is  the  fact  that  they 
were  deeply  attached  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 

The  Son  of  God  came  into  the  world  in  order 
to  unite  the  divine  life  which  He  had  with  the 


HOW  IT  WAS  BESTOWED  FROM  HEAVEN      37 

Father  with  the  life  of  man,  and  thus  to  secure 
that  the  life  of  God  should  penetrate  into  the 
life  of  the  creature.  When  He  had  completed 
the  work  in  His  own  person  by  His  obedience, 
and  death,  and  resurrection,  He  was  exalted  to 
the  throne  of  God  on  high  in  order  that  in 
spiritual  power,  and  not  only  apart  from  the 
limitations  of  earthly  life  but  in  the  might  of  the 
all-penetrating  sovereign  presence  of  God,  His 
disciples  and  His  Church  might  participate  in 
His  own  very  life.  We  read  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  "  was  not  yet,"  because  Jesus  was  not  yet 
glorified.1  It  was  only  after  His  glorification 
that  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  Spirit  of  Godhead 
united  with  manhood,  the  Spirit  of  the  complete 
indwelling  of  God  in  man,  could  be  given.  It  is 
the  Spirit  of  the  glorified  Jesus  that  the  disciples 
received  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the  Spirit  of  the 
Head,  penetrating  all  the  members  of  His  body. 

It  is  evident  without  proof  that,  if  the  fulness 
of  the  Spirit  thus  dwells  in  Jesus,  a  personal 
relationship  to  Him  is  the  first  condition  for  the 
reception  of  the  full  gift  of  the  Comforter.  It 
was  to  attain  this  end  that  the  Lord  Jesus 

1  John  vii.  39. 


38     THE   FULL   BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

throughout  all  His  three  years'  work  on  earth 
kept  the  disciples  in  such  close  converse  with 
Himself.  He  desired  to  attach  them  to  Himself. 
He  wanted  them  to  feel  themselves  truly  one 
with  Him.  He  wanted  them  to  identify  them 
selves  with  Him,  as  far  as  this  was  possible. 
By  knowledge  and  intercourse,  by  love  and 
obedience,  they  became  inwardly  knit  to  Him. 
This  was  the  preparation  for  participating  in  the 
Spirit  of  His  glorification. 

The  lesson  that  is  here  taught  us  is  indeed 
extremely  simple,  but  it  is  one  of  profound 
significance.  There  are  not  a  few  Christians 
who  believe  in  the  Lord  and  are  very  zealous 
in  His  service,  who  eagerly  desire  to  become 
holy,  and  who  yet  do  not  succeed  in  their 
endeavour.  It  seems  oftentimes  as  if  they 
could  not  understand  the  promise  of  the  Spirit. 
The  thought  of  being  filled  with  the  Spirit 
exercises  but  little  influence  upon  them.  The 
reason  is  obvious.  There  is  lacking  in  their 
religion  that  personal  relationship  to  the  Lord 
Jesus,  that  inward  attachment  to  Him,  that 
perfectly  natural  reference  to  Him  as  the  best 
and  nearest  Friend,  as  the  beloved  Lord,  which 


HOW  IT  WAS  BESTOWED  FROM  HEAVEN      39 

was  so  characteristic  of  the  disciples.  This, 
however,  is  absolutely  indispensable.  It  is  a 
heart  that  is  entirely  occupied  with  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  depends  only  upon  Him,  that  can 
alone  hope  for  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit. 

II 

They  had  left  all  for  Jesus. 

"  Nothing  for  nothing."  This  proverb  con 
tains  a  deep  truth.  A  thing  that  costs  me 
nothing  may  nevertheless  cost  me  much.  It 
may  bring  me  under  an  obligation  to  the  giver, 
and  so  cost  me  more  than  it  is  worth.  I  may 
have  so  much  trouble  in  appropriating  it  and 
keeping  it  that  I  may  pay  much  more  for  it 
than  the  price  which  should  be  asked  for  it. 
"  Nothing  for  nothing " :  the  maxim  holds  good 
also  in  the  life  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The 
parables  of  the  Pearl  of  great  price  and  the 
Treasure  hid  in  a  field  teach  us  that,  in  order 
to  obtain  possession  of  the  kingdom  within  us, 
we  must  sell  all  that  we  have.  This  is  the 
very  renunciation  that  Jesus  literally  demanded 
of  the  disciples  who  had  to  follow  Him.  This 
is  the  requirement  He  so  often  repeated  in  His 


40     THE   FULL  BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

preaching :  "  He  that  forsaketh  not  all  that  he 
hath  cannot  be  My  disciple."  l  The  two  worlds 
betwixt  which  we  stand  are  in  such  direct 
conflict  with  one  another,  and  the  world  in 
which  we  by  nature  live  exercises  such  a  mighty 
influence  over  us,  that  it  is  often  necessary  for 
us,  even  by  external  and  visible  sacrifice,  to  with 
draw  from  it.  It  was  thus  that  Jesus  trained 
His  disciples  to  long  for  that  which  is  heavenly. 
Only  thus  could  He  prepare  them  to  desire  and 
receive  the  heavenly  gift  with  an  undivided  heart. 
The  Lord  has  left  us  no  outward  directions 
as  to  how  much  of  the  world  we  are  to  abandon 
or  in  what  manner.  But  by  His  whole  Word 
He  teaches  us  that  without  sacrifice,  without 
a  deliberate  separation  from  the  world  and 
forsaking  of  it,  we  shall  never  make  much 
progress  in  grace.  The  spirit  of  this  world 
has  penetrated  so  deeply  into  us  that  we  do 
not  observe  it.  We  share  in  its  desire  for 
comfort  and  enjoyment,  for  self-pleasing  and 
self-exaltation,  without  our  knowing  how  im 
possible  these  things  make  it  for  us  to  be  filled 
with  the  Spirit.  Let  us  learn  from  the  early 
1  Luke  xiv.  33. 


41 

disciples  that  to  be  filled  from  the  heavenly  world 
with  the  Spirit  that  dwells  there,  we  must  be 
entirely  separate  from  the  children  of  this  world 
or  from  worldly  Christians.  We  must  be  ready 
and  eager  to  live  as  entirely  different  men,  who 
literally  represent  heaven  upon  earth,  because  we 
have  received  the  Spirit  of  the  King  of  heaven. 

Ill 

They  had  despaired  utterly  of  themselves  and 
all  that  is  of  man. 

Man  has  two  great  enemies  by  whom  the 
devil  tempts  him  and  with  whom  he  has  to 
contend.  The  one  is  the  world  without,  the 
other  is  the  self-life  within.  This  last,  the  sel 
fish  Ego,  is  much  more  dangerous  and  stronger 
than  the  first.  It  is  quite  possible  for  a  man 
to  have  made  much  progress  in  forsaking  the 
world  while  the  self-life  retains  full  dominion 
within  him.  You  see  this  fact  illustrated  in 
the  case  of  the  disciples.  Peter  could  say  with 
truth :  "  Lo !  we  have  left  all  and  followed 
Thee."  Yet  how  manifestly  did  the  selfish  Ego, 
with  its  self-pleasing  and  its  self-confidence,  still 
retain  its  full  sway  over  him. 


42     THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

As  the  Lord  at  their  first  calling  led  them  up 
to  the  point  of  forsaking  their  outward  posses 
sions  and  following  Him,  so  shortly  afterwards 
He  began  to  teach  them  that  a  disciple  must 
deny  himself  and  lose  his  own  life  if  he  would 
be  worthy  of  receiving  His.  He  must  hate  not 
only  father  and  mother,  where  this  was  necessary, 
but  even  his  own  life.  It  was  love  for  this  self- 
life,  more  than  all  love  for  father  and  mother, 
that  hindered  the  Lord  Jesus  from  doing  His 
work  in  the  heart.  It  was  to  cost  them  more 
to  be  redeemed  from  the  selfish  Ego  within  them 
than  to  get  quit  of  the  world  around  them. 
The  self-life  is  the  natural  life  of  sinful  man. 
He  can  be  liberated  from  it  by  nothing  save  by 
death — that  is,  by  first  dying  to  it  and  then 
living  in  the  strength  of  the  new  life  that  comes 
from  God. 

The  forsaking  of  the  world  began  at  the  outset 
of  the  three  years'  discipleship.  It  was  at  the  end 
of  that  period,  at  the  Cross  of  Jesus,  that  dying 
to  the  self-life  first  took  place.  When  they  saw 
Him  die,  they  learned  to  despair  of  themselves 
and  of  everything  on  which  they  had  hitherto 
based  their  hope.  Whether  they  thought  of 


HOW  IT  WAS  BESTOWED  FROM  HEAVEN      43 

their  Lord  and  the  redemption  which  they  had 
expected,  or  whether  they  thought  of  themselves 
and  their  shameful  unfaithfulness  towards  Him, 
everything  tended  to  fill  them  with  despair. 
Little  did  they  know  that  it  was  just  this 
despair  which  was  to  prove  the  breaking  up  of 
their  hard  hearts — the  mortification  of  the  self- 
life  and  of  confidence  in  themselves — which 
would  enable  them  to  receive  something  entirely 
new — namely,  a  divine  life  through  the  Spirit  of 
the  glorified  Jesus  in  the  innermost  depths  of 
their  souls. 

0  that  we  understood  better  that  there  is 
nothing  which  so  hampers  us  as  secret  reliance 
on  something  in  ourselves  or  in  the  Church 
around  us,  which  we  imagine  can  help  us  !  On 
the  other  hand,  there  is  nothing  that  brings  so 
much  blessing  as  entire  despair  of  ourselves  and 
of  all  that  is  upon  the  earth,  in  the  way  of 
teaching  us  to  turn  our  hearts  only  and  wholly 
to  heaven  and  to  partake  of  the  heavenly  gift 
which  comes  thence. 


44     THE   FULL  BLESSING   OF  PENTECOST 

IV 

They  received  and  held  fast  the  promise  of  the 
Spirit  given  by  the  Lord  Jesus. 

We  know  how,  in  His  farewell  address  on  the 
last  night  of  His  sojourn  on  earth,  Jesus  com 
forted  His  disciples  in  their  sorrow  over  His 
departure  with  one  great  promise — namely,  the 
mission  of  the  Holy  Spirit  from  heaven.  This 
was  to  be  better  than  His  own  bodily  presence 
among  them.  It  would  be  to  them  the  full 
fruit  and  power  of  His  redemption.  The  divine 
Life — yea,  He  Himself,  with  the  Father — was 
to  make  abode  within  them.  The  unheard-of 
wonder,  the  mystery  of  the  ages,  was  to  be  their 
portion.  They  were  to  know  that  they  were  in 
Him  and  He  in  them.  At  His  ascension  from 
the  Mount  of  Olives,  this  promise  of  the  Spirit 
was  the  subject  of  the  last  words  He  addressed 
to  them. 

It  is  evident  that  the  disciples  had  still  but 
little  idea  of  what  this  promise  signified.  But 
however  defective  their  understanding  of  it  was, 
they  held  it  fast ;  or  rather,  the  promise  held 
them  fast  and  would  not  let  them  go.  They 


HOW  IT  WAS  BESTOWED  FROM  HEAVEN      45 

all  had  only  one  thought :  something  has  been 
promised  to  us  by  our  Lord ;  it  will  give  us  a 
share  in  His  heavenly  power  and  glory ;  we 
know  for  certain  that  it  is  coming.  Of  what 
the  thing  itself  was,  or  of  what  their  experience 
of  it  was  to  be,  they  could  give  no  account.  It 
was  enough  for  them  that  they  had  the  word 
of  the  Lord.  He  would  make  it  a  blessed 
reality  within  them. 

Now  it  is  just  the  same  disposition  that  we 
have  so  much  need  of  now.  To  us  also,  even 
as  to  them,  has  the  word  of  the  Lord  come 
concerning  the  Spirit  who  is  to  descend  from 
the  throne  in  the  power  of  His  glorified  life. 
"  He  that  believeth  in  Me,  out  of  his  heart  shall 
flow  rivers  of  living  water."  For  us  also  it  is 
the  one  thing  needful  to  hold  fast  that  word ;  to 
set  our  whole  desire  upon  the  fulfilment  of  it ; 
to  lay  aside  all  else,  until  we  inherit  the  promise. 
The  word  from  the  mouth  of  Jesus  concerning 
the  reception  of  the  Spirit  in  such  measure  that 
we  shall  be  endued  with  power  from  on  high 
must  animate  and  fill  us  with  strong  desire,  with 
firm  and  joyful  assurance. 


46     THE   FULL  BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

V 

They  waited  upon  the  Father  until  the  perform 
ance  of  the  promise  came  and  tliey  were  filled  with 
the  Spirit. 

The  ten  days  of  waiting  were  for  them  days 
in  which  they  were  continually  in  the  Temple 
"  praising  and  blessing  God "  and  "  continuing 
instant  in  prayer  and  supplication."  It  is  not 
enough  for  us  to  endeavour  to  strengthen  desire 
and  to  hold  fast  our  confidence.  The  principal 
thing  is  to  set  ourselves  in  close  and  abiding 
contact  with  God.  The  blessing  must  come 
from  God ;  God  Himself  must  give  it  to  us ;  we 
are  to  receive  the  gift  directly  from  Him.  What 
is  promised  us  is  a  wonderful  work  of  divine 
Omnipotence  and  Love.  What  we  desire  is  the 
personal  occupancy  and  indwelling  of  God  the 
Holy  Spirit.  God  Himself  must  bestow  this 
personally  upon  us.  A  man  gives  another  a 
piece  of  bread  or  a  piece  of  money.  He  gives 
it  away  from  himself  and  has  nothing  further 
to  do  with  it.  It  is  not  thus  with  God's  gift  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  No :  the  Spirit  is  God.  God 
is  in  the  Spirit  who  comes  to  us,  even  as  He 


HOW  IT  WAS  BESTOWED  FROM  HEAVEN      47 

was  in  the  Son.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  the 
most  personal  act  of  the  Godhead :  it  is  the 
gift  of  Himself  unto  us.  We  have  to  receive 
it  in  the  very  closest  personal  contact  with 
God. 

The  clearer  the  insight  we  obtain  into  this 
principle,  the  more  deeply  shall  we  feel  how 
little  we  can  do  to  grasp  the  blessing  by  our 
own  desiring,  or  endeavouring,  or  believing.  No  : 
all  our  desiring,  and  striving,  and  believing  can 
only  issue  in  a  more  complete  acknowledgment 
that  we  ourselves  can  do  nought  to  win  the 
boon.  It  is  the  Goodness  of  God  alone  that 
must  give  it ;  it  is  His  Omnipotence  that  must 
work  it  in  us.  Our  disposition  must  be  one  of 
silent  assurance  that  the  Father  desires  to  give 
it  to  us ;  that  He  will  not  keep  us  waiting  one 
moment  longer  than  is  absolutely  necessary ; 
and  that  there  shall  not  be  a  single  soul  which 
persists  in  waiting  in  the  pathway  of  self- 
abnegation  and  dependence  that  shall  not  be 
filled  with  the  glory  of  God. 

Every  tree  continues  always  to  grow  from  the 
root  out  of  which  it  first  sprang.  The  day  of 
Pentecost  was  the  planting  of  the  Christian 


48     THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

Church,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  became  the  power 
of  its  life.  Let  us  turn  back  to  that  experience. 
There  is  our  power  still.  We  learn  from  the 
disciples  what  is  really  necessary.  Attachment 
to  Jesus,  the  abandonment  of  everything  in  the 
world  for  Him,  despair  of  self  and  of  all  help 
from  man,  holding  on  to  the  word  of  promise, 
and  then  waiting  on  God,  "  the  living  God  " — 
this  is  the  sure  way  of  living  in  the  joy  and  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 


THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF 
PENTECOST 


IV 
little  it  is  enjogetr 


"My  speech  and  my  preaching  were  not  in  persuasive 
words  of  wisdom,  but  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of 
power  :  that  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of 
men,  but  in  the  power  of  God."—  1  COR.  ii.  4,  5. 

~T)AUL  speaks  here  of  two  kinds  of  preaching 
and  two  kinds  of  faith.  According  to  the 
spirit  of  the  preacher  will  be  the  faith  of  the 
congregation.  When  the  preaching  of  the  Cross 
is  given  only  in  the  words  of  human  wisdom, 
then  the  faith  of  the  hearers  will  be  in  the 
wisdom  of  men.  When  the  preaching  is  in 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power,  the 
faith  of  the  Christian  people  will  also  be  in  the 
power  of  God,  at  once  firm  and  strong.  Preach  - 
4 


50     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

ing  in  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  will  bring 
the  double  blessing  of  power  in  the  word  and 
power  in  the  faith  of  those  that  receive  that 
word.  If  we  desire  to  know  the  measure  of  the 
working  of  the  Spirit,  we  must  consider  the 
preaching  and  the  faith  that  springs  from  it. 
In  this  way  alone  can  we  see  whether  the  full 
blessing  of  Pentecost  is  truly  manifested  in  the 
Church  of  Christ. 

There  are  very  few  who  are  prepared  to  say 
that  this  is  really  the  case.  Everywhere  among 
the  children  of  God  we  hear  complaints  of 
weakness  and  sin.  Amongst  those  who  do  not 
so  complain,  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  their 
silence  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  prevalence  of 
ignorance  or  self-satisfaction.  It  is  of  the 
utmost  importance  that  we  should  concentrate 
our  thoughts  upon  this  fact,  until  we  come 
under  the  full  conviction  that  the  condition  of 
the  Church  is  marked  by  impotence,  and  that 
nothing  can  restore  her  but  the  return  to  a  life 
in  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  blessing  of  Pentecost. 
The  more  deeply  we  feel  our  deficiency,  the  more 
speedily  shall  we  desire  and  obtain  restoration. 
It  will  help  to  awaken  longing  for  this  blessing, 


HOW   LITTLE   IT   IS   ENJOYED  51 

and  to  find  out  the  way  to  obtain  it,  if  we 
earnestly  consider  how  little  it  is  enjoyed  in  the 
Church  and  how  far  the  Church  is  from  being 
what  her  Lord  has  willingness  and  power  to 

make  her. 

I 

Think,  for  example,  what  little  power  over  sin 
there  is  amongst  the  children  of  God. 

The  Spirit  of  Pentecost  is  the  Holy  Spirit, 
the  Spirit  of  God's  holiness.  When  He  came 
down  upon  the  disciples,  what  a  transformation 
was  effected  in  them.  Their  carnal  thoughts 
were  changed  into  spiritual  insight,  their  pride 
into  humility,  their  selfishness  into  love,  their 
fear  of  man  into  courage  and  fidelity.  Sin  was 
cast  out  by  the  inflowing  of  the  life  of  Jesus  and 
of  heaven. 

The  life  which  the  Lord  has  prepared  for  His 
people  is  a  life  of  victory.  It  is  not  indeed 
victory  to  such  an  extent  as  that  there  shall  be 
no  temptation  to  evil ;  nor  yet  that  the  inclina 
tion  towards  sin,  inward  sinfulness,  shall  be 
utterly  rooted  out  of  the  flesh.  But  there  is  to 
be  victory  of  such  a  kind  that  the  indwelling 
power  of  the  Spirit  who  fills  us,  the  presence  of 


52     THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

the  indwelling  Saviour,  shall  keep  sin  in  sub 
jection,  as  the  light  subdues  the  darkness. 

Yet,  to  what  a  small  extent  do  we  see  power 
for  victory  over  sin  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  On 
the  contrary,  how  often,  even  amongst  earnest 
Christians,  do  we  see  much  untruthfulness  and 
lack  of  honour,  pride  and  self-esteem,  selfishness 
and  lack  of  love.  How  little  are  the  traces  of 
the  image  of  Jesus — obedience,  and  humility,  and 
love,  and  entire  surrender  to  the  will  of  God — 
seen  even  among  the  people  of  God.  The  truth 
is  that  we  have  become  so  accustomed  to  the 
confession  of  sin  and  unfaithfulness,  of  dis 
obedience  and  backsliding,  that  it  is  no  longer 
regarded  as  a  matter  for  shame.  We  make  the 
confession  before  each  other,  and  then  after  the 
prayer  rest  comforted  and  content.  0  brethren, 
let  us  rather  feel  humbled  and  mourn  over  it ! 
It  is  because  so  little  of  the  full  blessing  of  the 
Spirit  is  enjoyed  or  sought  for  that  the  children 
of  God  still  commit  so  much  sin,  and  have 
therefore  so  much  to  confess.  Let  every  sin, 
whether  in  ourselves  or  others,  serve  as  a 
summons  to  notice  how  much  is  lacking  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  amongst  us.  Let  every  instance 


HOW   LITTLE   IT   IS   ENJOYED  53 

of  failure  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  in  love,  and 
holiness,  and  entire  surrender  to  the  will  of 
God,  only  urge  us  the  more  unceasingly  to  call 
upon  God  to  bring  His  Spirit  once  more  to  full 
dominion  over  the  whole  Church  of  Christ. 

II 

Think,  too,  how  little  there  is  of  separation  from 
the  world. 

When  the  Lord  Jesus  promised  the  Comforter, 
He  said :  "  Whom  the  world  cannot  receive."  The 
spirit  of  this  world,  which  is  devotion  to  the 
visible,  is  in  irreconcilable  antagonism  with  the 
Spirit  of  Jesus  in  heaven,  where  God  and  His 
will  are  everything.  The  world  has  rejected  the 
Lord  Jesus ;  and,  to  whatever  extent  it  may 
now  usurp  the  Christian  name,  the  world  at 
heart  is  still  the  same  untamable  foe.  It  was 
for  this  reason  that  Jesus  said  of  His  disciples, 
and  as  indicating  one  of  their  chief  distinctive 
marks :  "  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I 
am  not  of  the  world."  l  This,  too,  is  the  reason 
why  Paul  said :  "  We  have  received,  not  the 
spirit  of  this  world,  but  the  Spirit  which  is  of 
1  John  xvii.  16. 


54     THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

God." l  The  two  spirits,  the  spirit  of  the  world 
and  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  engaged  in  a  life-and- 
death  conflict  with  one  another. 

Hence  it  is  that  God  has  always  called  upon 
His  people  to  separate  themselves  from  the 
world,  and  to  live  as  pilgrims  whose  treasure  and 
whose  heart  are  in  heaven.  But  is  this  what 
is  really  seen  amongst  Christians  ?  Who  shall 
dare  to  say  so  ?  When  they  have  attained  to 
a  measure  of  unblamableness  in  walk  and 
assurance  of  heaven,  most  Christians  consider 
that  they  are  at  liberty  to  enjoy  the  world  as 
fully  as  others.  There  is  little  to  be  seen  of 
true  heavenly-mindeduess  in  conversation  and 
walk,  in  disposition  and  endeavour.  Is  not  this 
the  case  just  because  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  is 
so  little  enjoyed  and  sought  for  ?  Nothing  but 
light  can  drive  out  darkness ;  and  nothing  but 
the  Spirit  of  heaven  can  expel  the  spirit  of  the 
world.  Where  a  man  does  not  surrender  himself 
to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  and  the 
Spirit  of  heaven,  there  can  be  no  other  issue  than 
that,  Christian  though  he  may  be,  he  must  come 
under  the  power  of  the  spirit  of  the  world. 

1  1  Cor.  ii.  12. 


HOW   LITTLE   IT   IS   ENJOYED  55 

0  listen  to  the  piercing  cry  that  rises  from  the 
whole  Church  of  Christ :  "  Who  shall  rescue  us 
from  the  power  of  this  spirit  of  the  world  ? "  And 
let  your  answer  be :  "  Nothing,  no  one,  save  the 
Spirit  of  God.  I  must  be  filled  with  the  Spirit." 

Ill 

Think  how  little  there  is  of  steadfastness  and 
growth  in  faith, 

There  is  nothing  of  which  ministers,  and 
especially  those  who  labour  for  the  salvation 
of  souls,  have  to  complain  more  than  that  there 
are  so  many  who  for  a  time  are  full  of  zeal 
and  then  fall  away.  We  see,  not  only  among 
the  young  or  in  times  of  awakening,  but  even 
among  many  that  have  for  years  maintained 
a  good  confession,  that  whenever  they  enter 
into  another  circle  of  influence,  and  are  put  to 
the  proof  by  prosperity  or  any  special  form  of 
temptation,  they  forthwith  cease  to  persevere. 
Whence  does  this  unhappy  result  arise  ?  From 
nothing  but  the  fact  that  the  preaching  is  more 
with  the  wisdom  of  persuasive  words  than  in 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power. 
Hence  their  faith  also  stands  in  the  wisdom 


56     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

and  work  of  man  rather  than  in  the  power  of 
God.  So  long  as  such  people  have  the  benefit 
of  earnest  and  instructive  preaching,  they  con 
tinue  to  stand ;  whenever  they  lose  it,  they 
begin  to  backslide.  It  is  because  the  current 
preaching  is  so  little  in  the  demonstration  of 
the  Spirit  that  souls  are  brought  so  little  into 
contact  with  the  living  God.  For  the  same 
reason,  far  too  much  of  the  current  faith  is  not 
in  the  power  of  God.  Even  the  Word  of  God — 
which  ought  always  only  to  be  a  guide  pointing 
towards  God  Himself — becomes  all  too  frequently 
a  veil  with  the  study  of  which  the  soul  becomes 
occupied,  and  is  thus  kept  back  from  meeting 
with  God.  The  Word,  and  preaching,  and 
means  of  grace  become  a  hindrance  in  place 
of  a  help  if  they  are  not  in  demonstration  of 
the  Spirit.  All  external  means  of  grace  are 
things  that  inevitably  change  and  fade.  It  is 
the  Spirit  alone  that  works  a  faith  which  stands 
in  the  power  of  God,  and  so  remains  strong  and 
unwavering. 

Whence  comes  it  that  there  are  so  many 
who  do  not  continue  to  stand  ?  Let  the  answer 
of  God  to  this  question  penetrate  deeply  into 


HOW   LITTLE   IT   IS  ENJOYED  57 

our  hearts.  There  is  a  grave  lack  of  the 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit.  Let  every  sad 
discovery  of  congregations,  or  of  smaller  circles, 
or  of  individuals  that  do  not  remain  steadfast, 
or  that  do  not  grow  in  grace,  serve  as  a 
summons  to  us  to  acknowledge  that  the  full 
blessing  of  Pentecost  is  lost.  This  is  what  we 
long  for  and  must  have  from  God.  Let  all 
that  is  within  us  begin  to  thirst  and  cry  out : 
"  Come  from  the  four  winds,  0  thou  Spirit  of 
God,  and  breathe  upon  these  dead  souls,  that 
they  may  live." 

IV 

Think  how  little  there  is  of  power  for  service 
amongst  the  unconverted. 

What  an  immense  host  of  workers  there  is 
in  Christian  countries.  How  varied  and  un 
ceasing  is  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  Sunday- 
school  teachers  are  to  be  numbered  by  hundreds 
of  thousands.  How  great  is  the  number  of 
Christian  parents  that  make  their  children 
acquainted  with  the  Word  of  God  and  would 
fain  also  bring  them  to  the  Lord  as  a  Saviour. 
Yet  how  widespread  is  the  acknowledgment  of 


58     THE   FULL  BLESSING  OF  PENTECOST 

the  little  fruit  that  springs  from  all  this  work. 
How  many  there  are  who,  notwithstanding  all 
they  hear,  and  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  they 
are  by  no  means  indifferent,  are  yet  never  laid 
hold  of  with  power  and  helped  to  make  a 
definite  choice  of  salvation.  How  many  also 
there  are  who  from  youth  to  old  age  are  con 
versant  with  the  Word  of  God  but  are  never 
seized  by  it  in  the  depths  of  their  heart.  They 
find  it  good,  and  pleasing,  and  instructive  to 
attend  church,  but  they  have  never  felt  the 
power  of  the  Word  as  a  hammer,  and  a  sword, 
and  a  fire.  The  reason  why  they  are  so  little 
disturbed  is  that  the  preaching  they  listen  to 
is  so  little  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and 
of  power.  Alas  !  there  is  evidence  enough  that 
there  is  but  too  great  lack  of  the  full  blessing 
of  Pentecost. 

Does  the  blame  for  this  issue  attach  to 
preachers  or  to  congregations  ?  My  belief  is 
that  it  belongs  to  both  together.  The  preachers 
are  the  offspring  of  the  Christian  community. 
By  the  children  we  are  enabled  to  see  whether 
the  mother  is  healthy  or  not.  Preachers  are 
very  dependent  on  the  life  that  is  in  their 


HOW   LITTLE   IT   IS  ENJOYED  59 

congregations.  When  a  congregation  finds 
satisfaction  in  the  merely  acceptable  and 
instructive  preaching  of  a  young  minister,  it 
encourages  him  to  go  forward  on  the  same 
path,  whilst  he  should  rather  be  helped  by 
its  elder  or  more  advanced  believers  to  seek 
earnestly  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit. 
When  a  minister  does  not  lead  his  congrega 
tion,  either  in  public  worship  or  in  private 
prayer,  really  to  expect  everything  from  the 
Spirit  of  God,  then  he  is  tempted,  both  for 
himself  and  his  people,  to  put  confidence  in  the 
wisdom  of  man  and  the  work  of  man.  0  that 
we  could  lay  it  to  heart,  that,  in  the  midst 
of  all  our  lamentation  over  increasing  worldli- 
ness  of  spirit  and  widespread  indifference,  the 
great  cause  of  all  impenitence  is  the  lack  of 
the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost !  This  alone  gives 
power  from  on  high  which  can  break  down  and 
quicken  again  the  hard  hearts  of  men. 


60     THE   FULL  BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

V 

Think  how  little  preparedness  there  is  for  self- 
sacrifice  in  behalf  of  the  extension  of  the  Idngdom 
of  God. 

When  the  Lord  Jesus  at  His  ascension 
promised  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  was  as  a  power  in 
us  to  work  for  Him.  "  Ye  shall  receive  power, 
when  the  Holy  Spirit  is  come  upon  you,  and  ye 
shall  be  My  witnesses  unto  the  uttermost  parts  of 
the  earth."  l  The  aim  of  the  pentecostal  blessing 
from  the  King  in  heaven  was  simply  to  complete 
the  equipment  of  His  servants  for  His  work  as 
King  upon  the  earth.  No  sooner  did  the  Spirit 
descend  upon  them  than  they  began  to  witness 
for  Him.  The  Spirit  filled  them  with  the  desire 
and  the  impulse,  with  the  courage  and  the  power, 
to  brave  all  hostility  and  danger,  to  endure  all 
suffering  and  persecution,  if  only  they  could  suc 
ceed  in  making  Jesus  known  as  a  Saviour.  The 
Spirit  of  Pentecost  was  that  true  missionary 
Spirit  which  seeks  to  win  the  whole  world  for 
Jesus  Christ. 

It  is  often  said  in  our  days  that  the  missionary 
1  Acts  i.  8. 


61 

spirit  is  so  much  on  the  increase.  Yet  when  we 
reflect  carefully  how  little  effort  is  expended  on 
the  missionary  enterprise  in  comparison  with 
what  we  bestow  on  our  own  interests,  we  shall 
see  at  once  how  feebly  this  question  is  still 
kindled  in  our  hearts  :  "  What  more  can  I  still 
sacrifice  for  Jesus  ?  He  offered  Himself  for  me. 
I  will  offer  myself  wholly  for  Him  and  His 
work."  It  has  been  well  said  that  the  Lord 
measures  our  gifts  not  according  to  what  we 
give,  but  according  to  what  we  retain.  He  who 
stands  beside  the  treasury  and  observes  what  is 
cast  into  it  still  finds  many  who,  like  the  widow, 
cast  in  all  their  living.  But,  alas !  how  many 
are  there  who  with  their  five  shillings  or  their 
five  pounds  have  given  only  what  they  could 
never  miss  and  what  costs  them  little  or  no 
sacrifice.  How  far  different  would  it  be  if  the 
full  blessing  of  Pentecost  began  to  flow  in. 
How  would  the  hearts  of  men  burn  with  love 
to  Jesus,  and  out  of  very  joy  be  impelled  to 
give  everything  that  He  might  be  known  as  a 
Saviour  all  around,  and  that  all  might  know 
His  love. 

Brother,    contemplate    the    condition    of    the 


62     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

Church  on  earth,  of  the  Christian  community 
around  you,  of  your  own  heart,  and  then  say  if 
there  is  not  grave  reason  for  the  cry  :  "  The  full 
blessing  of  Pentecost :  how  little  is  it  known." 
Ponder  the  present  lack  of  sanctification,  of 
separation  from  the  world,  of  steadfastness 
amongst  professing  Christians,  of  conversions 
amongst  the  unsaved,  and  of  self-sacrifice  for 
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  let  the  sad  reality 
deepen  in  your  soul  the  conviction  that  the 
Church  is  at  present  suffering  from  one  great 
evil,  and  that  this  is  her  lack  of  the  blessing 
of  Pentecost.  There  can  be  no  healing  of  her 
breaches,  no  restoration  from  her  fall,  no  renew 
ing  of  her  power,  except  by  this  one  remedy — 
namely,  her  being  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Let  us  then  never  cease  to  speak,  think,  mourn, 
and  pray  over  this  trouble  until  this  "  one  thing 
needful "  becomes  the  one  thing  that  occupies 
our  hearts.  The  restoration  is  not  easy.  It 
will  perhaps  not  come  all  at  once :  it  may  not 
come  speedily.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  required 
every  day  with  Jesus  for  three  long  years  to 
prepare  them  for  it.  Let  us  not  be  unduly 
discouraged  if  the  transformation  we  long  for 


HOW  LITTLE   IT  IS   ENJOYED  63 

does  not  take  place  immediately.  Let  us  feel 
the  need  and  lay  it  to  heart.  Let  us  continue 
instant  in  prayer.  Let  us  stand  fast  in  faith. 
The  blessing  of  Pentecost  is  the  birthright  of 
the  Church,  the  pledge  of  our  inheritance,  some 
thing  that  belongs  to  us  here  on  the  earth. 
Faith  can  never  be  put  to  shame.  Cleaving  to 
Jesus  with  purpose  of  heart  can  never  be  in 
vain.  The  hour  will  surely  come  when,  if  we 
believe  perseveringly  in  Him,  out  of  our  hearts 
too  will  flow  rivers  of  living  water.  Amen. 


THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF 
PENTECOST 


t!je  iSlcssittg  is  fjmtimli 


'  '  Then  said  Jesus  unto  His  disciples  :  If  any  man  would 
come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross, 
and  follow  Me.  For  whosoever  would  save  his  life  shall  lose 
it  •.  and  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life  for  My  sake  shall  find 
it."—  MATT.  xvi.  24,  25. 

FT!  HERE  are  many  who  seek  the  full  blessing 
of  Pentecost  long  and  earnestly  and  yet 
do  not  find  it.  Often  the  question  is  put  as  to 
what  may  be  the  cause  of  this  failure.  To  this 
inquiry  more  than  one  answer  may  be  given. 
Sometimes  the  solution  of  the  problem  points 
in  the  direction  of  one  or  another  sin  which  is 
still  permitted.  Woiidliness,  lovelessness,  lack 
of  humility,  ignorance  of  the  secret  of  walking 

04 


HOW   THE   BLESSING   IS   HINDERED       65 

in  the  way  of  faith — these,  and  indeed  many 
more  causes,  may  also  be  often  mentioned  with 
justice.  There  are,  however,  many  people  who 
think  that  they  have  come  to  the  Lord  with 
what  of  these  sources  of  failure  still  remains  in 
them,  and  have  sincerely  confessed  them  and  put 
them  away,  and  yet  complain  that  the  blessing 
does  not  come.  For  all  such  it  is  particularly 
necessary  to  point  out  that  there  remains  still 
one  great  hindrance — namely,  the  root  from  which 
all  other  hindrances  have  their  beginning.  This 
root  is  nothing  else  than  our  individual  self,  the 
hidden  life  of  Self  with  its  varied  forms  of  self- 
seeking,  self-pleasing,  self-confidence,  and  self- 
satisfaction.  The  more  earnestly  anyone  strives 
to  obtain  the  blessing  and  would  fain  know  what 
prevents  him,  the  more  certainly  will  he  be  led 
to  the  discovery  that  it  is  here  the  great  evil 
lies.  He  himself  is  his  worst  foe :  he  must  be 
liberated  from  himself ;  the  self-life  to  which  he 
clings  must  be  utterly  lost.  Only  then  can  the 
life  of  God  entirely  fill  him. 

That  is  what  is  taught  us  in  the  words  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  Peter.     Peter  had  uttered  such  a 
glorious  confession  of  his  Lord,  that  Jesus  said 
5 


GG     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

to  him :  "  Blessed  art  them,  Simon  Bar-Jonah : 
for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto 
thee,  but  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  But 
when  the  Lord  began  to  speak  of  His  death  by 
crucifixion,  the  self-same  Peter  was  seduced  by 
Satan  to  say :  "  Be  it  far  from  Thee,  Lord :  this 
shall  never  be  unto  Thee."  1  Thereupon  the  Lord 
said  to  him  that  not  only  must  He  Himself  lay 
down  His  life,  but  that  this  same  sacrifice  was 
to  be  made  by  every  disciple.  Every  disciple 
must  deny  himself  and  take  up  his  cross  in  order 
that  he  himself  may  be  crucified  and  put  to 
death  on  it.  He  that  would  fain  save  his  life 
will  lose  it;  and  he  that  is  prepared  to  lose 
his  life  for  Christ's  sake  will  find  it. 

You  see,  then,  what  the  Lord  here  teaches  and 
requires.  Peter  had  learned  through  the  Father 
to  know  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God,  but  he  did 
not  yet  know  Him  as  the  Crucified  One.  Of 
the  absolute  necessity  of  the  Cross,  and  death  on 
the  Cross,  he  as  yet  knew  nothing.  It  may  be  so 
with  the  Christian.  He  knows  the  Lord  Jesus 
as  his  Saviour ;  he  desires  to  know  Him  better, 
yea,  fully ;  but  he  does  not  yet  understand  that 

1  Mutt.  xvi.  17,  22, 


HOW   THE   BLESSING   IS   HINDERED      67 

for  this  end  it  is  necessary  that  he  must  have  a 
deeper  discernment  of  the  death  of  the  Cross 
as  a  death  which  he  himself  must  die ;  that  he 
must  actually  deny,  and  hate,  and  lose  his  life — 
his  whole  life  and  being  in  the  world — ere  he 
can  receive  the  full  life  of  God. 

This  requirement  is  hard  and  difficult.  And 
why  is  this  so  ?  Why  should  a  Christian  be 
called  upon  always  to  deny  himself,  his  own 
feeling,  and  will,  and  pleasure  ?  Why  must  he 
part  with  his  life — that  life  to  maintain  which 
a  man  is  prepared  to  make  any  sacrifice  ?  Why 
should  a  man  hate  and  lose  his  life  ?  The 
answer  is  very  simple.  It  is  because  that  life 
is  so  completely  under  the  power  of  sin  end 
death  that  it  has  to  be  utterly  denied  and 
sacrificed.  The  self-life  must  be  wholly  taken 
away  to  make  room  for  the  life  of  God.  He 
that  would  have  the  full,  the  overflowing  life  of 
God,  must  utterly  deny  and  lose  his  own  life. 

You  see  it  now,  do  you  not  ?  There  is  only 
one  great  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  the  full 
blessing  of  Pentecost.  It  lies  in  the  fact  that 
two  diverse  things  cannot  at  one  and  the  same 
time  occupy  the  very  same  place.  Your  own 


68     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

life  and  the  life  of  God  cannot  fill  the  heart  at 
the  same  time.  Your  life  hinders  the  entrance 
of  the  life  of  God.  When  your  own  life  is  cast 
out,  the  life  of  God  will  fill  you.  So  long  as  / 
myself  am  still  something,  Jesus  Himself  can 
not  be  everything.  My  life  must  be  expelled ; 
then  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  will  flow  in.  Let  every 
seeker  of  the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost  accept 
this  principle  and  hold  it  fast.  The  subject  is 
of  such  importance  that  I  should  like  to  make 
it  still  clearer  by  pointing  out  the  chief  lessons 
which  these  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus  teach  us. 

I 

Our  life,  our  individual  self,  is  entirely  and 
completely  under  the  power  of  sin. 

When  God  created  the  angels  and  man,  He 
gave  them  a  separate  personality,  a  power  over 
themselves,  with  the  intention  that  they  should 
of  their  own  free  will  present  and  offer  up  that 
life,  that  individual  self,  to  Him,  in  order  that 
He  in  turn  might  fill  them  with  His  life  and 
His  glory.  This  was  to  be  the  highest  blessed 
ness  of  the  creature.  It  was  to  be  a  vessel 
filled  with  the  life  and  the  perfection  of  God. 


HOW    THE   BLESSING   IS   HINDERED      69 

The  whole  Fall  alike  of  angels  and  of  inert 
consisted  of  nothing  but  the  perversion  of  their 
life,  their  will,  their  personality,  away  from  God, 
in  order  to  please  themselves.  This  self-exaltation 
was  the  pride  that  changed  the  angels  into 
demons  and  cast  them  out  of  heaven  into  hell. 
This  pride  was  the  infernal  poison  that  the 
serpent  breathed  into  the  ear  and  the  heart  of 
Eve.  Man  turned  himself  away  from  God  to 
find  delight  in  himself  and  the  world.  His 
life,  his  whole  individuality,  was  perverted  and 
withdrawn  from  the  control  of  God  that  he 
might  seek  and  serve  himself.  It  was  no  wonder 
that  Jesus  said :  "  You  must  hate,  you  must 
utterly  lose  that  life,  ere  the  full  life  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  can  be  yours.  To  the  minutest 
details,  always  and  in  everything,  you  must  deny 
that  self -life  ;  otherwise  the  life  of  God  cannot 
possibly  fill  you.  He  that  will  come  after  Me, 
let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross, 
and  follow  ME."  l 

A  deep  conviction  of  the  entire  corruption  of 
our  nature,  manifesting  itself  in  the  fact  that 
even  the  Christian  still  pleases  himself  in  many 

1  Matt.  .\vi.  2-i. 


70     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

things,  is  an  experience  that  is  still  lacking  in 
many  people.  It  appears  to  them  both  strange 
and  harsh,  when  we  say  that  in  nothing  is  the 
Christian  free  to  follow  his  own  feeling,  that 
self-denial  is  a  requirement  that  must  prevail  in 
every  sphere  of  life  and  without  any  exceptions. 
The  Lord  has  never  withdrawn  His  words  :  "  He 
that  forsaketh  not  all  that  he  hath  cannot  be  My 
disciple,  cannot  walk  with  Me,  cannot  be  .is  I."  1 

II 

Our  own  life  must  be  utterly  cast  aside  to  make 
full  room  for  the  life  of  God. 

At  the  time  of  his  conversion  the  young 
Christian  has  but  little  understanding  of  this 
requirement.  He  receives  the  seed  of  the  new 
life  into  his  heart  while  the  natural  life  is  still 
strong.  It  was  still  thus  with  Peter  when  the 
Lord  addressed  to  him  the  words  that  have 
been  quoted.  He  was  a  disciple,  but,  alas  !  how 
defective  and  incomplete.  When  his  Lord  was 
to  die,  instead  of  denying  himself,  he  denied 
his  Lord.  But  that  grievous  failure  brought 
him  at  last  to  that  despair  of  himself  which 
1  Luke  xiv.  33. 


HOW   THE   BLESSING   IS   HINDERED       71 

caused  him  to  go  out  and  weep  bitterly,  and  so 
prepared  him  for  losing  entirely  his  own  life  and 
for  being  wholly  filled  with  the  life  of  Jesus. 

This,  accordingly,  is  the  point  to  which  we 
must  all  in  the  long-run  come.  So  long  as 
a  Christian  imagines  that  in  some  things — for 
example,  in  his  eating  and  drinking,  in  the 
spending  of  his  time  or  money,  in  his  think 
ing  and  speaking  about  others — he  has  still  the 
right  and  the  liberty  to  follow  his  own  wishes,  to 
please  himself,  to  maintain  his  own  life,  he  cannot 
possibly  attain  to  the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost. 

My  brethren,  it  is  an  unspeakably  holy  and 
glorious  thing  that  a  man  can  be  filled  with 
the  Spirit  of  God.  It  demands  inevitably  that 
the  present  occupant  and  governor  of  the  heart, 
our  individual  self,  shall  himself  be  cast  out,  and 
that  everything  within  it,  everything  wholly  and 
entirely,  shall  be  surrendered  into  the  hands  of 
the  new  Inhabitant,  the  Spirit  of  God.  Would 
that  we  could  understand  that  the  joy  and  power 
of  being  filled  with  the  Spirit  will  come  of 
themselves  when  once  we  comply  with  the  first 
and  principal  condition — namely,  that  He  alone 
shall  be  acknowledged  as  our  Life  and  our  Leader. 


72     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

III 

It  is  once  for  all  impossible  for  the  Christian  to 
bring  about  this  great  transformation  in  himself. 

At  no  stage  of  our  spiritual  career  are  the 
power  and  the  deceitfulness  of  our  individual 
self  and  the  self-life  more  manifest  than  in  the 
attempt  to  grasp  the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost. 
Many  people  endeavour  to  appropriate  this 
blessing,  and  that  by  a  great  variety  of  efforts. 
They  do  not  succeed,  and  they  are  not  able 
to  discover  the  reason  why.  They  forget  that 
Self-will  can  never  cast  out  Self-will :  that 
Self  can  never  really  mortify  itself.  Happy 
is  the  man  who  is  brought  up  to  the  point  of 
acknowledging  his  helplessness  and  impotence. 
He  will  here  specially  need  to  deny  himself,  and 
so  cease  to  expect  anything  from  his  own  life 
and  strength,  but  will  rather  lay  himself  down 
in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  as  one  who  is  alike 
impotent  and  dead,  that  he  may  really  receive 
the  blessing  from  Him. 

It  was  not  Peter  that  prepared  himself  for 
the  day  of  Pentecost  or  brought  down  the 
Pentecostal  blessing  from  heaven ;  it  was  his 


HOW   THE   BLESSING   IS   HINDERED       73 

Lord  that  did  all  this  for  him.  His  part  was 
to  despair  of  himself  and  yield  himself  to  his 
Lord  to  accomplish  in  him  what  He  had 
promised.  Hence  also  it  is  your  part,  be 
liever,  while  yielding  obedience  to  this  call,  to 
deny  yourself,  and  to  lose  your  own  life,  and  in 
presence  of  the  Lord  to  sink  down  in  your 
nothingness  and  impotence.  Accustom  yourself 
to  set  your  heart  before  Him  in  deep  humility, 
and  silent  patience,  and  childlike  submission. 
The  humility  that  is  prepared  to  be  nothing, 
the  patience  that  will  wait  for  Him  and  His 
time,  the  submission  that  will  yield  itself  wholly 
that  He  may  do  what  seemeth  Him  good,  is  all 
that  you  can  do  to  show  that  you  are  ready  to 
lose  your  life.  Jesus  summons  you  to  follow 
Him.  Eemember  how  He  first  sacrificed  His 
will,  and  when  He  had  laid  down  His  life  into 
the  hands  of  the  Father,  and  went  down  into 
the  grave,  waited  till  God  raised  Him  again  to 
life.  Be  you  in  like  manner  ready  to  lay  down 
your  life  in  weakness,  and  be  assured  that  God 
will  raise  it  up  again  in  power  with  the  fulness  of 
the  Spirit.  Have  done  with  the  strength  of  mere 
personal  efforts ;  abandon  the  dominion  of  your 


74     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

own  power  of  apprehension.     "  Not   by    might, 
nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."  l 

V 

IV 

It  is  the  surrender  of  faith  to  Jesus  in  His 
self-humiliation  and  death  that  opens  the  way  to 
the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost. 

You  of  course  say  at  once  :  "  Who  is  sufficient 
for  these  things  ?  Who  can  sacrifice  everything 
and  die  and  lay  down  his  life  utterly  as  Jesus 
did  ?  To  man  such  a  surrender  is  impossible." 
My  reply  is  that  it  is  indeed  so.  But  "  with 
God  all  things  are  possible."  You  cannot 
literally  follow  Jesus,  and  like  Him  go  down 
into  death  and  the  grave.  That  ever  remains 
beyond  your  power.  Never  will  our  individual 
self  yield  itself  up  to  death  or  rest  quietly  in 
the  grave.  But  hear  the  glad  tidings.  In 
Christ  you  have  died  and  have  been  buried. 
The  power  of  His  dying,  of  His  willing  surrender 
of  His  spirit  into  the  hands  of  the  Father,  of 
His  silent  resting  in  the  grave,  works  in  you. 
In  faith  in  this  working,  however  little  you 
may  understand  it — in  faith  in  this  working  in 
1  Zech.  iv.  G. 


HOW   THE   BLESSING   IS   HINDERED      75 

you  of  the  spirit  and  the  power  of  the  deatli 
and  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  give  up  yourself 
willingly  to  lose  your  life. 

For  this  end,  begin  to  regard  the  denying  of 
yourself  as  the  first  and  most  necessary  work  of 
every  day.  Accept  the  message  I  bring  you. 
The  great  hindrance  in  the  way  of  the  life  of 
Pentecost  is  the  self-life.  Believe  in  the  sinful- 
ness,  the  detestableness,  of  that  life :  not  on 
account  of  its  gross  external  sins,  but  because 
it  sets  itself  in  the  place  of  God ;  seeks,  and 
pleases,  and  honours  itself  more  than  God. 
Exercise  yourself  in  what  Jesus  lays  upon  you, 
and  hate  your  own  life  as  your  own  worst  foe 
and  as  the  foe  of  God.  Begin  to  see  what  the 
full  blessing  is  that  Jesus  has  prepared  for  you 
and  which  He  bestowed  at  Pentecost — namely, 
His  own  life,  His  own  indwelling ;  and  count 
nothing  too  precious  or  too  costly  to  give  as 
an  exchange  for  this  pearl  of  great  price. 

Brother,  are  you  really  in  earnest  about 
having  the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost  and  being 
filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  Is  it  your  great 
desire  to  be  made  to  know  what  hinders  you 


76     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

from  obtaining  it  ?  Take  the  word  of  our  Lord 
and  keep  it  in  your  heart.  Take  it  and  go 
with  it  to  Himself.  He  is  able  to  make  you 
understand,  and  consider,  and  experience  it.  It 
is  He  who  baptizes  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Let 
everything  in  you  that  belongs  to  self  be 
sacrificed  to  Him,  and  be  counted  as  loss,  and 
cast  away  to  give  place  to  Himself.  He  who 
by  His  death  obtained  the  Spirit,  who  prepared 
Peter  for  Pentecost  in  the  fellowship  of  His 
suffering,  has  your  guidance  in  His  hands. 
Trust,  0  trust  Him,  your  own  Jesus.  He 
baptizes  with  the  Spirit,  beyond  doubt  or 
question :  deny  yourself,  and  follow  Him ;  lose 
your  own  life  and  find  His.  Let  Him  impart 
Himself  in  the  place  you  have  hitherto  retained 
for  yourself.  From  Him  there  will  flow  rivers 
of  living  water.  Amen. 


THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF 
PENTECOST 


VI 


it  is  otitauut)  fog  its 


"  Be  not  drunken  with  wine,  wherein  is  riot,  but  be  filled 
with  the  Spirit."—  EPH.  v.  18. 

fTlHE  command  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  is 
just  as  peremptory  as  the  prohibition  not 
to  be  drunken  with  wine.  As  truly  as  we  are 
not  at  liberty  to  be  guilty  of  the  vice  are  we 
bound  not  to  be  disobedient  to  the  positive  in 
junction.  The  same  God  who  calls  upon,  us  to 
live  in  sobriety  urges  us  with  equal  earnestness 
to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit.  His  command  is 
tantamount  to  a  promise  :  a  sure  pledge  that 
He  Himself  will  give  what  He  would  fain  see 
us  possess.  With  full  confidence  in  this  fact, 

77 


78     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

let  us  in  all  simplicity  ask  for  the  way  iu  which 
in  this  respect  we  should  live  in  the  will  of  God, 
as  those  who  would  be  filled  with  the  Spirit.  I 
desire  now  to  suggest  to  those  who  really  long 
for  this  blessing  some  directions  whereby  they 
may  obtain  what  is  prepared  for  them. 

I 

The  full  blessing  of  Pentecost  is  the  inheritance 
of  all  the  children  of  God. 

This  is  the  first  principle  we  have  to  enun 
ciate.  There  are  many  of  God's  children  who  do 
not  fully  believe  this.  They  imagine  that  the  day 
of  Pentecost  was  only  the  birthday  feast  of  the 
Church,  and  that  it  was  thus  a  time  of  blessing 
and  of  power  which  was  not  destined  to  endure. 
They  do  not  reflect  on  the  command  to  be  filled 
with  the  Spirit.  The  result  is  that  they  never 
with  earnestness  seek  to  receive  the  full  blessing. 
They  take  their  ease  and  remain  content  with 
the  weak  and  defective  life  in  which  the  Church 
of  the  day  exists. 

Is  not  this  the  case  with  you,  my  reader  ? 
Far  be  it  from  us.  In  order  to  carry  on  her 
work  in  the  world,  the  Church  requires  the  full 


HOW   IT   IS   OBTAINED   BY   US  79 

blessing.  To  please  your  Lord  and  to  live  a 
life  of  holiness,  and  joy,  and  power,  you  too 
have  need  of  it.  To  manifest  His  presence,  and 
indwelling,  and  glory  in  you,  Jesus  counts  it 
necessary  that  you  should  be  filled  with  the 
Spirit.  Believe  firmly  that  the  full  blessing  of 
Pentecost  is  a  sacred  reality.  A  child  of  God 
may  and  must  have  it.  Take  time  to  con 
template  it  and  to  suffer  yourself  to  be  fully 
possessed  by  the  thought  of  its  glorious  signi 
ficance  and  power.  A  firm  confidence  that  the 
blessing  is  actually  within  our  reach  is  the  first 
step  towards  obtaining  it  and  a  powerful  impulse 
in  the  pursuit. 

II 

/  do  not  as  yet  have  this  blessing. 

This  is  the  second  step  towards  it.  You  may 
perhaps  put  the  question  why  it  should  be 
necessary  to  cherish  this  conviction.  I  will 
tell  you  briefly  the  reasons  why  I  consider  it 
of  importance. 

The  first  is  that  there  are  many  Christians 
who  think  that  they  already  have  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  that  all  they  require  is  to  be  more 
faithful  in  the  endeavour  to  know  and  to  obey 


80     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

Him.  They  think  that  they  are  already  stand 
ing  in  God's  grace,  and  that  they  only  need  to 
make  a  better  use  of  the  life  they  possess.  They 
imagine  that  they  have  all  that  is  necessary  for 
continued  growth.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  rny 
deep  conviction  that  such  souls  are  in  a  sickly 
state  and  that  they  have  need  of  a  healing  as 
divine  and  effective  as  that  which  the  blind 
and  lame  received  from  the  Lord  on  earth. 
Accordingly,  just  as  the  first  condition  of  nay 
recovery  from  disease  is  the  knowledge  that  I 
am  sick,  so  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  them  to 
discover  and  acknowledge  that  they  do  not  live 
the  life  of  Pentecost,  that  they  do  not  walk  in 
the  fulness  and  the  joy  of  the  Spirit,  that  they 
do  not  possess  the  full  blessing  which  is  indis 
pensable  for  them  if  they  are  to  please  God  in 
everything. 

Once  this  first  conviction  is  made  thoroughly 
clear  to  them,  they  will  be  prepared  for  another 
consideration  —  namely,  that  they  ought  to 
acknowledge  the  guiltiness  of  their  condition. 
They  ought  to  see  that  if  they  have  not  yet 
rendered  obedience  to  the  command  to  "  be  filled 
with  the  Spirit,"  this  defect  is  to  be  ascribed  to 


HOW   IT   IS   OBTAINED   BY   US  81 

sluggishness,  and  self-satisfaction,  and  unbelief. 
They  should  be  induced  to  acknowledge  with 
shame  that  they  have  despised  what  God  had 
prepared  for  them.  When  once  the  confession 
that  they  have  not  yet  received  the  full  blessing  is 
deeply  rooted  in  them,  there  will  spring  from  it  a 
stronger  impulse  to  attain  to  it.  Take,  then,  this 
thought  and  let  it  work  in  you  with  power:  "No:  it 
is  true  that  I  do  not  as  yet  have  the  full  blessing." 

Ill 

The  thought  that  will  come  next  in  succession 
is  :  This  blessing  is  for  me. 

I  have  spoken  of  those  who  suppose  that  the 
full  blessing  of  Pentecost  was  only  for  the  first 
Christian  community.  There  are  others  who 
are  willing  enough  to  acknowledge  that  it  was 
intended  also  for  the  Church  of  later  times  but 
still  think  that  all  are  not  entitled  to  expect  it. 
Eminent  believers,  the  leaders  of  the  Church, 
and  such  as  have  much  leisure  and  abundant 
opportunity  to  occupy  their  minds  with  such 
attainments,  may  well  cherish  the  hope  of 
receiving  this  blessing,  but  it  is  not  to  be 
expected  by  ordinary  members  of  the  churches. 


82     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

Any  one  of  these  might  quite  reasonably  say : 
"  My  unfavourable  circumstances,  my  unfortu 
nate  disposition,  my  lack  of  real  ability,  and 
similar  difficulties,  make  it  impossible  for  me  to 
realise  this  ideal.  God  will  not  expect  this  at 
my  hands :  He  has  not  destined  me  to  obtain  it." 
0  soul,  do  not  permit  yourself  to  be  deceived 
by  such  shallow  views.  All  the  members 
of  a  body,  even  to  the  very  least,  must  be 
healthy  before  the  body  as  a  whole  can  be 
healthy.  The  indwelling,  the  fulness  of  the 
Spirit,  is  nothing  but  the  entire  healthfulness 
of  the  body  of  Christ.  Be  assured  that,  even 
though  you  are  actually  the  most  insignificant 
member  of  it,  the  blessing  is  for  you.  In  your 
own  little  measure  you  can  at  least  be  full.  In 
this  respect  the  Father  makes  no  exceptions.  A 
great  distinction  doubtless  prevails  in  point  of 
gifts,  and  calling,  and  circumstances ;  but  there 
can  be  no  distinction  in  the  love  of  the  Father  and 
His  desire  to  see  every  one  of  His  children  in  full 
health  and  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  Spirit  of 
adoption.  Learn,  then,  to  express  and  to  repeat 
over  again  the  conviction  :  "  This  blessing  is  for  me. 
My  Father  desires  to  have  me  that  He  may  fill 


HOW  IT  IS   OBTAINED  BY  US  83 

me  with  His  Spirit.  The  blessing  lies  before 
me,  to  be  taken  with  my  full  consent.  I  will  no 
longer  despise  by  unbelief  what  falls  to  me  as 
my  birthright.  With  my  whole  heart  I  will  say  : 
'  This  blessing  is  for  me.'  " 

IV 

/  cannot  grasp  this  blessing  in  my  own  power. 

Whenever  a  Christian  begins  to  strive  for  this 
blessing,  he  generally  makes  a  variety  of  efforts 
to  reach  after  the  faith,  and  obedience,  and 
humility,  and  submission  which  are  the  con 
ditions  of  obtaining  it.  Then,  when  he  does 
not  succeed,  he  is  tempted  to  blame  himself, 
and  if  he  does  not  become  utterly  discouraged, 
he  rouses  himself  to  still  stronger  effort  and 
greater  zeal.  All  this  struggling  is  not 
without  its  value  and  its  use.  It  has  its  use, 
however,  in  other  ways  than  are  commonly 
anticipated.  It  does  the  very  work  that  the 
law  does — that  is  to  say,  it  brings  us  to  the 
knowledge  of  our  entire  impotence ;  it  leads 
us  to  that  despair  of  ourselves  in  which  we 
become  willing  to  give  to  God  the  place  that 
belongs  to  Him.  This  lesson  is  entirely  indis- 


84     THE   FULL  BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

pensable.  "  I  can  neither  bestow  this  blessing 
on  myself  nor  take  it.  It  is  God  alone  that 
must  work  it  in  me." 

The  blessing  of  Pentecost  is  a  supernatural 
gift,  a  wonderful  act  of  God  in  the  soul. 
The  life  of  God  in  every  soul  is  just  as  truly 
a  work  of  God  as  when  that  life  was  first 
manifested  in  Jesus  Christ.  A  Christian  can 
do  as  little  to  bring  the  full  life  of  the 
Spirit  to  fruition  in  his  soul  as  the  Virgin 
Mary  did  to  conceive  her  supernatural  child.1 
Like  her,  he  can  only  receive  it  as  the  gift  of 
God.  The  impartation  of  this  heavenly  bless 
ing  is  as  entirely  an  act  of  God  as  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead  was  His 
divine  work.  As  Christ  Jesus  had  wholly  and 
entirely  to  go  down  unto  death,  and  lay  aside 
utterly  the  life  He  had,  in  order  to  receive  a 
new  life  from  God,  so  must  the  believer  abandon 
all  power  and  hope  of  his  own  to  receive  this 
full  blessing  as  a  free  gift  of  divine  Omnipotence. 
This  acknowledgment  of  our  utter  impotence, 
this  descent  into  true  self-despair,  is  indispens 
able  if  we  would  enjoy  this  supreme  blessing. 
1  Luke  i.  38. 


HOW   IT   IS   OBTAINED   BY   US  85 

V 

/  must  have  this  blessing  at  any  cost. 

To  get  possession  of  the  pearl  of  great  price, 
the  merchant  man  had  to  sell  all  that  he  had. 
The  full  blessing  of  Pentecost  is  to  be  obtained 
at  no  smaller  price.  He  that  would  have  it 
must  sell  all,  must  forsake  all :  sin  to  its 
smallest  item,  the  love  of  the  world  in  its  most 
innocent  forms,  self-will  in  its  simplest  and 
most  natural  expressions,  every  faculty  of  our 
nature,  every  moment  of  our  life,  every  pleasure 
that  feeds  our  self-complacency,  every  exercise 
of  our  body,  soul,  and  spirit — all  must  be 
surrendered  to  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
In  nothing  can  independent  control  or  in 
dependent  force  have  a  place :  everything — 
everything,  I  say — must  be  under  the  leading 
of  the  Spirit.  One  must  indeed  say :  "  Cost 
what  it  may,  I  am  determined  to  have  this 
blessing."  Only  the  vessel  that  is  utterly 
empty  of  everything  can  be  filled  and  overflow 
with  this  living  water. 

We  know  that  there  is  oftentimes  a  great 
gulf  betwixt  the  will  and  the  deed.  Even 


86     THE   FULL  BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

when  God  has  wrought  the  willing,  the  doing 
does  not  always  come  at  once.  But  it  will 
come  wherever  a  man  surrenders  himself  to 
the  will  which  God  has  wrought,  and  openly 
expresses  his  consent  in  the  presence  of  God. 
This,  accordingly,  is  what  must  be  done  by  the 
soul  who  intends  to  be  sincerely  ready  to  part 
with  everything,  even  though  he  feels  that  he 
has  no  power  to  accomplish  it.  The  selling 
price  is  not  always  paid  at  the  moment ; 
nevertheless,  the  purchaser  may  become  the 
possessor  as  soon  as  the  sale  is  concluded  and 
security  is  given  for  the  payment.  0  my 
brother,  this  very  day  speak  the  word :  "  Cost 
what  it  may,  I  will  have  this  blessing."  Jesus 
is  surety  that  you  will  have  power  to  abandon 
everything.  Express  your  decision  in  the 
presence  of  God  with  confidence  and  perse 
verance.  Repeat  it  before  your  own  conscience 
and  say :  "  I  am  a  purchaser  of  the  pearl  of 
great  price :  I  have  offered  everything  to 
obtain  the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost.  I  have 
said  to  God  that  I  must,  I  will  have  it.  By 
this  decision  I  abide.  I  must,  I  will  have  it." 


HOW   IT   IS   OBTAINED   BY   US  87 

VI 

In  faith  that  God  accepts  my  surrender  and 
bestows  this  blessing  upon  me,  I  appropriate  it  for 
myself. 

There  is  a  great  difference  betwixt  the 
appropriation  of  a  blessing  by  faith  and  the 
actual  experience  of  it.  It  is  because  Christians 
do  not  understand  this  that  they  often  become 
discouraged,  when  they  do  not  at  once  experi 
ence  the  feeling  and  the  enjoyment  of  what  is 
promised  them.  Whenever  in  response  to  the 
offer  of  Christ  you  have  said  that  you  forsake 
all,  and  count  it  but  loss  for  the  full  blessing 
of  Pentecost,  then  from  that  moment  you  have 
to  believe  that  He  receives  your  offer  and  that 
He  bestows  upon  you  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit. 
Yet  it  may  easily  be  that  you  cannot  at  that 
crisis  trace  any  marked  change  in  your 
experience.  It  is  as  if  everything  in  you 
remained  in  its  old  condition.  Now,  however, 
is  just  the  very  time  to  persevere  in  faith. 
Learn  by  faith  to  be  as  sure  as  if  you  had  seen 
it  written  in  heaven  that  God  has  accepted 
your  surrender  of  everything  as  a  certain  and 


88     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

completed  transaction.  In  this  faith  look  upon 
yourself  as  a  man  who  is  known  to  God  as  one 
that  has  sold  everything  to  obtain  this  heavenly 
treasure.  Believe  that  God  has  in  heaven 
bestowed  upon  you  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit. 
In  this  faith  regard  yourself  as  on  the  way  to 
know  the  full  blessing  also  in  feeling  and 
experience.  Believe  that  God  will  order  this 
blessing  to  break  forth  and  be  revealed  in  you. 
In  this  faith  let  your  life  be  a  life  of  joyful 
thanksgiving  and  expectation.  God  will  not  dis 
appoint  you. 

VII 

Now  I  count  upon  God  and  wait  upon  Him  to 
reveal  truly  within  me  the  blessing  which  He  has 
bestowed  upon  me. 

Faith  must  lead  me  to  the  actual  inheritance 
of  the  promise,  to  the  experience  and  enjoyment 
of  it.  Do  not  rest  content  with  a  belief  that 
does  not  lead  to  experience.  Rest  in  God  by 
faith  in  the  full  assurance  that  He  can  make 
Himself  known  to  you  in  a  manner  that  is  truly 
divine.  At  times  the  whole  process  may  appear 
to  you  too  great  and  too  wonderful,  and  really 


HOW   IT   IS   OBTAINED   BY   US  89 

impossible.  Be  not  afraid.  The  more  clearly 
you  discern  the  amazing  elements  in  the  fact 
that  you  on  your  part  have  said  to  the  Eternal 
Holy  God  that  He  on  His  part  may  have  you  to 
make  you  full  of  His  Holy  Spirit  here  on  earth, 
the  more  shall  you  feel  what  a  miracle  of  the 
grace  of  God  it  must  be.  There  may  be  in  you 
things  you  are  not  aware  of,  which  hinder  the 
breaking  forth  of  the  blessing.  God  is  bent  on 
putting  them  aside.  Let  them  be  consumed  in 
the  fire  of  strong  burning  desire.  Let  them,  be 
annihilated  in  the  flame  of  God's  countenance 
and  His  love.  Let  your  expectation  be  fixed 
upon  the  Lord  your  God.  He  who  in  a  frail 
woman  revealed  the  divine  life  in  the  Infant 
Jesus,  He  that  raised  up  the  dead  Jesus  to 
the  life  of  glory,  He  can  —  He  will,  indeed 
—  just  as  miraculously  bring  this  heavenly 
blessing  to  fruition  in  you,  so  that  you  may 
be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  that  you 
may  know,  not  by  reasoning  but  by  experi 
ence,  that  you  have  actually  received  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

Beloved  brother,   thou   who   readest   all    this, 


90     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

give  answer,  I  entreat  thee,  to  the  summons  I 
bring  thee.  God  promises,  God  desires  to  make 
you  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  would  fain 
have  your  whole  nature  and  life  under  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  asks  if  you  on 
your  part  are  willing,  if  you  really  desire  to 
have  it.  Pray  let  there  be  in  your  answer  no 
uncertain  sound,  but  let  all  that  is  within  you 
cry  out :  "  Yea,  Lord,  with  all  my  heart."  Let 
this  promise  of  your  God  become  the  chief 
element  in  your  life,  the  most  precious,  the  chief, 
the  only  thing  you  seek.  Do  not  be  content  to 
think  and  pray  over  it,  but  this  very  day  enter 
into  a  transaction  and  a  compact  with  God  that 
will  admit  of  no  doubt  concerning  the  choice 
you  have  made. 

When  once  you  have  made  this  choice,  cleave 
firmly  to  what  is  the  chief  element  in  it — namely, 
the  faith  that  expects  this  blessing  as  a  miracle 
of  divine  Omnipotence.  The  more  earnestly  you 
exercise  that  faith,  the  more  will  it  teach  you 
that  your  heart  must  be  entirely  emptied  of 
everything  and  set  free  from  every  fetter,  to  be 
filled  with  the  Spirit,  to  be  occupied  by  the 
indwelling  Christ.  Contemplate  yourself  in 


HOW   IT   IS   OBTAINED   BY   US  91 

faith  as  a  man  betwixt  whom  and  God  a  firm 
compact  has  been  made  that  you  must  receive 
the  full  blessing.  You  may  take  it  for  granted 
that  it  will  surely  come.  Amen. 


THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF 
PENTECOST 


VII 

it  mau  be  kept 


"But  ye,  praying  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  keep  yourselves  in 
the  love  of  God.  .  .  .  Now  unto  Him  who  is  able  to  guard 
you  from  stumbling,  to  the  only  God  our  Saviour,  be  glory 
for  evermore.  Amen."  —  JCDE  21,  24. 

/"^AN  one  who  has  the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost 
lose  it  again  ?  Yes  :  undoubtedly.  God 
does  not  bestow  this  boon  with  such  constraint 
that  a  man  retains  it  whether  he  will  or  not. 
No  :  this  blessing  also  is  intrusted  to  him  as  a 
talent  which  must  be  used  ;  and  only  by  use 
does  it  become  secure  and  win  success.  Just  as 
the  Lord  Jesus  after  He  was  baptized  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  had  to  be  perfected  by  obedience 
and  submission  to  the  leading  of  the  Spirit,  so 

92 


HOW   IT   MAY   BE   KEPT  93 

the  Christian  who  has  received  the  blessing  of 
Pentecost  has  to  see  to  it  that  he  guards  safely 
the  deposit  that  has  been  intrusted  to  him. 

When  we  inquire  how  we  can  keep  it, 
Scripture  points  us  to  the  fact  that  our  keeping 
of  it  consists  in  our  intrusting  it  to  the  Lord  to  be 
kept  by  Him.  Paul  places  these  two  ideas  along 
side  one  another  in  his  second  letter  to  Timothy  : 
"  He  is  able  to  keep  my  deposit "  (K.V.  margin) ; 
"  That  good  thing  which  was  committed  unto 
thee,  guard  through  the  Holy  Spirit  which 
dwelleth  in  us."  1  Jude  also,  after  saying,  "  Keep 
yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,"  adds  the  doxology: 
"  Unto  Him  that  is  able  to  keep  us  be  glory."  2 
The  main  secret  of  success  in  the  preservation  of 
the  blessing  is  the  exercise  of  a  humble  depend 
ence  on  the  Lord  who  keeps  us  and  on  the  Spirit 
by  whom  we  ourselves  are  kept  in  close  fellow 
ship  with  Him.  It  is  with  this  blessing  as  with 
the  manria  that  fell  in  the  wilderness:  it  must 
be  renewed  from  heaven  every  day.  It  is  with 
the  new  heavenly  life  as  with  the  life  we  live  on 
earth :  the  fresh  air  that  sustains  it  must  be 
drawn  in  every  moment  from  without  and  from 
1  2  Tim.  i.  12,  14.  2  Jude  21,  24. 


94     THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

above.     Let  us  see  how  this  ever-abiding,  unin 
terrupted  keeping  takes  place. 

I 

Jesus,  wlio  gave  us  the  blessing,  will  keep  it 
for  us. 

Jesus  is  the  Keeper  of  Israel.  This  is  His 
name  and  this  is  His  work.  God  not  only 
created  the  world  but  also  keeps  and  upholds  it. 
Jesus  is  not  content  with  merely  giving  the 
blessing  of  Pentecost :  He  will  also  maintain  it 
every  moment.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  not  a  power 
that  in  any  sense  is  subordinate  to  us,  that  is 
intrusted  to  us,  and  that  we  must  use ;  He  is  a 
power  that  is  over  and  above  us,  that  possesses 
and  energises  us,  a  power  by  which  Jesus  in 
heaven  will  carry  forward  His  work  from 
moment  to  moment.  Our  right  place  and  our 
proper  attitude  must  always  be  that  of  the 
deepest  dependence,  a  sinking  down  in  our  own 
nothingness  and  impotence.  Our  chief  concern 
is  to  let  Jesus  do  His  work  within  us. 

So  long  as  the  soul  does  not  discern  this 
truth  there  will  always  be  in  it  a  certain  dread 
of  receiving  the  full  blessing.  Such  a  one 


HOW  IT   MAY  BE   KEPT  95 

will  be  inclined  to  say :  "  I  shall  not  be  able  to 
continue  in  that  holy  life.  I  shall  not  be  able 
to  dwell  always  on  such  a  lofty  plane."  But 
these  thoughts  only  show  what  a  feeble  grasp 
such  a  one  has  of  the  great  reality.  When 
Jesus  conies  by  the  Spirit  to  dwell  in  nay  heart 
and  to  live  in  me,  He  will  actually  work  out 
the  maintenance  of  the  blessing  and  regard  my 
whole  inner  life  as  His  special  care.  He  who 
believes  this  truth  sees  that  the  life  in  the  joy 
of  the  blessing  of  Pentecost,  while  it  can  never 
be  relieved  of  the  necessity  of  watchfulness,  is  a 
life  that  is  freed  from  anxiety  and  ought  to  be 
characterised  by  continued  gladness.  The  Lord 
has  come  into  His  holy  temple.  There  He  will 
abide  and  work  out  everything.  He  desires 
only  this  one  thing — namely,  that  the  soul  shall 
know  and  honour  Him  as  its  faithful  Shepherd, 
its  Almighty  Keeper.  Jesus,  who  gives  the  bless 
ing  of  Pentecost,  will  certainly  keep  it  in  us. 

II 

Jesus  will  keep  the  blessiiig,  as  He  gave  it,  by 
faith. 

The  law  that  prevails  at  every  stage  in  the 


96     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

progress  of  the  kingdom  of  God  is :  "  Be  it  unto 
you  according  to  your  faith."  The  faith  that  in 
the  first  reception  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  as 
small  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed  must,  in  the 
course  of  the  Christian  life,  become  always  so 
enlarged  that  it  shall  see  more  and  receive  and 
enjoy  more  of  the  fulness  that  is  in  the  Lord. 
Paul  wrote  to  the  Galatians :  "  I  live,  yet  no 
longer  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me :  and  that  life 
which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  in  faith."  l 
His  faith  was  as  broad  and  boundless  and  unceas 
ing  as  were  the  needs  of  his  life  and  work.  In 
everything  and  at  all  times,  without  ceasing,  he 
trusted  in  Jesus  to  do  all.  His  faith  was  as 
wide  and  abundant  as  the  energy  that  flows 
from  Jesus  for  the  enrichment  of  His  people  is 
mighty  and  glorious.  He  had  given  up  his 
whole  life  to  Jesus :  he  himself  lived  no  longer. 
By  a  continuous  and  unrestricted  faith  he  gave 
to  Jesus  the  liberty  of  energising  his  life  without 
ceasing  and  without  limitation. 

The  fulness  of  the  Spirit  is  not  a  gift  that  is 
bestowed  once  for  all  as  a  part  of  the  heavenly 
life.  No  :  it  is  not  so.  It  is  rather  a  constantly 

1  Gal.  ii.  20. 


HOW   IT   MAY  BE   KEPT  97 

flowing  stream  of  the  river  of  the  water  of  life 
that  issues  from  beneath  the  throne  of  God  and 
of  the  Lamb.  It  is  an  uninterrupted  communica 
tion  of  the  life  and  the  love  of  Jesus,  the  most 
personal  and  intimate  association  of  the  Lord 
with  His  own  upon  the  earth.  It  is  by  the 
faith  which  discerns  this  truth,  and  assents  to 
it,  and  cleaves  to  it  with  joy,  that  Jesus  will 
certainly  do  His  work  of  keeping. 

Ill 

Jesus  keeps  this  blessing  in  fellowship  with 
Himself. 

The  single  aim  of  the  blessing  of  Pentecost  is 
to  reveal  Jesus  as  a  Saviour,  so  that  He  may 
exhibit  His  power  to  redeem  souls  in  us  and  by 
us  here  in  the  world.  The  Spirit  did  not  come 
merely  to  occupy  the  place  of  Jesus,  but  only 
and  wholly  to  unite  the  disciples  with  their 
Lord  more  closely,  and  deeply,  and  completely 
than  when  He  was  on  earth.  The  power  from 
on  high  did  not  coine  as  a  power  which  they 
were  thenceforth  to  reckon  as  their  own  :  the 
power  was  inseparably  bound  up  with  the  Lord 
Jesus  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  Every  operation  of 
7 


98     THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

the  power  was  a  direct  working  of  God  in  them. 
The  intercourse  which  the  disciples  had  with 
Jesus  on  earth,  the  following  of  Him,  the 
reception  of  His  teaching,  the  doing  of  His  will, 
the  participation  in  His  suffering — all  this  was 
to  be  still  their  experience,  only  in  greater 
measure. 

Not    otherwise,    accordingly,    is    it    with    us. 

The  Spirit  in  us  will  always  glorify  Jesus,  will 

always  make  it  manifest  that  He  alone  is  to  be 

Lord,  that  all  which  is  glorious  comes  only  from 

Him.      Close  communion  with  God  in  the  inner 

chamber,  faithfulness  in  searching  His  Word  and 

seeking    to   know    His   will    in    the    Scriptures, 

sacrifice   of    time   and  business  and   intercourse 

with    men,    to   bring    us    into    touch    with  the 

Saviour  —  all    this    is     indispensable    for    the 

keeping  of  the  blessing.     Jesus  keeps  us  through 

our  intercourse  with  Him,  being  occupied  with 

Himself.     He   that    loves  His  fellowship  above 

everything    shall    have    the    experience    of    His 

keeping. 


HOW   IT   MAY   BE   KEPT  99 

IV 

Jesus  keeps  the  blessing  in  the  pathway  of 
obedience. 

When  the  Lord  Jesus  promised  the  Holy 
Spirit,  He  said  three  times  over  that  the  blessing 
was  for  the  obedient.  "  If  ye  love  Me,  ye  will 
keep  My  commandments  :  and  I  will  pray  the 
Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another  Com 
forter."  l  Peter  speaks  of  "  the  Holy  Spirit 
whom  God  hath  given  to  them  that  obey  Him."  2 
Of  our  Lord  Himself  we  read  that  "  He  became 
obedient  unto  death.  Wherefore  also  God 
highly  exalted  Him."  Obedience  is  what  God 
cannot  but  demand.  It  is  the  only  true  relation 
and  blessedness  of  the  creature.  It  is  obedience 
that  attains  what  was  lost  by  the  Fall.  It  is 
the  power  of  obedience  Jesus  came  to  restore. 
It  is  His  own  life.  Apart  from  obedience  the 
blessing  of  Pentecost  can  neither  come  nor  abide. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  obedience.  There  is 
one  that  is  very  defective,  like  that  of  the 
disciples  previously  to  Pentecost.  They  desired 
from  the  heart  to  do  what  the  Lord  said,  but 

1  John  xiv.  15,  16  ;  cf.  vv.  21,  23.  2  Acts  v.  32. 


100    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

they  had  not  the  power.  Yet  the  Lord  ac 
counted  their  desire  and  purpose  as  obedience. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  more  abundant 
life,  which  comes  with  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit, 
where  new  power  is  given  for  full  obedience. 
The  characteristic  of  the  full  blessing  of 
Pentecost,  and  the  way  to  keep  it,  is  a  surrender 
to  obedience  in  the  minutest  details.  To  listen 
to  the  voice  of  Jesus  Himself,  to  the  voice  of 
the  Spirit,  to  the  voice  of  Conscience,  this  is 
the  way  in  which  Jesus  leads  us.  The  method 
of  making  the  life  of  Pentecost  within  us  sure 
and  strong  is  to  know  Jesus  and  to  love  Him, 
and  receive  Him  in  that  aspect  which  made  Him 
well-pleasing  to  the  Father  —  namely,  as  the 
Obedient  One.  The  whole  Jesus  becomes  the 
life  of  the  soul. 

It  is  the  exercise  of  this  obedience  that  gives 
to  the  soul  a  wonderful  firmness  and  confidence 
and  power  to  trust  God  and  to  expect  all  from 
Him.  A  strong  will  is  necessary  for  a  strong 
faith,  and  it  is  in  obedience  that  the  will  is 
strengthened  to  trust  God  to  the  uttermost. 
This  is  the  only  way  in  which  the  Lord  can 
lead  us  to  ever  richer  blessing. 


HOW   IT   MAY  BE   KEPT  101 

V 

Jesus  keeps  the  blessing  in  fellowship  with  His 
people. 

At  the  outset  of  His  seeking  for  the  full 
blessing  a  Christian  thinks  for  the  most  part 
only  of  himself.  Even  after  he  receives  the 
blessing  as  a  new  experience,  he  is  still  rather 
disposed  to  see  merely  how  he  can  keep  it  safely 
for  himself.  But  very  speedily  the  Spirit  will 
teach  him  that  a  member  of  the  body  cannot 
enjoy  the  flow  of  healthful  life  in  a  state  of 
separation  from  others.  He  begins  to  under 
stand  that  "  there  is  one  body  and  one  Spirit." 
The  unity  of  the  body  must  be  realised  to  enjoy 
the  fulness  of  the  Spirit. 

This  principle  teaches  us  some  very  important 
lessons  about  the  condition  on  which  the 
blessing  received  can  be  maintained.  All  that 
you  have  belongs  to  others,  and  must  be  em 
ployed  for  their  service.  All  that  they  have 
belongs  to  you,  and  is  in  turn  indispensable  for 
you.  The  Spirit  of  the  body  of  the  Lord  can 
work  effectively  only  when  the  members  of  it 
work  in  unison.  You  should  confess  to  others 


102    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

what  the  Lord  has  done  for  you,  ask  their 
intercession,  seek  their  fellowship,  and  help  them 
with  what  the  Lord  has  given  you.  You  should 
lay  to  heart  the  unhappy  condition  of  the  en 
feebled  Christian  Church  in  our  days,  yet  not 
in  the  spirit  of  judgment  or  bitterness,  but 
rather  in  the  spirit  of  humility  and  prayer,  of 
gentleness  and  willingness  to  serve.  Jesus  will 
teach  you  what  is  meant  by  the  saying  that 
"  love  is  the  greatest "  ; l  and  by  the  very  intensity 
of  your  surrender  to  the  welfare  of  His  Church 
He  will  both  keep  and  increase  the  blessing 
in  you. 

VI 

Jesus  keeps  the  blessing  in  the  service  of  His 
kingdom. 

We  have  said  more  than  once  that  the  Spirit 
came  as  the  power  for  work.  The  very  name 
of  Jesus  Christ  involves  entire  consecration  to 
God's  work,  utter  devotion  to  the  rescue  of  souls. 
It  was  for  this  end  alone  that  He  lived :  it  is 
only  for  this  cause  that  He  lives  in  heaven. 
How  can  anyone  ever  dream  of  having  the 

1  1  Cor.  xiii.  13. 


HOW   IT   MAY  BE   KEPT  103 

Spirit  of  Christ  otherwise  than  as  a  Spirit  which 
aims  at  the  work  of  God  and  the  salvation  of 
souls  ?  It  is  an  impossibility.  Hence  from  the 
outset  we  must  keep  these  two  aspects  of  the 
Spirit's  operation  closely  knit  together.  What 
the  Spirit  works  in  us  is  for  the  sake  of  what 
He  works  by  us.  Our  seeking  for  the  blessing 
will  miscarry,  our  initial  possession  of  the 
blessing  will  be  lost,  if  we  do  not  as  the 
dominant  feature  of  our  life  present  ourselves 
to  be  used  by  the  Spirit  in  the  doing  of  His 
work. 

The  blessing  of  Pentecost  does  not  always 
come  with  equal  power  and  not  always  at  once. 
God  often  gives  preparatory  experiences  and 
awakenings  that  must  lead  to  the  full  blessing. 
Every  attempt  to  keep  such  gracious  gifts  for 
ourselves  will  entail  loss.  He  that  does  not 
follow  his  own  inclination,  either  in  being  silent 
or  in  speaking,  but  presents  himself  to  the 
Lord  and  waits  upon  Him  with  an  undivided 
spirit,  will  experience  that  work,  so  far  from  ex 
hausting  or  weakening,  is  the  sure  way  to  keep 
the  treasure. 


104    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

VII 

One  thought  more.  It  is  as  the  indwelling 
.Lord  that  Jesus  keeps  the  blessing  of  Pentecost  in 
us. 

Whenever  mention  is  made  of  Jesus  as  our 
Keeper,  it  is  oftentimes  difficult  to  believe  that 
we  who  are  upon  the  earth  can  really  know 
ourselves  to  be  always,  without  interruption,  in 
His  hands  and  under  His  power.  How  much 
clearer  and  more  glorious  does  the  truth  become 
when  the  Spirit  discovers  to  us  that  Christ  is 
in  us ;  and  that,  not  only  as  a  tenant  in  a  house, 
or  water  in  a  glass,  in  such  a  fashion  that  they 
continue  quite  distinct,  but  rather  as  the  soul 
is  in  the  body  animating  and  moving  every 
part  of  it,  and  never  to  be  separated  from  each 
other  except  by  a  violent  death.  Yes  :  it  is  thus 
that  Christ  dwells  in  us,  penetrating  our  whole 
nature  with  His  nature.  The  Holy  Spirit  came 
for  the  purpose  of  making  Him  thus  deeply 
present  within  us.  As  the  sun  is  high  in  the 
firmament  above  me,  and  yet  by  his  heat 
penetrates  my  bones  and  marrow  and  quickens 
my  whole  life,  so  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  is  exalted 


HOW   IT   MAY   BE   KEPT  105 

high  in  heaven,  penetrates  my  whole  nature  by 
His  Spirit  in  such  a  way,  that  all  my  willing,  and 
thinking,  and  feeling  are  animated  by  Him. 
Once  this  fact  is  fully  grasped,  we  no  longer 
think  of  an  external  keeping  through  a  person 
outside  of  us  in  heaven,  but  rather  become 
convinced  that  our  whole  individual  life  is  itself 
quickened  and  possessed  by  One  who,  not  in  a 
human  but  in  a  divine,  all-penetrating  manner, 
occupies  and  fills  the  heart.  Then  we  see  how 
natural,  how  certain,  how  blessed  it  is  that  the 
indwelling  Jesus  keeps  the  blessing  and  always 
maintains  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit. 

Brethren,  is  there  anyone  amongst  you  who 
is  longing  for  this  life  in  the  fulness  of  blessing, 
and  yet  is  afraid  to  enter  upon  it,  because  he 
knows  not  how  he  is  to  persevere  ?  Pray  listen 
to  what  I  say  :  Jesus  will  make  this  blessing 
continuous  and  sure.  Is  there  any  one  of  you 
who  longs  for  it  and  yet  cannot  understand 
wherein  the  secret  of  it  lies  ?  Again  listen  to 
me :  the  blessing  is  this — that  as  Jesus  Christ 
was  daily  with  His  disciples  in  bodily  fashion, 
so  He  will  by  His  Spirit  every  day  and  always 


106    THE  FULL  BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

be  your  life ;  yea,  live  His  life  in  you.  No 
one  can  fully  understand  how  things  look  on 
the  top  of  a  mountain  until  he  himself  has 
been  there.  Although  you  do  not  understand 
everything,  yet  believe  that  the  Lord  Jesus  has 
sent  His  Spirit  with  no  other  object  in  view 
than  just  to  receive  and  keep  you  in  His  divine 
power.  Trust  Him  for  this.  Let  all  burdens 
be  laid  aside,  and  give  yourself  up  to  receive 
from  Him  this  full  blessing  of  Pentecost  as  a 
fountain  which  He  Himself  will  cause  to  spring 
up  in  you  unto  everlasting  life. 


THE    FULL   BLESSING   OF 
PENTECOST 

VIII 

$?ofo  it  mag  fie  incrrasrti 

"He  that  believeth  on  Me  shall  never  thirst."  —  JOHN  vi. 
35. 

"He  that  believeth  on  Me,  out  of  him  shall  flow  rivers 
of  living  water."  —  JOHN  vii.  38. 


the  full  blessing  of  Pentecost  be  still 
further  increased  ?  Can  anything  that 
is  full  become  still  fuller  ?  Yes  :  undoubtedly. 
It  can  become  so  full  that  it  always  overflows. 
This  is  especially  the  characteristic  and  law  of 
the  blessing  of  Pentecost. 

The  words  of  our  blessed  Lord  Jesus  which 
have  been  quoted,  point  us  to  a  double  blessing. 
First,  Jesus  says  that  he  who  believes  in  Him 
shall  never  thirst  :  he  shall  always  have  life  in 

107 


himself — that  is  to  say,  the  satisfaction  of  all 
his  needs.  Then  He  speaks  of  something  that 
is  grander  and  more  glorious :  he  that  belie veth 
in  Him,  out  of  his  heart  shall  flow  rivers  of 
living  water  to  quench  the  thirst  of  others.  It 
is  the  distinction  betwixt  full  and  overflowing. 
A  vessel  may  be  full  and  yet  have  nothing  over 
for  others.  When  it  continues  full,  and  yet  has 
something  over  for  others,  there  must  be  in  it 
an  over-brimming,  ever-flowing  supply.  This  is 
what  our  Lord  promises  to  His  believing  disciples. 
At  the  outset,  faith  in  Him  gives  them  the 
blessing  that  they  shall  never  thirst.  But  as 
they  advance  and  become  stronger  in  faith,  it 
makes  them  a  fountain  of  water  out  of  which 
streams  flow  to  others.  The  Spirit  who  at  first 
only  fills  us  will  overflow  out  of  us  to  souls 
around  us. 

It  is  with  the  rivers  of  living  water  as  with 
many  a  fountain  on  earth.  When  we  begin  to 
open  them,  the  stream  is  weak.  The  more  the 
water  is  used,  and  the  more  deeply  the  source  is 
opened  up,  the  more  strongly  does  the  water 
flow.  I  should  like  to  inquire  how  far  this 
principle  holds  good  in  the  realm  of  the  spiritual 


HOW   IT   MAY  BE   INCREASED  109 

life  and  to  discover  what  is  necessary  to  secure 
that  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  may  constantly 
flow  more  abundantly  from  us.  There  are  several 
simple  directions  which  may  help  us  in  reaching 
this  knowledge. 


Holdfast  that  which  you  have. 

See  to  it  that  you  do  not  misunderstand  the 
blessing  which  God  has  given  you.  Be  sure 
that  you  do  not  form  any  wrong  conceptions  of 
what  the  full  blessing  is.  Do  not  imagine  that 
the  animation,  and  joy,  and  power  of  Pentecost 
must  be  felt  and  seen  immediately.  No  :  the 
Church  at  present  is  in  a  dead-and-alive  con 
dition,  and  the  restoration  often  comes  slowly. 
At  first,  indeed,  one  receives  the  full  blessing 
only  as  a  seed  :  the  full  life  is  wrapt  up  in  a  little 
invisible  capsule.  The  quickened  soul  has  longed 
for  it ;  he  has  surrendered  himself  unreservedly  for 
it ;  he  has  believed  in  silence  that  God  has  accepted 
his  consecration  and  fulfilled  His  promise.  In 
that  faith  he  goes  on  his  way,  silent  and  happy, 
saying  to  himself :  "  The  blessing  of  the  fulness 
of  the  Spirit  is  for  me."  But  the  actual  ex- 


110    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

periences  of  the  blessing  did  not  come  as  he  had 
anticipated ;  or  they  did  come,  but  lasted  only 
for  a  short  time.  The  result  was  that  he  began 
to  fear  that  his  surrender  was  not  a  reality ; 
that  he  had  been  rejoicing  in  what  was  only  a 
transient  emotion ;  and  that  the  real  blessing 
was  something  greater  and  more  powerful  than  he 
had  yet  received.  The  result  is  that  very  speedily 
the  blessing  becomes  less  instead  of  larger,  and 
he  moves  farther  back  rather  than  forward  through 
discouragement  on  account  of  his  disappoint 
ment. 

The  cause  of  this  condition  is  simply  lack  of 
faith.  We  are  bent  on  judging  God  and  His 
work  in  us  by  sight  and  feeling.  We  forget 
that  the  whole  process  is  the  work  of  faith. 
Even  in  its  highest  revelations  in  Christians 
that  have  made  the  greatest  progress,  faith  rests 
not  on  what  is  to  be  seen  of  the  work  of  God  or 
on  the  experiences  of  it,  but  on  the  work  of  God 
as  spiritual,  invisible,  deeply  hidden,  and  incon 
ceivable.  To  you,  therefore,  my  brother,  who 
desirest  in  this  time  of  discouragement  to  return 
to  the  true  life  according  to  the  promise,  my 
counsel  is  not  to  be  greatly  surprised  if  it  comes 


HOW   IT   MAY  BE   INCREASED  111 

to  you  slowly  or  if  it  appears  to  be  involved  in 
darkness.     If    you   know  that   you   have   given 
yourself  to    God   with   a   perfect   heart,   and   if 
you  know  that  God,  really  and  with  His  whole 
heart,  waits  to   fulfil  His  promise  in  you  with 
divine  power,  then    rest   in   silence   before  His 
face  and  hold  fast  your  integrity.     Although  the 
cold  of    winter  appears  to   bury  everything    in 
death,  say  with  the  prophet  Habakkuk  :  "  Though 
the  fig-tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit 
be  in  the  vines,  yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord, 
I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation." 1     Do 
this,  and  you    shall    know  God,  and    God  will 
know  you.      If  you  are  sure  that  you  have  set 
yourself    before    God    as    an    empty,    separated, 
purified  vessel,  to  become  full  of  His  Spirit,  then 
continue  still  to   regard  yourself    so    and  keep 
silence  before  Him.     If  you  have  believed  that 
God  has  received  you  to  fill  you  as  a  purified 
vessel — purified    through    Jesus    Christ  and  by 
your  entire  surrender  to  Him — then  abide  in  this 
attitude  day  by  day,  and  you  may  reckon  upon 
it  that  the  blessing  will  grow  and  begin  to  flow. 
"  He  that  believeth  shall  not  be  ashamed." 2 

1  Hab.  iii.  17.  2  Isa.  xxviii.  16  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  (J. 


112    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

II 

Persevere  in  the  entire  denial  of  yourself  and 
the  sacrifice  of  everything. 

If  I  wish  to  have  a  reservoir  of  water,  the 
greater  the  excavation  I  make  for  it,  the  wider 
the  space  I  occupy  with  it,  the  greater  is  the 
quantity  of  water  I  can  collect,  and  the  stronger 
is  the  stream  that  flows  from  it  when  the  sluices 
are  opened.  In  your  surrender  for  sanctification, 
or  for  the  full  blessing  of  the  Spirit,  you  have 
said  in  truth  and  uprightness  that  you  are  prepared 
to  sacrifice  and  forsake  all  in  order  to  win  this 
pearl  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  and  this  con 
secration  was  acceptable  to  God.  But  you  have 
not  yet  fully  understood  the  full  import  of  the 
words  you  have  used.  The  Lord  has  still  much 
to  teach  you  concerning  what  the  individual 
self  is,  how  deeply  rooted  in  your  nature,  how 
utterly  corrupt  as  well  as  deeply  hidden  it  is, 
as  the  secret  source  of  many  things  you  both  say 
and  do.  Be  willing  to  make  room  for  the  Spirit 
by  a  constant,  daily,  and  entire  denial  of  the 
self -life,  and  you  may  be  sure  that  He  will 
always  be  willing  to  come  and  fill  the  empty 


HOW   IT   MAY  BE   INCREASED  113 

place.  You  have  forsaken  and  sacrificed  every 
thing  so  far  as  you  know ;  but  keep  your  mind 
open  to  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  and  He  will 
lead  you  farther  on,  and  let  you  see  that  only 
when  the  entire  sacrifice  of  everything  after  the 
example  of  Christ  comes  again  to  be  the  rule  in 
His  Church,  shall  the  full  blessing  again  break 
forth  like  an  overflowing  stream. 

It  is  surprising  how  sometimes  a  very  little 
thing  may  hinder  the  continuance  in  the  increase 
of  the  blessing.  It  may,  for  example,  be  a 
little  variance  betwixt  friends,  in  which  they 
show  that  they  are  not  willing  to  forgive  and 
to  forbear  at  once  according  to  the  law  of  Christ. 
Or  it  may  be  some  unobserved  yielding  to 
undue  sensitiveness  or  to  the  ambition  which  is 
not  prepared  to  take  the  lowest  place.  Or  it 
may  be  the  possession  or  use  of  earthly  property 
as  if  it  were  our  own.  Or  it  may  be  some  pro 
viding  for  the  flesh  in  the  enjoyment  of  eating 
and  drinking  without  the  self-denial  which 
Christ  always  expects  at  our  hands  every  day. 
Or  it  may  be  in  connection  with  things  that 
are  lawful  and  in  themselves  innocent,  which, 

however,  do   not  befit   us  in  our  profession   of 
8 


114    THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

being  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  For  here,  like 
the  Lord  Jesus  in  His  poverty,  we  are  bound  to 
show  that  the  heavenly  portion  we  possess  is 
itself  sufficient  to  satisfy  all  our  desires.  Or 
it  may  be  in  connection  with  doubtful  things, 
in  which  we  give  way  too  easily  to  the  lust  of 
the  flesh. 

Christian  brother,  do  you  really  desire  to 
enjoy  the  full  measure  of  the  blessing  of  the 
Spirit  ?  Then,  before  temptation  comes,  train 
yourself  to  understand  the  fundamental  law  of 
the  imitation  of  Jesus  and  of  full  discipleship 
— namely,  Forsake  all.  Suffer  yourself  also  to 
be  strengthened  and  drawn  into  the  observance 
of  it  by  the  sure  promise  of  the  "  hundredfold 
in  this  life."  A  full  blessing  will  be  given 
you,  a  measure  shaken  together  and  running 
over. 

Ill 

\ 

Regard  yourself  as  living  only  to  make  others 
happy. 

God  is  Love.  His  whole  being  is  nothing 
but  a  surrender  of  Himself  in  love  to  be  the 
life  of  the  creature,  to  make  the  creature 


HOW   IT   MAY  BE   INCREASED  115 

participate  in  His  holiness  and  blessedness. 
He  blesses  and  serves  all  that  lives.  His  glory 
as  God  is  that  He  puts  all  that  He  has  at  the 
disposal  of  His  creatures. 

Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God's  love,  the 
Bearer,  the  Bringer,  the  Dispenser  of  the  love. 
What  God  is  as  invisible  in  heaven,  He 
was  as  visible  on  earth.  He  came,  He  lived, 
He  suffered  and  died  only  to  glorify  the  Father 
— that  is,  to  let  it  be  seen  how  glorious  the 
Father  in  His  love  is,  and  to  show  that  in  the 
Godhead  there  is  no  other  purpose  than  to 
bless  men  and  make  them  happy ;  to  make  it 
manifest  that  the  highest  honour  and  blessed 
ness  of  any  being  is  to  give  and  to  sacrifice. 

The  Holy  Spirit  came  as  the  Spirit  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son  to  make  us  partakers  of 
this  divine  nature,  to  shed  abroad  the  love  of 
God  in  our  hearts,  to  secure  the  indwelling  of 
the  Son  and  His  love  in  our  hearts  to  such 
an  extent  that  Christ  may  verily  be  formed 
within  us,  and  that  our  whole  "  inner  man " 
shall  bear  the  impress  of  His  disposition  and 
His  likeness. 

Hence,    when    any    soul    seeks    and    receives 


116    THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

the  fulness  of  the  Spirit,  and  desires  to  have 
it  increased,  is  it  not  perfectly  evident  that 
he  can  enjoy  this  blessing  only  according  as 
he  is  prepared  to  give  himself  to  a  life  in  the 
service  of  love  ?  The  Spirit  comes  to  expel 
the  life  of  self  and  self-seeking.  The  fulness 
of  the  Spirit  presupposes  a  willingness  to 
consecrate  ourselves  to  the  blessing  of  others 
and  as  the  servants  of  all,  and  that  in  a 
constantly  increasing  and  unreserved  measure. 
The  Spirit  is  the  outflowing  of  the  life  of  God. 
If  we  will  but  yield  ourselves  to  Him,  He  will 
become  rivers  of  living  water,  flowing  from 
the  depths  of  our  heart. 

Christian  brother,  if  you  will  have  the 
blessing  increased,  begin  to  live  as  a  man  who 
is  left  here  on  earth  only  in  order  that  the 
love  of  God  may  work  by  you.  Love  all 
around  you  with  the  love  of  God  which  is  in 
you  through  the  Spirit.  Love  the  children  of 
God  cordially,  even  the  weakest  and  most 
perverse.  Exercise  and  exhibit  your  love  in 
every  possible  way.  Love  the  unsaved.  Present 
yourself  to  the  Spirit  to  love  Him.  Then  will 
love  constrain  you  to  speak,  to  work,  to  give, 


HOW   IT   MAY  BE   INCREASED  117 

and  to  pray.  If  there  is  no  open  door  for 
working,  or  if  you  have  not  the  strength  for 
it,  the  door  of  prayer  is  always  open,  and  power 
can  be  obtained  at  the  mercy -seat.  Embrace 
the  whole  world  in  your  love ;  for  Christ,  who 
is  in  your  heart,  belongs  also  to  the  heathen. 
The  Spirit  is  the  power  of  Christ  for  redeeming 
them.  Like  God  and  Jesus  and  the  Spirit, 
live  wholly  to  bless  others.  Then  the  blessing 
shall  stream  forth  and  become  overflowing. 

IV 

Let  Jesus  Christ  for  your  faith  ~be  everything. 

You  know  what  the  Scripture  says  :  "  It  was 
the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father  that  IN  HIM 
should  all  the  fulness  dwell,  that  in  all  things 
HE  might  have  the  pre-eminence  "  ; l  and  again  : 
"  All  the  promises  of  God  are  IN  HIM  Yea  and 
IN  HIM  Amen,  to  the  glory  of  God  by  us."2 
When  the  Lord  spoke  of  "  rivers  of  living 
water,"  He  connected  the  promise  with  faith 
in  Himself :  "  He  that  believeth  in  ME,  out 
of  his  heart  shall  flow  rivers."  If  we  only 
understood  that  word  "  believeth "  rightly,  we 

1  Col.  i.  19.  2  2  Cor.  i.  20. 


118    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

should  require  no  other  answer  than  this  to  the 
question  as  to  how  the  blessing  may  be  in 
creased. 

Faith  is  primarily  a  seeing  by  the  Spirit 
that  Jesus  is  nothing  but  a  flowing  fountain 
of  the  divine  love,  and  that  the  Spirit  Himself 
always  flows  from  Him  as  the  Bearer  of  the 
life  that  this  love  brings  and  that  always  streams 
forth  in  love.  Then  it  is  an  embracing  of  the 
promise,  an  appropriation  of  the  blessing  as  it 
is  provided  in  Christ,  a  resting  in  the  certainty 
of  it,  and  a  thanking  of  God  for  what  He  is  yet 
to  do.  Thereafter,  faith  is  a  keeping  open  of 
the  soul,  so  that  Christ  can  come  in  with  the 
blessing  and  take  possession  and  fill  all. 
Accordingly,  faith  becomes  the  most  fervent 
and  unbroken  communion  betwixt  the  soul  in 
which  Christ  obtains  His  place  and  Christ 
Himself,  who  by  the  silent,  effectual  blessing 
of  the  Spirit  is  enthroned  in  the  heart. 

Christian  brother,  pray,  learn  the  lesson  that, 
if  you  believe,  you  shall  see  the  glory  of  God. 
Let  every  doubt,  every  weakness,  every  tempta 
tion  find  you  trusting,  rejoicing  in  Jesus,  and 
reckoning  upon  Hirn  always  to  work  all  in 


HOW   IT   MAY   BE   INCREASED  119 

you.  You  know  that  there  are  two  ways  in 
which  a  believer  can  encounter  and  strive 
against  sin.  One  is  to  endeavour  to  ward  it 
off  with  all  his  might,  seeking  his  strength  in 
the  Word  and  in  prayer.  In  this  form  of  the 
conflict  we  use  the  power  of  the  will.  The 
other  is  to  turn  at  the  very  moment  of  the 
temptation  to  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  silent 
exercise  of  faith  and  say  to  Him :  "  Lord,  I 
have  no  strength.  THOU  art  my  Keeper."  1  This 
is  the  method  of  faith.  "  This  is  the  victory 
that  overcometh  the  world,  even  your  faith." 2 
Yes :  this  is  indeed  "  the  one  thing  needful," 
because  it  is  the  only  way  in  which  Jesus, 
who  is  in  Himself  "  The  One  Thing  Needful,"  can 
maintain  the  work  of  His  Spirit  in  us.  It  is 
by  the  exercise  of  faith  without  ceasing  that  the 
blessing  will  flow  without  ceasing. 

Christ  must  be  all  to  us  every  moment.  It 
is  of  no  avail  to  me  that  I  have  life  on  earth 
unless  that  life  is  renewed  every  moment  by 
my  inbreathing  of  fresh  air.  Even  so  must  God 
actually  renew,  and  uphold,  and  strengthen  the 
divine  life  in  me  every  moment.  He  does  this 

1  Ps.  cxxi.  5.  2  1  John  v.  4. 


120    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

for  me  in  my  union  with  Christ.  Christ  is 
simply  the  fulness  of  God,  the  life  of  God, 
the  love  of  God  prepared  for  us  and  com 
municating  itself  to  us.  The  Spirit  is  simply 
the  fulness  of  Christ,  the  life  of  Christ,  the  self- 
communicating  love  of  Christ,  surrounding  us 
as  the  air  surrounds  the  body. 

0  let  us  believe  that  we  are  in  Christ,  who 
surrounds  us  in  His  heavenly  power,  longing 
to  make  the  rivers  of  His  Spirit  flow  forth  by 
us !  Let  us  endeavour  to  obtain  a  heart  filled 
with  the  joyful  assurance  that  the  Almighty 
Lord  will  fulfil  His  word  with  power,  and  that 
our  only  choice  is  to  see  Him,  to  rejoice  in  Him, 
and  sacrifice  all  for  Him.  Then  shall  His  word 
become  true :  "  He  that  believeth  in  Me,  out 
of  his  heart  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water." 
Amen. 


THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF 
PENTECOST 


IX 

it  comes  to  its  full  i&amf  station 


"I  bow  my  knees  unto  the  Father  "  — 

1.  That  He  would  grant  you  that  ye  may  be  strength- 

ened  with  power  through  His  Spirit  in  the  inward 
man; 

2.  That    Christ    may    dwell    in    your    hearts    through 

faith  ; 

3.  That  ye,  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  may  be 

strong  to  know  the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth 
knowledge  ; 

4.  That    ye    may  be    filled  unto    all    the  fulness  of 

God.—  EPH.  iii.  14-19. 

TT7E  have  remarked  several  times  that  every 

blessing  which  God  gives  is  like  a  seed 

with  the  power  of  an  indissoluble  life  hidden  in 

it.     Let  no  one  therefore  imagine  that  to  be  filled 

with  the  Spirit  is  a  condition  of  perfectness  which 
121 


122    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

leaves  nothing  more  to  be  desired.  In  no  sense 
can  this  be  true.  It  was  after  the  Lord  Jesus 
was  filled  with  the  Spirit  at  His  baptism  He 
had  to  go  forth  to  be  still  further  perfected 
by  temptations  and  the  learning  of  obedience. 
When  the  disciples  were  filled  with  the  Spirit 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  this  equipment  with 
power  from  on  high  was  given  to  them  that  they 
might  carry  out  the  victory  over  sin  in  their  own 
lives  and  all  around  them.  The  Spirit  is  the 
Spirit  of  truth,  and  He  must  guide  us  into  it. 
It  will  only  be  by  slow  degrees  that  He  will 
lead  us  into  the  eternal  purpose  of  God,  into  the 
knowledge  of  Christ,  into  true  holiness,  into  full 
fellowship  with  God.  The  fulness  of  the  Spirit 
is  simply  the  full  preparation  for  living  and  work 
ing  as  a  child  of  God. 

When  we  consider  the  matter  from  this  point 
of  view,  we  see  at  a  glance  how  entirely  indis 
pensable  it  is  for  every  child  of  God  to  aim  at 
obtaining  this  blessing.  Then  we  begin  to  feel  that 
this  is  the  very  blessing  that  is  to  be  pressed  on 
the  acceptance  of  the  weak  and  timid.  We  also 
understand  why  it  is  that  Paul  offers  this  prayer 
on  which  we  are  now  to  meditate,  in  behalf  of  all 


believers  without  distinction.  He  did  not 
regard  it  as  a  spiritual  distinction  or  special 
luxury  which  was  intended  only  for  those  who 
were  prominent  or  favoured  amongst  the 
children  of  God.  No :  it  was  for  all  without 
distinction,  for  all  who  at  their  conversion 
had  by  faith  received  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  he 
prayed.  And  his  request  was  that  by  the  special, 
powerful,  and  ever-deepening  work  of  the  Spirit, 
God  would  bring  them  to  what  was  their  true 
destiny — namely,  to  be  filled  unto  all  the  fulness 
of  God.  This  prayer  of  Paul  is  everywhere 
regarded  as  one  of  the  most  glorious  repre 
sentations  that  the  Word  of  God  gives  of  what 
the  life  of  a  Christian  ought  to  be.  Let  us  then 
endeavour  to  learn  what  the  full  revelation  and 
manifestation  of  this  blessing  of  the  Spirit  may 

become. 

I 

That  the  Father  would  grant  you  that  ye  may  be 
strengthened  with  power  through  the  Spirit. 

That  these  Christians  had  received  the 
Spirit  when  they  believed  in  Christ  is  clear 
from  a  previous  statement  of  the  Epistle.1 

1  Of.  chap.  i.  ver.  14. 


But  he  sees  that  they  do  not  yet  know 
or  have  all  that  the  Spirit  can  do  for  them, 
and  that  there  is  a  danger  that,  by  their 
ignorance,  they  may  make  no  further  progress. 
Hence  he  bows  his  knees  and  prays  without 
ceasing  in  their  behalf  that  the  Father  would 
strengthen  them  with  might  by  His  Spirit  in  the 
inner  man.  This  powerful  strengthening  with 
the  Spirit  is  equivalent  to  being  filled  with 
the  Spirit,  is  indeed  this  same  blessing  under 
another  aspect.  It  is  the  indispensable  condition 
of  a  healthful,  growing,  and  fruitful  life. 

Paul  prays  that  the  Father  would  grant  this 
boon.  He  asks  for  a  new,  definite  operation 
of  God.  He  entreats  that  God  would  do  this 
according  to  the  riches  of  His  glory.  It  is  surely 
not  any  trilling  thing,  anything  very  common, 
that  he  thus  craves.  He  desires  that  God 
would  remember  and  bring  into  play  all  the 
riches  of  His  grace  and,  in  a  fashion  commensurate 
with  the  divine  glory  of  His  power,  do  a  heavenly 
wonder  and  as  the  living  God  strengthen  these 
believers  with  might  by  His  Spirit  in  the  inner 
man. 

0  Christian,  learn  at  this  point  that  your  life 


HOW   IT   COMES   TO   ITS   MANIFESTATION   125 

every  day  depends  on  God's  will,  on  God's  grace, 
on  God's  omnipotence.  Yes :  every  moment 
God  must  work  in  your  inner  life  and  strengthen 
you  by  His  Spirit,  otherwise  you  cannot  live  as 
He  would  have  you  live.  Just  as  no  creature 
in  the  natural  world  can  exist  for  a  moment  if 
God  does  not  work  in  it  to  sustain  its  life,  so 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  pledge  that 
God  Himself  is  to  work  everything  in  us  from 
moment  to  moment.  Learn  to  know  your  entire, 
your  blessed  dependence  on  God,  and  the  claim 
which  you  have  on  Him  as  your  Heavenly  Father 
to  begin  in  you  a  life  in  the  mighty  strengthen 
ing  of  the  Spirit  and  to  maintain  it  without  the 
interruption  of  a  single  moment. 

Paul  tells  these  believers  what  he  prays  for 
in  their  behalf,  in  order  that  they  may  know 
what  they  have  need  of  and  ask  for  it  for 
themselves.  Do  you  also  learn  to  offer  up 
this  petition.  Expect  everything  from  God  alone. 
Bow  your  knees,  and  ask  and  expect  from  the 
Father  that  He  would  manifest  to  you — yes,  in 
you — the  riches  of  His  glory.  Ask  and  expect 
that  He  would  strengthen  you  with  might  by 
His  Spirit,  that  Spirit  who  in  fact  is  already  in 


126    THE   FULL  BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

you,  but  only  as  an  unknown,  hidden,  and 
slumbering  seed.  Let  this  become  the  one 
desire,  the  strong  confidence  of  your  soul : 
"God  will  fill  me  with  the  Spirit:  God  will 
strengthen  me  through  the  Spirit  with  His 
Almighty  energy."  Let  your  whole  life  every 
day  be  permeated  by  this  prayer  and  this 
expectation. 

II 

That  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  ly  faith. 

This  is  the  glorious  fruit  of  the  divine 
strengthening  with  might  in  the  inner  man  by 
the  Spirit.  The  great  work  of  the  Father  in 
eternity  is  to  bring  forth  the  Son. 

In  Him  alone  is  the  good  pleasure  of  God 
realised.  The  Father  can  have  no  fellowship 
with  the  creature  except  through  the  Son.  He 
can  have  no  joy  in  it  except  in  so  far  as  He 
beholds  His  Son  in  it.  Hence  it  is  His  great 
work  in  redemption  to  reveal  His  Son  in  us, 
and  so  to  obtain  an  abode  for  Him  in  us,  that 
our  life  shall  be  a  visible  expression  of  the  life 
of  Jesus. 

That  is  the  aim  He  has  in  view  in  strengthen- 


HOW   IT   COMES   TO   ITS   MANIFESTATION   127 

ing  us  with  might  by  the  Spirit  in  the  inner  man. 
It  is  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  our  hearts  by  faith. 

This  indwelling  of  Christ  in  us  is  not  like 
that  of  a  man  who  abides  in  a  house,  but  is 
nevertheless  in  no  sense  identified  with  it.  No : 
His  indwelling  is  a  possession  of  our  hearts 
that  is  truly  divine,  quickening  and  penetrating 
their  inmost  being  with  His  life.  The  Father 
strengthens  us  inwardly  with  might  by  His 
Spirit,  so  that  the  Spirit  animates  our  will  and 
brings  it,  like  the  will  of  Jesus,  into  entire 
sympathy  with  His  own.  The  result  is  that  our 
heart  then,  like  the  heart  of  Jesus,  bows  before 
Him  in  humility  and  surrender ;  our  life  seeks 
only  His  honour ;  and  our  whole  soul  thrills 
with  desire  and  love  for  Jesus.  This  inward 
renewal  makes  the  heart  fit  to  be  a  dwelling- 
place  of  the  Lord.  By  the  Spirit  He  is  revealed 
within  us  and  we  come  to  know  that  He  is 
actually  in  us  as  our  life,  in  a  deep,  divine 
unity,  One  with  us. 

Brother,  God  longs  to  see  Jesus  in  you.  He 
is  prepared  to  work  mightily  in  you  that  Christ 
may  dwell  in  you.  The  Spirit  has  come,  and  the 
Father  is  willing  to  work  mightily  by  Him  that 


128    THE  FULL   BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

the  living  presence  of  His  Son  may  always  abide 
in  you.  Jesus  loves  you  so  dearly  and  longs  so 
intensely  for  you  that  He  cannot  rest  until  He 
makes  His  abode  in  your  heart.  This  is  the 
supreme  blessing  that  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit 
brings  you. 

That  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  heart  by  faith. 
It  is  by  faith  that  you  receive  and  know  the 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit  and  the  operation  of  the 
Father  by  Him.  By  faith,  which  discerns  things 
invisible  as  clearly  as  the  sun,  you  receive  and 
know  the  living  Jesus  in  your  heart.  As  con 
stantly  as  He  was  with  His  disciples  on  earth — 
yea,  more  constantly  than  with  them,  because  more 
inwardly  and  more  really — He  will  be  in  you  and 
will  grant  you  to  enjoy  His  presence  and  His 
love.  0  soul,  pray  that  the  Father  would 
strengthen  you  with  might  by  the  Spirit,  would 
open  your  heart  for  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit,  and 
enable  you  trustfully  to  appropriate  it.  Then  at 
last  shall  you  know  what  it  means  to  have  Christ 
dwelling  in  your  heart  by  faith. 


HOW  IT   COMES  TO   ITS   MANIFESTATION   129 

III 

That  ye,  Toeing  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  may 
be  strong  to  know  the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth 
knowledge. 

Here  is  the  glorious  fruit  of  the  indwelling 
of  Christ  in  the  heart.  By  the  Spirit  the  love 
of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  the  heart.  By  Christ 
who  dwells  in  the  heart  the  love  wherewith  God 
loved  Him  comes  into  us ;  and  we  learn  that 
just  as  life  in  God,  between  Father,  Son,  and 
Spirit,  is  only  infinite  love,  so  the  life  of  Christ 
in  us  is  nothing  but  love.  Thus  we  become  rooted 
and  grounded  in  love.  We  are  implanted  in  the 
soil  of  love :  we  strike  our  roots  into  heavenly 
love  ;  henceforth  we  have  our  being  in  it  and  draw 
our  strength  from  it.  Love  is  the  supreme  element 
in  our  spiritual  life.  The  Spirit  in  us  and  the 
Son  in  us  bring  us  nothing  but  the  love  of  God. 
Love  is  the  first  and  the  chief  among  the  streams 
of  living  water  that  are  to  flow  from  us. 

It  is  thus  that  we  come  to  discover  the 
truths  that  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law ; 
that  love  doeth  no  ill  to  one's  neighbour ; l  that 

1  Rom.  xiii.  10. 
9 


130    THE   FULL  BLESSING   OF  PENTECOST 

love  seeketh  not  its  own ; 1  that  love  lays  down 
its  life  for  the  brethren.2  Our  heart  becomes  ever 
larger  and  larger ;  our  friends,  our  enemies,  the 
children  of  God  and  the  children  of  the  world, 
those  that  are  worthy  to  be  loved  and  those 
that  are  hateful,  the  ransomed  and  the  lost,  the 
world  as  a  whole  and  every  individual  creature 
in  particular — are  all  embraced  in  the  love 
of  God.  We  find,  then,  our  happiness  lies  in 
the  sacrifice  of  our  own  honour,  our  own 
advantage  and  comfort,  in  favour  of  others. 
Love  takes  no  account  of  sacrifice :  it  is  its 
blessedness  to  love :  it  cannot  do  otherwise ; 
actual  loving  is  its  nature  and  its  life.  We  are 
able  so  to  love,  because  the  Father  with  His 
Spirit  works  mightily  within  us ;  because  the 
Son,  "  who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me," 
dwells  in  us,  and  He,  who  is  crucified  Love,  has 
filled  the  heart  completely  with  Himself.  We 
are  rooted  in  love,  and  in  accordance  with  the 
nature  of  the  root  in  God  is  the  fruit  from 
God — love. 

That  ye  may  be  strong  to  know  the  love  which 
passeth  knowledge  :  that  is,  to  know  love  not  with 
1 1  Cor.  iiii.  5.  2 1  John  iii.  16, 


HOW  IT   COMES   TO   ITS   MANIFESTATION   131 

the  knowledge  of  the  understanding  and  its 
thoughts  alone,  but  in  the  conscious  blessedness 
of  a  heart  in  which  Jesus  dwells ;  to  know  love 
as  something  that  cannot  be  known  or  conceived 
by  the  heart  of  itself ;  to  be  strong  to  know  it 
fully,  so  far  as  this  is  possible  before  God,  in 
order  that  He  may  fill  you,  an  earthen  vessel, 
with  His  own  love  to  overflowing. 

0  souls,  pray,  listen  to  the  word :  "  God  is 
Love  " ;  and  He  has  provided  everything  to  the 
end  that  you  may  know  love  fully.  It  is  for 
this  object  that  the  Spirit  is  in  you,  and  that  the 
Father  will  work  mightily  in  you :  it  is  with 
this  aim  that  Christ  desires  to  have  your  whole 
heart.  0  let  us  begin  to  pray,  as  never  before, 
that  the  Father  would  strengthen  us  with  might 
by  the  Spirit ;  that  the  Father  would  grant  unto 
us  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit ;  that  ye  may  be 
strong  to  know  the  love  of  Christ. 

IV 

That  ye  may  be  filled  unto  all  the  fulness  of  God. 

What  an  expression  !  what  an  impenetrable 
mystery !  what  a  divine  blessedness !  Filled 
unto  all  the  fulness  of  God :  this  is  the 


132    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

experience  to  which  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  is 
intended  to  bring  us,  and  will  bring  us. 

Filled  unto  all  the  fulness  of  God :  who  shall 
ever  unfold  the  meaning  of  this  expression  to 
us  ?  How  shall  we  ever  reach  any  definite  idea 
of  what  it  signifies  ?  God  has  made  provision 
for  our  enlightenment.  In  Christ  Jesus  we  see 
a  man  full  of  God,  a  man  who  was  perfected  by 
suffering  and  obedience,  filled  unto  all  the 
fulness  of  God :  yea,  a  man  who  in  the  solitari 
ness  and  poverty  of  an  ordinary  human  life, 
with  all  its  needs  and  infirmities,  has  nevertheless 
let  us  see  on  earth  the  life  enjoyed  by  the 
inhabitants  of  heaven,  as  they  are  there  filled 
unto  all  the  fulness  of  God.  The  will  and  the 
honour,  the  love  and  the  service  of  God  were 
always  visible  in  Him.  God  was  all  to  Him. 

When  God  called  the  world  into  existence 
it  was  in  order  that  it  might  reveal  Him.  In 
it  His  wisdom  and  might  and  goodness  were  to 
dwell  and  be  visibly  manifested.  We  say 
continually  that  nature  is  full  of  God.  God 
can  be  seen  in  everything  by  the  believing  eye. 
The  Seraphim  sing :  the  whole  earth  is  full  of 
His  glory.  When  God  created  man  after  His 


HOW  IT  COMES  TO   ITS   MANIFESTATION   133 

image,  it  was  in  order  that  He  Himself  might 
be  seen  in  man,  that  man  should  simply  serve 
as  a  reflection  of  His  likeness.  The  image  of 
a  man  never  serves  any  other  purpose  than 
to  represent  the  man.  As  the  image  of  God 
man  was  destined  simply  to  receive  the  glory  of 
God  in  his  own  life,  to  bear  it  and  make  it 
visible.  God  was  to  be  all  to  him ;  to  be  all 
in  him :  he  was  to  be  full  of  God. 

By  sin  this  divine  purpose  has  been  frustrated. 
Instead  of  being  full  of  God,  man  became  full 
of  himself  and  the  world ;  and  to  such  an  extent 
has  sin  blinded  us  that  it  appears  an  impossi 
bility  ever  to  become  full  of  God  again. 
Alas !  even  many  Christians  see  nothing 
desirable  in  this  fulness.  Yet  it  is  back  to 
this  blessing  that  Jesus  came  to  redeem  and 
bring  us ;  and  this  is  the  end  for  which  God  is 
prepared  to  work  mightily  within  us  by  His 
Spirit.  This  is  no  less  the  result  for  which  the 
Son  of  God  desires  to  dwell  in  our  heart,  and 
which  He  will  bring  to  accomplishment :  it  is 
all  that  we  may  be  filled  unto  the  fulness  of 
God. 

Yes  ;  this  is  the  highest  aim  of  the  Pentecostal 


134    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

blessing.  To  attain  this,  we  can  count  upon 
the  Spirit  to  make  sure  of  our  reaching  it. 
He  will  open  the  way  for  us  and  guide  us  in 
it.  He  will  work  in  us  the  deep  humility  of 
Jesus,  who  always  said :  "  I  can  of  Myself  do 
nothing " ;  "I  do  not  My  own  will " ;  " The 
words  I  speak,  I  speak  not  of  Myself." l  Amidst 
this  self-emptying  and  sense  of  dependence 
He  will  work  in  us  the  assurance  and  the 
experience  that  for  the  soul  which  is  nothing, 
God  is  surely  ALL.  By  our  faith  He  will 
reveal  to  us  Jesus,  who  was  full  of  God,  as  our 
life.  He  will  cause  us  to  be  rooted  in  the  love 
in  which  God  gives  all,  and  we  shall  take  God 
as  all.  Thus  it  will  be  with  us  as  with  Jesus : 
man  nothing,  and  God's  honour,  God's  will, 
God's  love,  God's  power,  everything.  Yes ; 
the  issue  will  be  that  we  shall  be  "  filled  unto 
all  the  fulness  of  God." 

Christian,  I  beg  of  you  by  the  love  of  God 
not  to  say  that  this  is  too  high  an  experience 
for  you,  or  that  it  is  not  for  you.  No  ;  it  is  in 
truth  the  will  of  God  concerning  you :  the  will 
alike  of  His  commandment  and  of  His  promise. 

1  John  v.  30,  vi.  38,  xii.  49,  xiv.  10. 


HOW  IT   COMES  TO   ITS   MANIFESTATION   135 

He  is  bent  on  fulfilling  His  promise  :  He  Himself 
will  work  it  out.  To-day,  then,  in  humility 
and  faith  take  this  word,  "  FILLED  UNTO  ALL 
THE  FULNESS  OF  GOD,"  as  the  purpose  and  the 
watchword  of  your  life,  and  see  what  it  will 
do  for  you.  It  will  become  to  you  a  mighty 
lever  to  raise  you  out  of  the  self-seeking  which 
is  quite  content  with  only  being  prepared  for 
blessing.  It  will  urge  you  to  enter  into  and 
become  firmly  rooted  in  the  love  of  God  which 
gives  everything  to  you,  and  thereby  in  the 
love  which  gives  everything  back  to  Him.  It 
will  convince  you,  that  nothing  less  than  Christ 
Himself  dwelling  in  your  heart  can.  keep  such  a 
love  abiding  in  you,  or  actually  make  the  fulness 
of  God  a  reality  within  you.  It  will  train  you 
to  fix  your  only  hope  of  all  this  blessing  on 
the  mighty  operation  of  God  Himself  by  the 
Spirit.  It  will  also  move  you  to  go  down  upon 
your  knees  and  summon  to  your  aid  the  wealth 
of  God's  glory,  that  it  may  itself  prepare  you 
for  this  great  wonder.  This  it  will  continue  to 
do  until  your  heart  is  enabled  to  utter  the 
response  :  "  Yes  :  FILLED  UNTO  ALL  THE  FULNESS 
OF  GOD  is  what  my  God  has  prepared  for  me." 


136    THE   FULL   BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

With  this  glorious  prospect  before  us,  come 
and  let  us  join  with  the  apostle  in  the  doxology : 
"  Unto  Him  that  is  able  to  do  exceeding 
abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think, 
according  to  the  power  that  worketh  in  us  (the 
power  of  His  might),  unto  Him  be  the  glory 
for  ever  and  ever." ]  Let  us  desire  nothing 
less  than  these  riches  of  the  glory  of  God. 
To-day,  if  we  have  never  done  it  before,  let  us 
make  a  beginning  and  appropriate  to  ourselves 
the  full  blessing  of  the  Spirit  as  the  power 
which  is  sure  to  lead  us  to  be  "  filled  unto  all 
the  fulness  of  God." 

When  God  said  to  Abraham,  "  I  am  God 
Almighty,"  He  invited  him  to  trust  His  omni 
potence  to  fulfil  His  promise.  When  Jesus  went 
down  into  the  grave  and  its  impotence,  it  was  in 
the  faith  that  God's  omnipotence  could  lift  Him 
to  the  throne  of  His  glory.  It  is  that  same 
Omnipotence  that  waits  to  work  out  God's  pur 
pose  in  them  that  believe  in  Him  to  do  so.  Let 
our  hearts  say,  "  Unto  Him  THAT  is  ABLE  to  do 
exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or 
think,  unto  Him  be  the  glory."  Amen. 

1  Eph.  iii.  20,  21. 


THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF 
PENTECOST 


fitllg  it  is  assure*  to  us  fog 


"If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  to 
your  children  :  how  much  more  shall  your  Heavenly  Father 
give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him?"  —  LUKE  xi.  13. 

"ITT  HEN  Jairus  came  to  the  Lord  Jesus  to 
entreat  His  help  for  his  dying  daughter, 
and  he  learned  by  the  way  the  sorrowful  tidings 
that  she  had  already  died,  Jesus  said  :  "  Be 
not  afraid  :  only  believe."  l  Face  to  face  with 
a  trial  in  which  man  was  utterly  helpless,  the 
Lord  called  upon  him  to  put  his  trust  in 
Himself.  There  was  but  one  thing  that  suited 
his  case  or  could  help  him  :  "  only  believe." 
Many  a  thousand  times  has  that  word  been 

1  Luke  viii.  50. 
137 


138    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

the  strength  of  God's  children,  where  so  far 
as  man  was  concerned  all  hope  was  lost  and 
success  appeared  to  be  impossible.  So  here 
also,  whilst  we  are  on  our  way  to  search  for 
and  know  the  full  Pentecostal  blessing,  we 
have  need  of  this  word.  In  view  of  the 
inconceivable  preciousness  of  the  blessing,  and 
of  the  divine  element  in  it,  it  will  indeed  be 
only  the  wonder-working  power  of  God  that 
can  make  this  exceeding  grace  a  reality 
within  us.  Let  us  only  be  silent  before  God ; 
here  also  we  shall  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus 
saying  to  us :  "  Be  not  afraid,  only  believe : 
God  will  do  it  for  you." 

It  is  nothing  less  than  this  that  is  the 
aim  of  this  word  of  our  Lord  concerning  the 
divine  assurance  that,  much  more  readily  than 
an  earthly  father  will  give  his  children  bread, 
will  God  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask 
Him.  We  should  regard  it  as  quite  unnatural 
on  the  part  of  a  father  if  he  did  not  give  his 
child  bread ;  how  much  more,  then,  shall  not 
God  give  the  Holy  Spirit,  yea,  all  the  promised 
fulness  of  the  Spirit,  to  those  that  ask  Him. 
In  the  midst  of  all  our  thinking  and  speaking, 


all  our  praying  and  hoping,  the  fundamental 
element  in  our  spiritual  life  must  be  the  firm 
confidence  that  the  Father  will  give  His  child 
His  full  heritage.  God  is  spirit :  He  desires 
in  His  eternal  love  to  obtain  full  possession  of 
us ;  but  He  can  do  this  in  no  other  manner 
than  by  giving  us  His  Spirit.  As  surely  as 
He  is  God,  will  He,  0  child  of  God,  fill  thee 
with  His  Holy  Spirit.  Without  that  faith  you 
will  never  succeed  in  your  quest  of  this  blessing. 
That  faith  will  give  you  the  victory  over  every 
difficulty.  Therefore,  "  be  not  afraid :  only 
believe."  Hear  the  voice  of  Jesus :  "  Said  I 
not  unto  thee  that  if  thou  believest  thou  shalt 
see  the  glory  of  God  ? " 

Let  us  listen  to  these  three  great  lessons. 

I 

Although  you  cannot  comprehend  or  explain 
everything  by  the  mere  power  of  your  understand 
ing,  still :  "  only  believe." 

There  are  many  preliminary  questions  which 
arise  at  once  in  connection  with  this  subject, 
and  which  tempt  us  to  resolve  that  we  shall 
first  take  in  and  understand  everything  about 


140    THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

it  before  we  expect  the  blessing.  Two  of  these 
questions  I  shall  venture  to  mention  now. 

The  first  is :  whence  must  this  blessing  come, 
from  WITHIN  or  from  ABOVE  ?  Some  earnest 
Christians  will  say  at  once  that  "  it  must  come 
from  WITHIN."  The  Holy  Spirit  descended 
upon  the  earth  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  and 
was  given  to  the  Christian  community.  At 
the  moment  of  conversion  He  comes  into  our 
heart.  We  have  therefore  no  longer  to  pray 
that  He  may  be  given  to  us :  we  have  simply 
to  recognise  and  use  what  we  already  have. 
It  is  not  as  if  we  had  to  seek  to  have  more 
of  the  Spirit :  we  have  Him  in  the  fulness 
of  the  gift  as  it  is.  It  is  rather  the  Holy 
Spirit  who  must  have  more  of  us.  As  we 
yield  ourselves  entirely  to  Him  He  will  entirely 
fill  us.  It  is  from  WITHIN  that  the  blessing 
must  come :  the  fountain  of  living  water  is 
already  there ;  the  fountain  has  only  to  be 
opened  and  every  obstruction  cleared  out  of 
the  way  and  the  water  shall  stream  forth.  It 
must  spring  from  WITHIN. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  not  a  few  that 
say,  "  No  ;  it  must  come  from  ABOVE."  When, 


HOW  FULLY  IT  IS  ASSUEED  TO  US  BY  GOD   141 

on  the  arrival  of  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the 
Father  bestowed  the  Spirit,  He  did  not  give 
Him  away  beyond  His  own  control.  The  ful 
ness  of  the  Spirit  still  remains  in  God.  God 
bestows  nothing  apart  from  Himself,  to  work 
without  or  independently  of  His  will.  He 
Himself  works  only  through  the  Spirit,  and 
every  new  and  greater  manifestation  of  the 
Spirit's  power  comes  directly  from  ABOVE. 
Long  after  the  day  of  Pentecost  the  Spirit 
came  down  again  from  heaven  at  Samaria  and 
Csesarea.  In  His  fulness  He  is  in  heaven  still ; 
and  it  is  from  God  in  heaven  that  the  fulness 
of  the  Spirit  is  to  be  ever  waited  for. 

Brother  Christian,  pray,  do  not  linger  till 
by  reasonings  of  your  own  you  have  decided 
which  of  these  representations  is  the  right  one. 
God  can  bless  men  in  both  ways.  When  the 
flood  came  all  the  fountains  of  the  abyss  were 
broken  up  and  the  sluices  of  heaven  were 
opened.  It  came  simultaneously  from  beneath 
and  from  above.  God  is  prepared  to  bless  men 
in  both  of  these  methods.  He  desires  to  teach 
us  to  know  and  honour  the  Spirit  who  is  already 
within  us.  He  would  fain  also  bring  us  to 


142    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

wait  upon  Himself  in  a  spirit  of  utter  depend 
ence,  and  to  beseech  Him  that  He  as  our 
Father  would  give  us  our  daily  bread,  the  new, 
the  fuller  influx  of  His  Spirit.  I  entreat  you 
not  to  suffer  yourself  to  be  held  back  by  such 
a  question  as  this.  God  understands  your 
petition.  He  knows  what  you  would  have. 
Believe  that  God  is  prepared  to  fill  you  with 
His  Spirit ;  let  that  faith  look  up  to  Him  with 
unceasing  prayer  and  confidence.  He  will  give 
the  blessing. 

The  other  question  is :  Does  this  blessing 
come  gradually  or  at  once  ?  Will  it  manifest 
itself  in  the  shape  of  a  silent,  unobserved 
increase  of  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  or  as  a 
momentary,  immediate  outpouring  of  His  power  ? 
It  must  suffice  for  me  to  say  here  again  that 
God  has  already  sent  this  blessing  in  both 
modes,  and  will  continue  to  do  so  still.  What 
must  take  place  at  once  is  this :  there  must 
be  a  definite  resolve  to  place  the  whole  life 
unreservedly  under  the  control  of  the  Spirit, 
and  a  conviction  of  faith  that  God  has  accepted 
this  surrender.  In  the  majority  of  cases  this 
is  done  at  once.  It  must  at  last  come  to  this, 


HOW  FULLY  IT  IS  ASSURED  TO  US  BY  GOD   143 

perhaps  after  a  long  course  of  seeking  and 
praying,  that  the  soul  shall  present  itself  to 
God  for  this  blessing  in  one  definite,  irrevocable 
act,  and  shall  believe  that  the  offering  is  then 
sanctified  and  accepted  upon  the  altar.  Thence 
forth,  whether  the  experience  of  the  blessing 
comes  at  once  and  with  power,  or  comes  quietly 
and  gradually,  the  soul  must  maintain  its  act 
of  self -dedication  and  simply  look  to  God  to  do 
His  own  work. 

Thus  in  dealing  with  all  such  questions  the 
chief  concern  is-  this :  "  only  believe "  and  rest 
in  the  FAITHFULNESS  OF  GOD.  Hold  fast  this 
one  principle :  God  has  given  us  a  promise 
that  He  will  fill  us  with  His  Spirit.  It  is 
His  work  to  make  His  promise  an  accomplished 
fact.  Thank  God  for  the  promise  even  as  you 
would  thank  Him  for  the  fulfilment  of  it.  In 
the  promise  God  has  already  pledged  Himself 
to  you.  Rejoice  in  Him  and  in  His  faithfulness. 
Be  not  held  back  by  any  questions  whatever. 
Set  your  heart  on  what  God  will  do,  on 
Himself  from  whom  the  blessing  must  come. 
The  result  will  be  certain  and  glorious. 


144    THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

II 

Although  you  receive  but  little  help  from  others, 
or  even  encounter  opposition,  still :  "  only  believe" 

It  is  one  of  the  saddest  tokens  of  the  un- 
spiritual  condition  of  the  Church  that  so  many 
are  content  with  things  just  as  they  are,  and 
have  no  desire  to  know  more  of  this  seeking 
for  the  reality  of  the  Spirit's  power.  They 
point  to  the  present  purity  of  doctrine,  to  the 
prevailing  earnestness  of  preaching,  to  the 
generous  gifts  which  are  made  for  the  main 
tenance  of  religious  works  and  the  enterprises 
of  philanthropy,  to  the  interest  which  is 
manifested  in  the  cause  of  education  and  of 
missions,  and  they  say  that  we  ought  rather 
to  give  God  thanks  for  the  good  we  see 
around  us.  Such  people  would  condemn  the 
language  of  Laodicea,  and  would  refuse  to  say 
that  they  were  rich  and  increased  in  goods 
and  had  need  of  nothing,1  and  yet  there  are 
some  traces  of  this  spirit  in  what  they  say. 
They  do  not  consider  the  injunction  to  be  "  filled 
with  the  Spirit."  They  have  forgotten  the 
1  Rev.  iii.  17. 


HOW  FULLY  IT  IS  ASSURED  TO  US  BY  GOD   145 

command  to  prophesy  to  the  Spirit  and  say : 
"  Come  from  the  four  winds,  0  Breath,  and 
breathe  upon  the  slain,  that  they  may  live." l 
When  you  speak  of  these  things  you  will 
receive  little  encouragement  from  them.  They 
do  not  understand  what  you  mean.  They 
believe  indeed  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  their 
eyes  have  not  been  opened  to  the  fact  that 
more  of  the  Spirit,  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit,  is 
the  one  thing  needful  for  the  Church. 

There  are  others  who  will  agree  with  you 
when  you  speak  of  this  need,  and  yet  will  really 
give  you  even  less  encouragement.  They  have 
often  both  thought  and  prayed  over  the  matter, 
but  no  benefit  has  accrued  from  the  effort :  they 
have  made  no  real  progress.  They  bid  you  look 
to  the  Church  of  earlier  times,  and  say  that  it 
was  never  much  otherwise  than  it  is  now. 
What  you  say  of  the  poverty  and  weakness  of 
the  Church  in  its  relations  to  the  world  is  true : 
your  representation  of  the  promise  of  God  is 
glorious :  all  that  you  expect  from  the  mighty 
working  of  the  Spirit  it  is  the  highest  degree 
desirable ;  but — it  is  not  to  be  obtained.  These 

1  Ezck.  xxxvii.  9. 
10 


146    THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

people  belong  to  the  generation  of  the  ten  spies 
who  were  sent  to  spy  out  Canaan :  the  land  is 
glorious,  but  the  enemy  in  possession  is  too 
strong :  we  are  too  weak  to  overcome  them. 
Lack  of  consecration  and  of  willingness  to 
surrender  everything  for  this  blessing  is  the 
root  of  the  unbelief,  and  has  made  them  incapable 
of  exercising  the  courage  of  Caleb  when  he  said : 
"  Lot  us  go  up  at  once,  and  possess  it ;  for  we 
are  well  able  to  overcome  it." 1 

My  brother,  if  you  would  be  filled  with  the 
Spirit,  do  not  suffer  yourself  to  be  held  back  by 
such  reasonings.  "  Only  believe  "  and  strengthen 
yourself  in  the  omnipotence  of  God.  Do  not 
say :  is  God  able  ?  Say  rather  :  God  is  ABLE. 
The  God  who  was  able  to  raise  Christ  from  the 
dead  is  still  mighty  in  the  midst  of  His  people, 
and  is  able  to  reveal  His  divine  life  with  power 
in  your  heart.  Hear  His  voice  saying  to  you  as 
to  Abraham :  "  I  am  God  Almighty :  walk  thou 
•before  My  face  and  be  perfect."  2  Set  your  heart 
without  distraction  on  what  God  has  said  that 
He  will  do,  and  then  on  the  Omnipotence  which 
is  prepared  to  bring  the  promise  to  accomplish- 

1  Num.  xiii.  30.  2  Gen.  xvii.  1. 


HOW  FULLY  IT  IS  ASSURED  TO  US  BY  GOD   147 

ment.  Pray  to  the  Father  that  He  would  grant 
unto  you  to  be  strengthened  with  might  by  His 
Spirit.  Adore  Him  who  is  able  to  do  for  us 
exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  and 
think,  and  give  Him  the  glory.  Let  faith  in  the 
Omnipotence  of  God  fill  your  soul  and  you  will 
be  full  of  the  assurance  that,  however  difficult, 
however  improbable,  however  impossible  it  may 
seem,  God  can  fill  us  with  His  Spirit.  "  Only 
believe." 

Ill 

Although  everything  in  you  appears  entirely 
unfit  for  this  Messing  and  unworthy  of  it,  still : 
"  only  believe." 

When  one  prays  for  this  blessing  of  being 
filled  with  the  Spirit,  the  thought  will  spring  up 
unbidden,  of  what  one's  life  as  a  Christian  has 
already  been.  The  believer  thinks  of  all  the 
workings  of  divine  grace  in  his  heart,  and  of  the 
incessant  strivings  of  the  Spirit.  He  thinks  of  all 
his  efforts  and  prayers,  of  his  past  attempts  at 
entire  surrender  and  the  appropriation  of  faith. 
He  then  looks  upon  what  he  is  at  the  moment, 
upon  his  unfaithfulness  and  sin  and  helplessness, 


148    THE   FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

and  he  becomes  dispirited.  In  the  lapse  of  so 
many  years  so  little  progress  has  been  made. 
The  past  testifies  only  of  failure  and  unfaithful 
ness.  What  avails  it  to  think  that  the  future 
will  be  any  better  ?  If  all  his  praying  and 
believing  of  earlier  days  have  been  of  so  little 
avail,  why  should  he  now  dare  to  hope  that 
everything  is  to  be  transformed  at  once  ?  He 
presents  to  himself  the  life  of  a  man  full  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  alongside  it  he  sets  his  own 
life  as  he  has  learned  to  know  it,  and  it  becomes 
impossible  for  him  to  imagine  that  he  shall  ever 
be  able  to  live  as  a  man  full  of  the  Spirit.  For 
such  a  task  he  is  once  for  all  unfit,  and  feels  no 
courage  to  make  the  attempt. 

Christian,  when  such  thoughts  as  these  throng 
in  upon  you  there  is  but  one  counsel  to  follow, 
and  that  is  :  "  only  believe."  Cast  yourself  into 
the  arms  of  your  Father  who  gives  His  children 
the  Holy  Spirit  much  more  readily  than  an 
earthly  father  gives  bread.  Only  believe,  and 
count  upon  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD.  All  your  self- 
dedication  and  surrender,  all  your  faith  and 
integrity  is  not  a  work  by  which  you  have  to 
move  God  or  make  Him  willing  to  bless  you. 


HOW  FULLY  IT  IS  ASSURED  TO  US  BY  GOD   149 

Far  from  it.  It  is  God  that  desires  to  bless 
you,  and  that  will  Himself  work  everything  in 
you.  God  loves  you  as  a  father  and  sees  that, 
to  be  able  to  live  in  perfect  health  and  happi 
ness  as  His  child,  you  have  need  of  nothing 
but  this  one  thing — to  be  full  of  His  Spirit. 
Jesus  has  by  His  blood  opened  up  the  way  to  the 
full  enjoyment  of  this  love.  You  must  learn  to 
enter  into  this  love,  to  abide  in  this  love,  and 
by  faith  to  acknowledge  that  it  shines  upon  you 
and  surrounds  you,  even  as  the  light  of  the 
sun  illumines  and  animates  your  body.  Begin 
to  trust  this  love.  I  do  not  say  in  its  willing 
ness  :  no — in  its  unspeakable  longing  to  fill  you 
entirely  with  itself.  It  is  your  Father,  whose 
love  waits  to  make  you  full  of  His  Spirit.  He 
Himself  will  do  it  for  you. 

And  what  does  He  crave  at  your  hands  ? 
Simply  this,  that  you  yield  yourself  to  Him  in 
utter  unworthiness,  nothingness,  and  impotence, 
to  let  Him  do  this  work  in  you.  He  is  prepared 
to  take  charge  of  all  the  preparatory  work. 
You  may  be  sure  that  He  will  help  you  by  His 
Spirit.  He  will  strengthen  you  with  might 
in  the  inner  man,  silently  and  hiddenly,  yet 


150    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

none  the  less  surely,  to  abandon  everything  that 
has  to  be  given  up  and  to  receive  this  treasure. 
He  will  help  you  in  the  faith  of  appropriation 
to  rest  in  His  word  and  to  wait  for  Him ;  and 
He  will  hold  Himself  responsible  for  all  the 
future.  He  will  make  provision  that  you  shall 
be  able  to  walk  in  the  fulness  of  this  blessing. 

You  have  perhaps  already  formed  a  very  high 
idea  of  what  a  man  must  be  that  is  filled  with 
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  you  see  no  chance  of  your 
being  able  to  live  in  such  a  fashion.  Or  it  may 
be  that  you  have  not  been  able  to  form  any 
idea  of  it  whatever,  and  are  on  that  account 
afraid  to  strive  for  a  life  which  is  so  unknown 
to  you.  0  Christian,  abandon  all  such  thoughts. 
The  Spirit  alone,  when  He  is  once  in  you,  will 
Himself  teach  you  what  that  life  is,  for  He  will 
work  it  in  you.  God  will  take  upon  Himself 
the  responsibility  of  making  you  full  of  the 
Spirit,  not  as  a  treasure  which  you  must  carry 
and  keep,  but  as  a  power  which  is  to  carry  and 
keep  you.  Therefore,  0  Soul,  "  only  believe  "  : 
count  upon  THE  LOVE  OF  YOUE  FATHER. 

In  His  promise  of  the  blessing  and  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  the  Lord  Jesus  always  pointed  to 


HOW  FULLY  IT  IS  ASSURED  TO  US  BY  GOD   151 

God  the  Father.  He  called  it  "  the  promise  of 
the  Father."  1  He  directed  us  to  the  faithfulness 
of  God :  "  He  is  faithful  that  promised."  2  He 
directed  us  to  the  power  of  God :  the  Spirit  was, 
as  power  from  on  high,  to  come  from  God 
Himself.  3  He  directed  us  to  the  love  of  God : 
it  is  as  a  Father  that  God  is  to  give  this  boon 
to  His  children.  Let  every  thought  of  this 
blessing  and  every  desire  for  it  only  lead  us  to 
God.  Here  is  something  that  HE  must  do,  that 
He  must  give,  that  HE,  HE  ALONE,  must  work. 
Let  us  in  silent  adoration  set  our  heart  upon 
God :  He  will  do  something  for  us.  Let  us 
joyfully  trust  in  Him :  He  is  able  to  do  above 
all  praying  and  thinking.  His  love  will,  0  so 
willingly,  bestow  upon  us  a  full  blessing. 
Therefore,  "  only  believe "  :  God  will  make  me 
full  of  the  Spirit.  And  say  humbly :  Behold 
the  servant  of  the  Lord.  Let  Him  do  to  me  what 
is  good  in  His  sight.  Be  it  unto  me  according  to 
Thy  word*  "  Faithful  is  He  that  calleth  you, 

WHO    ALSO    WILL    DO    IT." 

1  Luke  xxiv.  49.  2  IL;b.  x.  23. 

3  Acts  i.  8.  4  Luke  i.  38. 


THE    FULL   BLESSING   OF 
PENTECOST 


XI 

it  is  to  fae  founti  fog  all 


"  And  I  will  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall 
be  clean  :  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  all  your  idols, 
will  I  cleanse  you.  And  I  will  put  My  Spirit  within  you,  and 
cause  you  to  walk  in  My  statutes,  and  ye  shall  keep  My 
judgments,  and  do  them."  —  EZEK.  xxxvi.  25,  27. 


nHHE  full  Pentecostal  blessing  is  for  all  the 
children  of  God.  As  many  as  are  led  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  children  of  God.1 
God  does  not  give  a  half  portion  to  any  one  of 
His  children.  To  every  one  He  says  :  "  Son,  thou 
art  ever  with  Me,  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine"  2 
Christ  is  not  divided  ;  he  that  receives  Him 

1  Rom.  viii.  14.  "  Luke  xv.  31. 

152 


HOW   IT   IS   TO   BE   FOUND   BY  ALL     153 

receives  Him  in  all  His  fulness.  Every  Christian 
is  destined  by  God,  and  is  actually  called,  to  be 
filled  with  the  Spirit. 

In  the  preceding  chapters  I  have  had  in  view 
especially  those  who  are  to  some  extent  ac 
quainted  with  these  things,  and  have  been 
already  in  search  of  the  truth  :  such  as  have 
been  already  led  after  conversion  to  make  a 
more  complete  renunciation  of  sin,  and  to  yield 
themselves  wholly  to  the  Lord.  But  it  is  quite 
conceivable  that  amongst  those  who  read  this 
book  there  may  be  Christians  who  have  heard 
but  little  of  the  full  Pentecostal  blessing,  and  in 
whose  hearts  the  desire  has  arisen  to  obtain  a 
share  in  it.  There  is,  however,  so  much  that 
they  do  not  as  yet  understand,  that  they  are 
willing  indeed  to  have  pointed  out  to  them  in 
the  simplest  possible  fashion,  where  they  are  to 
begin,  and  what  they  have  to  do,  in  order  to 
succeed  in  their  desire.  They  are  prepared  to 
acknowledge  that  their  life  is  full  of  sin,  and 
that  it  seems  to  them  as  if  they  would  have  to 
strive  long  and  earnestly,  ere  they  can  become 
full  of  the  Spirit.  I  should  like  much  to  inspire 
them  with  fresh  courage  and  to  direct  them  to 


154    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

the  God  who  has  said  :  "  I  the  Lord  will  hasten 
it  in  its  time." l  I  should  like  to  take  them  and 
guide  them  to  the  place  where  God  will  bless 
them,  and  to  point  to  them  out  of  His  Word 
what  the  disposition  and  the  attitude  must  be 
in  which  they  can  receive  this  blessing. 

I 

First  of  all,  there  must  be  a  new  discovery  and 
confession  and  casting  away  of  sin. 

In  the  message  of  Ezeldel,  God  first  promised  : 
"  I  will  cleanse  you,"  and  then  :  "  I  will  put  My 
Spirit  within  you."  A  vessel  into  which  any 
thing  precious  is  to  be  poured  must  always 
first  be  cleansed.  So,  if  the  Lord  is  to  give  you 
a  new  and  full  blessing,  a  new  cleansing  must 
also  take  place.  In  your  conversion,  it  is  true, 
there  was  a  confession  and  putting  away  of  sin. 
Yet  this  separation  was  but  superficial  and 
external.  The  soul  was  still  half  enveloped  in 
darkness :  it  thought  more  of  its  heinous  sins 
and  the  punishment  they  might  entail.  After 
conversion  it  did  indeed  endeavour  to  overcome 
sin,  but  the  effort  did  not  succeed.  It  did  not 

1  Isa.  Ix.  22  (R.V.). 


HOW   IT   IS   TO   BE   FOUND   BY   ALL     155 

know  in  what  holiness  the  Lord  desires  His 
people  to  live  :  it  did  not  know  how  pure  and  holy 
the  Lord  would  have  it  be  and  would  make  it  be. 
This  new  cleansing  must  come  through  new 
confession  and  discovery  of  sin.  The  old  leaven 
cannot  be  purged  away  unless  it  be  first  searched 
for  and  found.  Do  not  say  that  you  already 
know  sufficiently  well  that  your  Christian  life 
is  full  of  sin.  Sit  down  in  silent  meditation 
and  with  the  express  purpose  of  seeing  of  what 
sort  your  life  as  a  Christian  has  been.  How 
much  pride,  self-seeking,  worldliness,  self-will, 
and  impurity  has  been  in  it.  Can  such  a  heart 
receive  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  ?  It  is  im 
possible.  Look  into  your  home  life.  In  your 
intercourse  with  wife  and  children,  servants  and 
friends,  do  not  hastiness  of  temper,  anxiety  about 
yourself,  bitterness,  idle  or  harsh  or  unbecoming 
words  testify  how  little  you  have  been  cleansed  ? 
Look  into  the  current  life  of  the  Church.  How 
much  religion  is  there  that  is  merely  intellectual, 
or  formal,  or  pleasing  to  men,  without  that  real 
humiliation  of  spirit,  that  real  desire  for  the 
living  God,  that  real  love  for  Jesus,  that  real 
subjection  to  the  word,  which  constitute  worship 


156    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

in  spirit  and  in  truth.  Look  into  your  general 
course  of  conduct.  Consider  whether  the  people 
amongst  whom  you  mingle  can  testify  that  they 
have  observed,  by  your  honourable  spirit  and 
disinterestedness  and  freedom  from  worldly- 
mindedness,  that  you  are  one  who  has  been 
cleansed  from  sin  by  God.  Contemplate  all  this 
in  the  light  of  what  God  expects  from  you  and 
has  offered  to  work  in  you,  and  take  your  place 
as  a  guilty,  helpless  soul  that  must  be  cleansed 
before  God  can  bestow  the  full  blessing  upon  you. 
On  the  back  of  this  discovery  follows  the 
actual  putting  away  and  casting  out  of  what  is 
impure.  This  is  something  that  you  are  simply 
bound  to  do.  You  must  come  with  these  sins, 
and  especially  with  those  that  are  most  strictly 
your  own  besetting  sins,  and  acknowledge  them 
before  God  in  confession,  and  there  and  then 
make  renunciation  of  them.  You  must  be 
brought  to  the  conviction  that  your  life  is  a 
guilty  and  shameful  life.  You  are  not  at  liberty 
to  take  comfort  from  the  consideration  that  you 
are  so  weak,  or  that  the  majority  of  Christians 
live  no  higher  life.  It  must  become  a  matter 
of  earnest  resolve  with  you  that  your  life  is  to 


HOW  IT   IS  TO   BE   FOUND   BY  ALL     157 

undergo  a  complete  transformation.  The  sins 
that  still  cleave  to  you  are  to  be  cast  off  and 
done  away  with. 

Perhaps  you  may  say  in  reply  that  you  find 
yourself  unable  to  do  away  with  them  or  cast 
them  off.  I  tell  you  that  you  are  quite  able  to 
do  this ;  and  in  this  way.  You  can  give  these 
sins  up  to  God.  If  there  should  happen  to  be 
anything  in  my  house  that  I  wish  to  have  taken 
away,  and  that  I  myself  am  unable  to  carry,  I 
call  for  men  who  shall  do  it  for  me,  and  I  give 
it  over  into  their  hands,  saying :  "  Look  here : 
take  that  away  ;  "  and  they  do  it.  So  I  am  able 
to  say  that  I  have  put  away  this  thing  out  of 
my  house.  In  like  manner  you  can  give  up  to 
God  those  sins  of  yours,  against  which  you  feel 
yourself  utterly  impotent.  You  can  give  them 
up  to  Him  to  be  dealt  with  as  He  desires  and 
He  will  fulfil  His  promise :  "  I  will  cleanse  you 
from  all  your  filthiness."  There  is  nothing  so 
needful  as  that  there  should  be  a  very  definite 
understanding  between  you  and  the  Lord,  that 
you  on  your  part  really  confess  your  sin  and 
bid  it  everlasting  farewell  and  give  it  up,  and 
that  you  wait  on  Him  until  He  assures  you  that 


158    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

He  has  taken  it,  or  rather  has  taken  your  heart 
and  life,  into  His  own  hands  to  give  you  a 
complete  victory. 

II 

In  this  way  you  come  to  a  new  discovery,  and 
reception,  and  experience  of  what  Christ  is  and  is 
prepared  to  do  for  you. 

If  the  knowledge  of  sin  at  conversion  is 
superficial,  so  also  is  the  faith  in  Jesus.  Our 
faith,  our  reception  of  Jesus  never  goes  further 
or  deeper  than  our  insight  into  sin.  If  since 
your  conversion  you  have  learned  to  know  the 
inward  invincible  power  of  sin  in  you,  you  are 
now  prepared  to  receive  from  God  a  discovery 
of  the  inward  invincible  power  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  your  heart,  such  as  you  have  hitherto 
had  no  idea  of.  If  you  really  long  for  a  com 
plete  deliverance  from  sin,  so  as  to  be  able  to 
live  in  obedience  to  God,  God  will  reveal  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  you  as  a  complete  Saviour.  He 
will  make  you  to  know  that,  although  the  flesh 
always  remains  in  you,  with  its  inclination  to 
evil,  the  Lord  Jesus  will  so  dwell  in  your  heart 
that  the  power  of  the  flesh  shall  be  kept  in 


HOW   IT   IS   TO   BE   FOUND   BY  ALL     159 

subjection  by  Him,  in  order  that  you  may  no 
longer  do  the  will  of  the  flesh.  Through  Jesus 
Christ,  God  will  cleanse  you  from  all  unrighteous 
ness,  so  that  day  by  day  you  may  walk  before 
God  with  a  pure  heart.  What  you  really  need 
is  the  discovery  that  He  is  prepared  to  work  this 
change  in  you,  and  that  you  may  receive  it  by 
faith,  here  and  now. 

Yes :  this  is  what  Jesus  Christ  desires  to 
work  in  you  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  came  to 
put  away  sin ;  not  the  guilt  and  punishment 
of  it  only,  but  sin  itself.  He  has  not  only 
mastered  the  power  and  dominion  of  the  law  and 
its  curse  over  you,  but  has  also  completely 
broken  and  taken  away  the  power  and  dominion 
of  sin.  He  has  completely  rescued  you  as  a 
new-born  soul  from  beneath  the  power  of  sin ; 
and  He  lives  in  His  heavenly  authority  and 
all-pervading  presence  in  order  to  work  out  this 
deliverance  in  you.  In  this  power  He  will  live 
in  you  and  Himself  carry  out  His  work  in  you. 
As  the  indwelling  Christ,  He  is  bent  on 
maintaining  and  manifesting  His  redemption  in 
you.  The  sins  which  you  have  confessed,  the 
pride  and  the  lovelessness,  the  worldly-mindedness 


160    THE  FULL  BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

and  vanity  and  all  uncleanness,  He  will  by  His 
power  take  out  of  your  heart ;  so  that,  although 
the  flesh  may  tempt  you,  the  choice  and  the  joy 
of  your  heart  abide  in  Him  and  in  His  obedience 
to  God's  will.  Yes :  you  may  indeed  become  "  more 
than  conqueror"  through  Him  that  loved  you.1  As 
the  indwelling  Christ,  He  will  overcome  sin  in  you. 
What  then  is  required  on  our  side  ?  Only 
this,  a  thing  that  can  be  done  at  once,  namely, 
that  when  the  soul  sees  it  to  be  true  that  Jesus 
will  carry  out  this  work,  it  shall  then  open  the 
door  before  Him  and  receive  Him  into  the  heart 
as  Lord  and  King.  Yes :  that  can  be  done  at 
once.  A  house  that  has  remained  closely  shut 
for  twenty  years  can  be  penetrated  by  the  light 
in  a  moment,  if  the  doors  and  windows  are 
thrown  open.  In  like  manner,  a  heart  that  has 
remained  enveloped  in  darkness  and  impotence 
for  twenty  years,  because  it  knew  not  that  Jesus 
was  willing  to  take  the  victory  over  sin  into  His 
own  hands,  can  have  its  whole  experience 
changed  in  a  moment.  When  it  acknowledges 
its  sinful  condition  and  yields  itself  to  God,  and 
believes  that  the  Son  of  God  is  prepared  to 

1  Rom.  viii.  37. 


HOW  IT   IS  TO   BE   FOUND   BY  ALL     161 

assume  the  responsibility  of  the  inner  life  and  its 
purification  from  sin ;  when  it  ventures  to  trust 
the  Lord  that  He  will  do  this  work  at  the  very 
moment ;  then  it  may  firmly  believe  that  it  is 
done,  and  that  Jesus  takes  all  that  is  in  me 
into  His  own  hands. 

This  is  indeed  an  act  of  faith,  that  must  be 
held  fast  in  faith.  When  doors  and  windows  are 
thrown  open,  and  the  light  streaming  in  drives  out 
the  darkness,  we  discover  at  once  how  much  dust 
and  impurity  there  is  in  the  house.  But  the 
light  shines  just  in  order  that  we  may  see  how 
to  take  it  away.  When  we  receive  Christ  into 
the  heart  everything  is  not  yet  perfected : 
light  and  gladness  are  not  seen  and  experienced 
at  once  ;  but  by  faith  the  soul  knows  that  He 
who  is  faithful  will  keep  His  word  and  will 
surely  do  His  work.  The  faith  that  has  up  to 
this  moment  only  sought  and  wrestled,  now 
rests  in  the  Lord  and  His  word.  It  knows  that 
what  was  begun  ~by  faith  must  be  carried  forward 
only  by  faith.  It  says :  "  I  abide  in  Jesus ;  I 
know  that  He  abides  in  me  and  that  He  will 
manifest  Himself  unto  me."  As  Jesus  cleansed 

the  lepers  with  a  word,  and  it  was  only  when 
ii 


162    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

they  were  on  their  way  to  the  priest  that  they 
found  out  they  were  clean,  so  He  cleanses  us  by 
His  Word.  He  that  firmly  holds  that  fact  in 
faith  will  see  the  proofs  of  it. 

Ill 

So  the  soul  is  prepared  to  receive  the  full 
blessing  of  the  Spirit. 

The  Lord  gave  first  the  promise,  /  will  cleanse 
you ;  and  then  the  second  promise,  /  will  put  My 
Spirit  within  yon.  The  Holy  Spirit  cannot  come 
with  power  or  fill  the  heart  and  continue  to 
dwell  in  it,  unless  a  special  and  complete 
cleansing  first  takes  place  within  it.  The  Spirit 
and  sin  are  engaged  in  a  mortal  combat.  The 
only  reason  why  the  Spirit  works  so  feebly  in 
the  Church  is  sin,  which  is  all  too  little  known 
or  dreaded  or  cast  out.  Men  do  not  believe  in 
the  power  of  Christ  to  cleanse ;  and  therefore 
He  cannot  do  His  work  of  baptizing  with  the 
Spirit.  It  is  from  Christ  that  the  Spirit  comes, 
and  to  Christ  the  Spirit  returns  again.  It  is 
the  heart  that  gives  Christ  liberty  to  exercise 
dominion  in  it  that  shall  inherit  the  full  blessing. 
Therefore,  my  reader,  if  you  have  understood  the 


HOW   IT   IS   TO   BE   FOUND   BY   ALL     163 

lesson  of  this  chapter,  and  have  done  what  has 
been  suggested  to  you ;  if  you  have  believed  in 
Jesus  as  the  Lord  that  cleanses  you  and  dwells 
in  you  to  keep  you  clean,  be  assured  that  God 
will  certainly  fulfil  His  word  :  "  I  will  cleanse  you 
and  put  My  Spirit  within  you."  Cleave  to  Jesus, 
who  cleanses  you  :  let  Him  be  all  within  you  ;  God 
will  see  to  it  that  you  are  filled  with  the  Spirit. 

Only  keep  in  view  these  two  truths. 

First,  that  the  gift  and  the  blessing  and  the 
fulness  of  the  Spirit  do  not  always  come,  as  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost,  with  external  observation. 
God  is  often  a  God  that  hideth  Himself :  do  not 
be  surprised,  therefore,  if  your  heart  does  not 
at  once  feel,  as  you  should  like  it  to  feel, 
immediately  after  your  act  of  surrender  or 
appropriation.  Eest  assured  that,  if  you  fully 
trust  Christ  to  do  everything  for  you,  He  there 
and  then  begins  to  do  it  in  secret  by  His  Spirit. 
Count  upon  it  that,  if  you  present  yourself  to 
God  as  a  pure  vessel,  cleansed  by  Christ,  to  be 
filled  with  the  Spirit,  God  will  take  you  at  your 
word  and  say  unto  you :  "  Eeceive  ye  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  be  it  unto  you  according  to  your  faith."  1 

1  John  xx.  22. 


164    THE   FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

At  that  moment  bow  down  before  Him,  more 
and  more  silently,  more  and  more  deeply,  in  holy 
adoration  and  expectation,  in  the  blessed  assur 
ance  that  the  unseen  God  has  now  begun  to 
carry  on  His  work  more  mightily  in  you,  and 
that  He  will  also  manifest  it  to  you  more 
gloriously  than  ever  before. 

The  other  thing  you  must  keep  in  view  is  the 
purpose  for  which  the  Spirit  is  given.  I  will 
put  My  Spirit  within  you,  and  /  will  cause  you  to 
walk  in  My  statutes  and  to  keep  My  judgments 
and  do  them.  The  fulness  of  the  Spirit  must  be 
sought  and  received  and  kept  with  the  direct 
aim  that  you  shall  now  simply  and  wholly  live 
to  do  God's  will  and  work  upon  the  earth, — yes : 
only  to  be  able  to  live  like  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
to  say  with  Him  :  "  Lo  !  I  come  to  do  Thy  will."  l 
If  you  cherish  this  disposition,  the  fulness  of  the 
Spirit  may  be  positively  expected.  Be  full  of 
courage  and  yield  yourself  to  walk  in  God's 
statutes  and  to  keep  His  judgments  and  do  them, 
and  you  may  trust  God  to  keep  His  word  that 
He  will  cause  you  to  keep  and  do  them.  He, 
the  living  God,  will  work  in  you.  Even  before 
1  Ps.  xl.  7,  8  ;  Heb.  x.  7. 


HOW   IT   IS   TO   BE   FOUND   BY  ALL     165 

you  are  aware  how  the  Spirit  is  in  you,  He  will 
enable  you  to  experience  the  full  blessing. 

My  brother,  have  you  never  yet  known  the 
fulness  of  the  Spirit,  or  have  you  perhaps  been 
really  seeking  it  for  a  long  while  without  finding 
it  ?  Here  you  have  at  last  the  sure  method  of 
winning  it.  Acknowledge  the  sinfulness  of  your 
condition  as  a  Christian  and  make  renunciation 
of  it,  once  and  for  all,  by  yielding  it  up  to  God. 
Acknowledge  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  ready  and 
able  to  cleanse  your  heart  from  its  sin ;  to  con 
quer  these  sins  by  His  entrance  into  it,  and  to 
set  you  free ;  and  that  His  purpose  is  to  do  this 
at  once.  Take  Him  now  as  your  Lord,  at  once 
and  for  ever.  Then  you  may  be  assured  that 
God  will  put  His  Spirit  within  you  in  a  way 
and  a  measure  and  a  power  of  which  you  have 
hitherto  had  no  idea.  Be  assured  that  He  will 
do  it.  0  permit  Him  to  begin ;  let  Him  do  it 
in  you  now.  Amen. 


THE  FULL  BLESSING  OF 
PENTECOST 


XII 

fbergtijing  must  tie  gibnt  tip  for  it 


"Then  shall  the  Son  also  Himself  be  subjected  to  Him 
that  did  subject  all  things  unto  Him,  that  God  may  be  all 
in  all."—  1  COR.  xv.  28. 

TTTHEN  we  speak  of  entire  consecration,  we 
are  frequently  asked  what  the  precise 
distinction  is  betwixt  the  ordinary  doctrine  of 
sanctification,  and  the  preaching  of  that  gracious 
work  which  has  begun  to  prevail  in  the  Church 
in  recent  years.  One  answer  that  may  be 
given  is  that  the  distinction  lies  solely  in  the 
little  word,  all.  That  word  is  the  key  of  the 
secret.  The  ordinary  method  of  proclaiming 
the  necessity  of  holiness  is  true  so  far  as  it 

166 


HOW   EVERYTHING  MUST   BE   GIVEN   UP    167 

goes ;  but  sufficient  emphasis  is  not  laid  on  this 
one  point  of  the  "  All."  So  is  it  also  with  the 
question  as  to  the  reasons  why  the  fulness  of 
the  Spirit  is  not  more  widely  enjoyed.  That 
little  word  "  All "  suggests  the  explanation. 
So  long  as  the  "  All "  of  God,  of  sin,  of  Christ,  of 
surrender,  of  the  Spirit,  and  of  faith,  is  not  fully 
understood,  the  soul  cannot  enjoy  all  that  God 
desires  to  give  and  be,  all  that  God  would  have 
it  be.  In  this  our  last  meditation  let  us 
consider  the  full  Pentecostal  blessing  from  this 
standpoint.  We  would  fain  do  this  in  a  spirit 
of  humble  waiting  on  God,  and  with  the 
prayer  that  He  would  make  us  by  His  Spirit 
feel  so  deeply  where  the  evil  lies  and  what 
the  remedy  is,  that  we  shall  be  ready  to  give  up 
everything  in  order  to  receive  nothing  less  than 
everything. 

I 

THE  ALL  OF  GOD 

It  lies  in  the  very  being  and  nature  of  God 
that  He  must  be  all.  From  Him  and  through 
Him  and  to  Him  are  all  things.  As  God  He 


168    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

is  the  life  of  everything :  all  life  is  only  the 
effect  of  His  direct  and  continuous  operation. 
It  is  because  all  is  thus  through  Him  and  from 
Him  that  it  is  also  to  Him.  Everything  that 
exists  serves  only  as  a  means  for  the  manifestation 
of  the  goodness  and  wisdom  and  power  of  God. 

Sin  consists  in  nothing  but  this,  that  man 
determined  to  be  something  and  would  not 
suffer  God  to  be  everything ;  and  the  redemp 
tion  of  Jesus  has  no  other  aim  than  that  God 
should  again  become  everything  in  our  heart 
and  life.  At  the  end,  even  the  Son  shall  be 
subjected  to  the  Father,  that  God  may  be  all 
in  all.  Nothing  less  than  this  is  what 
redemption  is  to  secure.  Christ  Himself  has 
shown  in  His  life  what  it  means  to  be  nothing, 
and  to  suffer  God  to  be  everything ;  and  as 
He  once  lived  upon  the  earth,  so  does  He  still 
live  in  the  hearts  of  His  people.  According 
to  the  measure  in  which  they  receive  and 
rejoice  in  the  truth  that  God  is  all,  will  the 
fulness  of  the  blessing  be  able  to  find  its  way 
into  their  life. 

The  All  of  God :  that  is  what  we  must  seek. 
In  His  will,  His  honour,  His  power  must  He 


HOW   EVERYTHING   MUST   BE   GIVEN  UP    169 

be  everything  for  us.  No  moment  of  our  time, 
no  word  of  our  lips,  no  movement  of  our  heart, 
no  satisfying  of  the  needs  of  our  physical  life, 
should  there  be  that  is  not  the  expression  of 
the  will,  the  glory,  the  power  of  God.  Only 
the  man  who  discerns  this  and  consents  to  it, 
who  desires  and  seeks  after  it,  who  believes  and 
appropriates  it,  can  rightly  understand  what 
the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  must  effect,  and  why 
it  is  necessary  that  we  should  forsake  every 
thing  if  we  desire  to  obtain  it.  God  must  be 
not  merely  something,  not  merely  much,  but 
literally,  AIL 

II 

THE  ALL  OF  SIN 

What  is  sin  ?  It  is  the  absence  of  God ; 
separation  from  God.  Where  man  is  guided 
by  his  own  will,  his  own  honour,  his  own 
power ;  where  the  will,  the  honour,  the  opera 
tion  of  God  are  not  manifested,  there  sin  must 
be  at  work.  Sin  is  death  and  misery,  only 
because  it  is  a  turning  away  from  God  to  the 
creature. 


170    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

Sin  is  in  no  sense  a  thing  that  may  exist  in 
man  along  with  other  things  that  are  good. 
No :  as  God  was  once  everything,  so  has  sin 
in  fallen  man  become  everything.  It  now 
dominates  and  penetrates  his  whole  being,  even 
as  God  should  have  been  allowed  to  do.  His 
nature  in  every  part  of  it  is  corrupt.  We  still 
have  our  natural  existence  in  God,  and  doubtless 
with  not  a  few  good  inclinations  in  nature  and 
character,  just  as  these  are  to  be  found  in 
the  lower  creatures.  But  of  what  is  good  in 
the  spiritual  and  heavenly  sense  of  the  word, 
of  what  is  done  out  of  inward  harmony  with 
God  or  the  direction  of  His  Spirit — of  all  this 
there  is  nothing  that  has  its  origin  in  His 
nature.  All  is  in  sin,  and  under  the  influence 
of  sin. 

The  All  of  sin :  some  small  measure  of  the 
knowledge  of  this  fact  was  necessary  even  at 
the  time  of  conversion.  This,  however,  was  still 
very  imperfect.  If  a  Christian  is  to  make 
progress  and  become  fully  convinced  of  the 
necessity  of  being  filled  with  the  Spirit,  his 
eyes  must  be  opened  to  the  extent  in  which 
sin  dominates  over  everything  within  him. 


HOW   EVERYTHING   MUST  BE   GIVEN   UP    171 

Everything  in  him  is  tainted  with  sin,  his  will, 
his  power,  his  heart ;  and  therefore  the  omni 
potence  of  God  must  take  in  hand  the  renewal 
of  everything  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Man  is 
utterly  impotent  to  that  which  is  good  in  the 
highest  sense :  he  can  do  no  more  of  what  is 
good  than  what  the  Spirit  actually  works  in 
him  at  any  moment.  He  learns  also  to  see 
the  All  of  sin  just  as  distinctly  in  the  world 
around  him ;  for  the  fairest,  the  most  useful, 
and  the  most  legitimate  possessions  or  enjoy 
ments  are  all  under  the  power  of  sin. 
Everything  must  be  sacrificed  and  given  over 
to  death :  the  All  of  God  must  expel  the  All 
of  sin.  God  must  again  live  wholly  and 
entirely  within  us,  and  take  inwardly  and  con 
tinuously  the  place  which  sin  usurped.  He 
that  desires  this  change  will  rightly  understand 
and  desire  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit,  and  as  he 
believes  will  certainly  receive  it. 


172    THE   FULL   BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

III 

THE  ALL  OF  CHRIST 

The  Son  is  the  revelation  of  the  Father : 
the  All  of  God  is  exhibited  to  our  view  and 
made  accessible  to  us  in  the  Son.  On  this 
account  the  ALL  of  Christ  is  just  as  necessary 
and  infinite  as  that  of  God.  Christ  is  God 
come  upon  the  earth  to  undo  the  All  of  sin,  to 
win  back  and  restore  in  man  the  lost  All  of 
God.  To  this  end  we  must  know  thoroughly 
the  All  of  Christ. 

The  idea  which  most  believing  disciples  have 
of  the  All  of  Christ  is  that  He  alone  does 
everything  in  the  atonement  and  the  forgiveness 
of  sin.  This  is  indeed  the  glorious  beginning 
of  His  redemptive  work,  but  still  only  the 
beginning.  God  has  given  in  Him  all  that  we 
have  need  of :  life  and  all  grace.  Christ 
Himself  desires  to  be  our  life  and  strength,  the 
Indweller  of  our  heart,  who  animates  that 
heart  and  makes  it  what  it  ought  to  be  before 
God.  To  know  the  All  of  Christ,  and  to  under 
stand  how  intensely  and  how  completely  and 


how  really  Christ  is  prepared  to  be  everything 
in  us,  is  the  secret  of  true  sanctification.  He 
that  discerns  the  will  of  God  in  this  principle 
and  from  the  heart  yields  himself  to  its 
operation  has  found  the  pathway  to  the  full 
blessing  of  Pentecost. 

The  All  of  Christ,  Acknowledge  this  in 
humble  joyful  thanksgiving :  confess  that  every 
thing  has  been  given  by  God  in  Him.  Eeceive 
with  firm  confidence  the  fact  that  Christ  is  all 
and  the  promise  that  He  will  work  all,  yes,  all, 
in  you.  Consent  from  the  heart  that  this  must 
be  so,  and  confirm  it  by  laying  everything  at 
His  feet  and  offering  it  up  to  Him.  The  two 
things  go  together :  let  Him  be  and  do  all ;  let 
Him  reign  and  rule  over  all.  Let  there  be 
nothing  in  which  He  does  not  rule  and  operate. 
It  is  not  impossible  for  you  to  accomplish  this 
change.  Let  Him  be  everything ;  let  Him  have 
everything,  in  order  that  by  His  Almighty 
energy  He  may  fill  everything  with  Himself. 


174    THE   FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

IV 

THE  ALL  OF  SURRENDER 

Leave  all,  sell  all,  forsake  all :  that  was  the 
Lord's  requirement  when  He  was  here  on 
earth  :  the  requirement  is  in  force  still. 

The  discernment  of  the  fact  that  Christ  is 
all  leads  of  itself  to  the  acknowledgment  that 
He  must  have  all.  The  chief  hindrance  of  the 
Christian  life  is  that,  because  men  do  not 
believe  that  Christ  is  all,  they  consequently 
never  think  of  the  necessity  of  giving  Him 
all. 

Everything  must  be  given  to  Him,  because 
everything  is  under  sin.  He  cannot  cleanse 
and  keep  a  thing  when  it  is  not  so  yielded  up 
to  Him  that  He  can  take  full  possession  of  it 
and  fill  it.  All  must  be  given  up  to  Him, 
because  He  alone  can  bring  the  all  of  God  to 
its  rightful  supremacy  within  us.  Even  what 
appears  useful  or  lawful  or  innocent  becomes 
defiled  by  the  stain  of  our  selfishness  when  it 
is  held  fast  in  our  own  possession  and  for  our 
own  enjoyment.  We  must  surrender  it  into 


HOW  EVERYTHING  MUST  BE   GIVEN  UP    175 

the  hands  and  the  power  of  Christ :  only  there 
can  it  be  sanctified. 

The  All  of  surrender  :  0  it  is  because  Christians 
are  so  ignorant  of  the  requirement  that  all  their 
praying  and  hearing  avail  so  little.  If  then, 
0  Soul,  you  are  really  prepared  to  turn  to-  God 
for  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit ;  if  you  have  turned 
to  Christ  to  have  your  heart  purified  and  kept 
pure ;  then  be  assured  that  it  is  your  blessed 
privilege  to  regard  and  deal  with  everything — 
everything  that  you  have  to  strive  for  or  do  as 
given  up  to  Hirn.  The  All  of  surrender  will  be 
the  measure  of  your  experience  of  the  All  of 
Christ.  In  a  preceding  chapter  we  have  seen 
that  surrender  may  be  carried  out  at  once  and 
as  a  whole :  let  us  not  merely  read  and  think  of 
this,  but  actually  do  it.  Yes  :  this  very  day,  let 
the  All  of  Christ  be  the  power  of  a  surrender  on 
our  part  that  shall  be  immediate,  complete,  and 
everlasting. 


THE  ALL  OF  THE  SPIEIT 

The  All  of  God  and  the  All  of  Christ  demand 
as  a  necessary  consequence  the  All  of  the  Spirit. 
It  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  to  glorify  the  Son 
as  dwelling  in  us,  and  by  Him  to  reveal  the 
Father ;  how  can  He  do  this  if  He  Himself  is 
not  All  and  has  not  All  and  does  not  possess 
and  penetrate  All  with  His  own  power  ?  To  be 
filled  with  the  Spirit,  to  let  the  Spirit  have  All, 
is  indispensable  to  a  true,  healthful  Christian 
life. 

It  is  a  source  of  great  loss  in  the  life  of 
Christendom  to-day  that  the  truth  is  not  dis 
cerned,  that  the  Three -One  God  must  have  All. 
Even  the  professing  Christian  oftentimes  makes 
it  his  very  first  aim  to  find  out  what  he  is  and 
what  he  desires,  what  pleases  him  and  makes 
him  happy.  Then  he  brings  in  God  in  the 
second  place  to  secure  this  happiness.  The  claim 
of  God  is  not  the  primary  or  main  consideration. 
He  does  not  discern  that  God  must  have  him  at 
His  disposal  even  in  the  most  trivial  details  of 


HOW   EVERYTHING   MUST   BE   GIVEN   UP    177 

his  life  to  manifest  His  divine  glory  in  him. 
He  is  not  aware  that  this  entire  filling  with  the 
will  and  the  operation  of  God  would  prove  to  be 
his  highest  happiness.  He  does  not  know  that 
the  very  same  Christ  who  once  lived  upon  the 
earth  as  the  obedient,  lowly  Servant  of  God, 
entirely  surrendered  to  the  will  of  the  Father, 
is  prepared  to  abide  and  work  in  like  manner 
in  his  heart  and  life  now.  It  is  on  this  account 
that  he  can  never  fully  comprehend  how  neces 
sary  it  is  that  the  Spirit  must  be  all  and  must 
fill  him  completely. 

0  my  brother,  if  these  thoughts  hare  had  any 
influence  with  you,  surfer  yourself  to  be  brought 
without  delay  to  the  acknowledgment  that  the 
Spirit  must  be  all  in  you.  Say  from  the  heart : 
"  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  make  any,  even  the  least, 
exception  :  the  Spirit  must  have  all."  Then  add 
to  this  confession  the  simple  thought  that  Christ 
has  come  to  restore  the  All  of  God ;  that  the 
Spirit  is  given  to  reveal  the  All  of  Christ  within 
us,  so  that  God  may  again  be  all ;  that  the  love 
of  the  Father  is  eagerly  longing  to  secure  again 
His  own  supreme  place  with  us ;  and  then  your 
heart  will  be  filled  with  the  sure  confidence 

12 


178    THE   FULL   BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

that  the  Father  actually  gives  you  the  fulness 
of  the  Spirit. 

VI 

THE  ALL  OF  FAITH 

"  All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth." 
"  All  things  whatsoever  ye  pray  and  ask  for, 
believe  that  ye  have  received  them,  and  ye  shall 
have  them." 1  The  preceding  sections  of  this 
chapter  have  taught  us  to  understand  why  it  is 
that  faith  is  all.  It  is  because  God  is  all.  It 
is  because  man  is  nothing,  and  thus  has  nothing 
good  in  him  except  the  capacity  for  receiving 
God.  When  he  becomes  a  believer,  that  which 
God  reveals  becomes  of  itself  a  heavenly  light 
that  illumines  him.  He  sees  then  what  God 
is  prepared  to  be  for  him ;  he  keeps  his  soul 
silent  before  God  and  open  to  God,  and  gives 
God  the  opportunity  of  working  all  by  the 
Spirit.  The  more  unceasingly  and  undividedly 
he  believes,  the  more  fully  can  the  All  of  God 
and  Christ  prevail  and  work  in  him. 

The  All  of  Faith.     How  little  is  it  understood 

1  Mark  xi.  24  (R.V.). 


HOW  EVERYTHING   MUST   BE   GIVEN   UP    179 

in  the  Church  that  the  one  and  only  thing  I 
have  to  do  is  without  ceasing  to  keep  my  soul  in 
its  nothingness  and  dependence  silent  and  open 
before  God,  that  He  may  be  free  to  work  in 
me ;  that  faith  as  the  willing  acceptance  and 
expectation  of  God's  working,  receives  all  and 
can  achieve  all.  Every  glance  at  my  own 
impotence  or  sin,  every  glance  at  the  promise 
of  God  and  His  power  to  fulfil  it,  must  rouse  me 
to  the  gladness  of  faith,  to  the  willing,  cheerful 
acknowledgment  that  God  is  able  to  work  all,  to* 
the  assurance  that  He  will  do  it. 

Let  such  a  faith,  as  the  act  of  a  moment,  look 
upon  Christ  even  to-day  and  move  you  on  the 
one  hand  to  make  renunciation  of  every  known 
sin,  and  on  the  other  to  receive  Him  as  One  who 
purifies  you,  who  keeps  you,  who  dwells  in  your 
heart.  0  that  faith  might  receive  the  All  of 
Christ  and  take  Him  with  All  that  He  is !  0 
that  your  faith  might  then  see  that  the  All  of 
the  Spirit  is  your  rightful  heritage,  and  that 
your  hope  is  sure  that  the  full  blessing  has  been 
bestowed  upon  you  by  God  Himself,  and  will  be 
revealed  in  you ! 

0  soul,  if  the  All  of  God,  the  All  of  Christ, 


180    THE   FULL  BLESSING  OF   PENTECOST 

the  All  of  the  Spirit  be  so  immeasurable,  if  the 
dominion  and  power  of  the  terrible  All  of 
sin  be  so  unlimited,  if  the  All  of  your  surrender 
to  God  and  your  decision  to  live  wholly  for  Him 
be  also  so  real,  then  let  your  faith  in  what  God 
will  do  for  you  be  also  unlimited.  "  He  that  be- 
lieveth  in  Me,  out  of  his  heart  shall  flow  rivers 
of  living  water." 

My  reader,  the  time  has  now  come  when  we 
must  part.  Ere  this  takes  place,  let  me  press 
on  your  heart  one  thing.  There  is  something 
that  can  be  done  to-day.  As  the  Holy  Spirit 
saith  :  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice,  harden 
not  your  heart." l  I  cannot  promise  that  you 
shall  immediately  overflow  with  the  light  and 
joy  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  do  not  promise  you 
that  you  shall  to-day  feel  very  holy  and  truly 
blessed.  But  what  can  take  place  is  this :  to 
day  you  may  receive  Christ  as  One  who  purifies 
you,  and  baptizes,  and  fills  with  the  Spirit.  Yes  : 
to-day  you  may  surrender  your  whole  being  to 
Him  to  be  henceforth  wholly  under  the  mastery 
of  the  Spirit.  To-day  you  may  acknowledge  and 
appropriate  the  All  of  the  Spirit  as  your  personal 

1  Ps.  xcv.  7  ;  Heb.  iii.  15. 


HOW  EVERYTHING   MUST   BE   GIVEN   UP    181 

possession.  To-day  you  may  submit  to  the  re 
quirement  of  the  All  of  faith  and  begin  to  live 
only  and  wholly  in  the  faith  of  what  Christ  will 
do  in  you  through  the  Spirit.  This  you  may  do  ; 
this  you  ought  to  do.  Kneel  down  at  the  mercy- 
seat  and  do  it.  Eead  once  more  the  earlier 
chapter  with  its  directions  as  to  what  Christ  is 
prepared  to  do,  and  surrender  yourself  this  very 
hour  as  an  empty  vessel  to  be  filled  with  the 
Spirit,  that  your  whole  life  may  be  carried  out 
under  the  leading  of  the  Spirit.  In  His  own 
time  God  will  certainly  accomplish  it  in  you. 

There  is  also  something,  however,  that  He  on 
His  part  is  prepared  to  do.  To-day  He  is  ready 
to  give  you  the  assurance  that  He  accepts  your 
surrender  and  to  seal  on  your  heart  the  conviction 
that  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  belongs  to  you.  0 
wait  upon  Him  to  give  you  this  to-day ! 

My  brother,  pray  listen  to  my  last  words. 
The  All  of  God  summons  you.  The  All  of  sin 
summons  you.  The  All  of  Christ  summons  you. 
The  All  of  the  surrender  that  Jesus  requires 
summons  you.  The  All  of  the  Spirit,  His 
indispensableness  and  His  glory,  summons  you. 
The  All  of  faith  summons  you.  Come  and  let 


182    THE   FULL   BLESSING   OF   PENTECOST 

the  love  of  God  conquer  you.  Come  and  let  the 
glorious  salvation  master  you.  Do  not  hark 
away  back  from  the  glorious  tidings  that  the 
Triune  God,  with  all  that  He  is,  is  prepared  to 
be  your  All ;  but  be  silent  and  listen  to  it,  until 
your  soul  becomes  constrained  to  give  the  answer, 
"Even  in  me  God  shall  be  all."  Take  Christ 
anew  to-day  as  One  who  has  given  His  life  that 
God  may  be  all,  and  do  you  also  yield  your  life 
for  this  supreme  end.  God  will  fill  you  also 
with  His  Holy  Spirit.  Amen. 


Printed  ly  MORRISON  &  GIBB  LIMITED,  Edinburgh 


By   the   Rev.   ANDREW   MURRAY. 

"All  that  this  author  writes  is  good." — Christian  Commonwealth. 

WHOLLY  FOE  GOD.     Selections  from  the  Writings  of 
William  Law.     Selected,  and  with  an  Introduction  by  the 
Rev.  ANDREW  MURRAY.     Crown  8vo,  handsomely  bound, 
gilt  top,  5s. 
"This  volume  of  selections  is  admirable." — Publishers'  Circular. 

THE  POWER  OF  THE  SPIRIT.  With  additional 
Extracts  from  the  Writings  of  William  Law.  Crown  8vo, 
'Js.  6d. 

THE  MINISTRY  OF  INTERCESSION.  A  Plea  for  more 
Prayer.  Small  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.  Cheap  Edition,  Is.  6d. 

THE  KEY  TO  THE  MISSIONARY  PROBLEM.  Small 
crown  8vo,  cloth,  2s.  6d.  ;  paper  covers,  Is.  6d. 

THY  WILL  BE  DONE.    Small  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 

HAVE  MERCY  ON  ME  :  The  Prayer  of  the  Penitent  in 
the  51st  Psalm  Explained  and  Applied.  Small  crown  8vo, 
Is.  6d. 

"It  is  done  so  quietly,  with  such  a  mastery  of  all  the  motives  which 
actuate  men,  and  with  such  easy  power,  that  it  is  only  on  reflection  that 
we  find  out  how  rare  is  the  gift  of  the  author." — Aberdeen  Free  Frets. 

OUT  OF  HIS  FULNESS.  A  Series  of  Addresses.  Small 
crown  8vo,  Is.  6d. 

THE  TWO  COVENANTS.  Small  crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. ; 
cheaper  binding,  Is.  6d. 


Small  crown  8uo,  2s.  6d.    Cheap  Edition,  Is.  net 

ABIDE  IN  CHRIST  :  Thoughts  on  the  Blessed  Life  of 

Fellowship  with  the  Son  of  God. 

"  The  varied  aspects  of  this  practical  truth  are  treated  with  much  fresh 
ness,  power,  and  unction.  It  cannot  fail  to  stimulate,  to  cheer,  and  to 
qualify  for  higher  service." — Mr.  SPUROEON  in  the  Sword  and  Trowel. 

LIKE  CHRIST.     Thoughts  on  the  Blessed  Life  of  Con 
formity  to  the  Son  of  God.    A  Sequel  to  ' '  Abide  in  Christ. " 
"The  author  has  written  with  such  loving  unction  and  spiritual  insight, 
that  his  pages  may  be  read  with  comfort  and  edification  by  all. "— Literary 
Churchman. 

WITH  CHRIST  IN    THE  SCHOOL  OF    PRAYER. 

Thoughts  on  our  Training  for  the  Ministry  of  Intercession. 
"A  volume  of  rare  excellence,  and  one  which  is  much  needed."— 
Christian  News. 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  CHRIST.    Thoughts  on  the  Indwelling 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Believer  and  the  Church. 

HOLY  IN  CHRIST.    Thoughts  on  the  Calling  of  God's 

Children  to  be  Holy  as  He  is  Holy. 

"This  is  one  of  the  best  books  we  have  seen  upon  a  subject  which  is 
happily  attracting  much  attention  nowadays.  "—Methodist  N.  C.  Magazine. 

THE  CHILDREN  FOR  CHRIST.  Thoughts  for  Christian 

Parents  on  the  Consecration  of  the  Home  Life. 
"All  Sunday-school  teachers  and  parents  would  do  well  to  lay  its 
lessons  to  heart." — Methodist  Recorder. 

THE  NEW  LIFE.    Words  of  God  for  Disciples  of  Christ, 


Pott  8uo,  is. 
WORKING  FOR  GOD. 

THE  SCHOOL  OF  OBEDIENCE. 
WITHIN.     The  Kingdom  of  God  is  within  you. 

THE  LORD'S  TABLE.    A  Help  to  the  Right  Observance 
of  the  Holy  Supper. 

WAITING  ON  GOD.    Roan,  gilt  edges,  2s. 

"Admirers  of  Mr.  Murray's  deeply  religious  and  deeply  thoughtful  style 
should  have  this  pocket  volume  of  meditation."— Literary  World. 

LET  US  DRAW  NIGH.    Fifth  thousand.    In  roan,  gilt 

edges,  2s. 
"A  spiritually  helpful  little  book." — British  Messenger. 

WHY  DO  YOU  NOT  BELIEVE  ?     In  roan,  gilt  edges, 
2s.     Tenth  thousand. 

BE  PERFECT  :  A  Message  from  the  Father  in  Heaven  to 
His  Children  on  Earth.     Meditations  for  a  Month. 

THE     DIVINE      INDWELLING.      Selections     from 
William  Law.     With  gilt  edges,  Is.  6d. 

DYING   TO   SELF.     Extracts   from    the   Writings    of 
William  Law.     Crown  16mo.     Gilt  edges,  Is.  6d. 

THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  TRUE  VINE.     Meditations 

for  a  Month.     Crown  16mo.     Gilt  edges,  Is.  6d. 
"  Earnest  and  pious  in  tone,  simple  in  style  and  language,  these  medita 
tions  will  be  of  help,  comfort  and  stimulus  to  many  a  devout  reader." — 
Dundee  Advertiser. 


JAMES  NISBET  &  CO.,  LIMITED, 
22  BERNERS  STREET,  LONDON,  W. 


